- SECURITY AND SAFETY IN A POST-9/11 WORLD

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SECURITY AND SAFETY IN A POST 9/11 WORLD

=======================================================================

FIELD HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

SEPTEMBER 12, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-27
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-678 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY

Anthony D'Esposito, New York, Chairman
Nick LaLota, New York                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana, Ranking
Dale W. Strong, Alabama                  Member
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Daniel S. Goldman, New York
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Diana Bergwin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Lauren McClain, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Anthony D'Esposito, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Daniel S. Goldman, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     7
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
The Honorable Troy A. Carter, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Prepared Statement.............................................     8

Witnesses

Mr. Joseph Pfeifer, First Deputy Fire Commissioner, New York City
Fire Department:
Oral Statement.................................................    10
Prepared Statement.............................................    13
Ms. Laura Kavanagh, Fire Commissioner, New York City Fire
Department:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Ms. Rebecca Ulam Weiner, Deputy Commissioner, Intelligence and
Counterterrorism, New York City Police Department:
Oral Statement.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    21
Mr. Patrick J. Ryder, Commissioner of Police, Nassau County
Police Department..............................................    23
Mr. Greg Ehrie, Chief Security Officer, Port Authority of New
York & New Jersey:
Oral Statement.................................................    25
Prepared Statement.............................................    27

SECURITY AND SAFETY IN A POST-9/11 WORLD

----------

Tuesday, September 12, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Emergency Management
and Technology,
New York, NY.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:24 a.m., in
9/11 Memorial & Museum, Concourse Lobby, 180 Greenwich Street,
New York, NY, Hon. Anthony D'Esposito (Chairman of the
subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives D'Esposito, LaLota, Strong,
Brecheen, and Goldman.
Also present: Representatives Malliotas, Molinaro, and
Menendez.
All. I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the United States
of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one
Nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for
all.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, everybody. The Committee on
Homeland Security, Subcommittee Emergency Management and
Technology, will come to order. Without objection, the
subcommittee may recess any point. The purpose of this hearing
is to hear from State and local law enforcement partners on the
evolving threat landscape post-9/11. I thank the 9/11 Memorial
and Museum for hosting us as we remember the tragedy that
affected so many lives, and changed our understanding of the
threat landscape here in United States of America and beyond.
Without objection, the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Molinaro and the gentlewoman from New York, Ms. Malliotakis,
are permitted to sit on the dais and ask questions to the
witnesses. I would also like to seek unanimous consent and have
Mr. Menendez also waive onto the committee. Without objection,
so ordered. I recognize myself for an opening statement.
I first want to thank our witnesses for participating in
today's field hearing on evolving threats, security and safety
in a post-
9/11 world. I am humbled to be able to conduct this hearing on
such sacred ground. As a lifelong New Yorker, retired NYPD
detective, former chief of the Island Park Fire Department, and
Chairman of the Homeland Security Subcommittee on Emergency
Management and Technology, I want to thank each and every one
of you for your commitment to keeping our Nation, our State,
our city, and, of course, our beloved Nassau County safe.
Without you, we would be in a very different place.
It is my firm belief that those serving in law enforcement,
the fire service, and emergency management represent the very
best of America. Our Nation remains resilient thanks to your
bravery and the bravery of your colleagues, their tenacity, and
their ability to bring order into chaos. They choose to
overcome fear with courage every day, which they nobly
demonstrated 22 years ago as they helped our Nation respond to
and recover from the deadliest attack the United States has
ever seen.
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, shook this
great Nation, and took the lives of almost 3,000 innocent
people, lives that were taken far too soon. Our sense of safety
and security was shattered, highlighting the presence of very
real and a very cruel enemy. While the tragic fall of those
great towers will never be erased from our memory, we also
cannot forgot the unparalleled heroism and determination
demonstrated by first responders and law enforcement that day.
As former President George W. Bush declared in his address
later that evening, we responded with the best of America, with
the daring of our rescue workers, with the caring for strangers
and neighbors who came to give blood and help in any way they
could. Amid such pain and chaos, New York City's firefighters,
police officers, paramedics ran toward the collapsing buildings
with unforgettable courage and compassion. The world may look
different than it did 22 years ago, but there is no shortage of
those who seek to do harm and disrupt our way of life. From our
Nation's first responders to those of us serving in Congress,
we each have a role to play in keeping our community safe and
protecting our right to life, liberty, and our pursuit of
happiness.
Following the attacks of September 11, Congress
demonstrated its commitment to national security by reforming
intragovernmental coordination and terrorism prevention by
creating the Department of Homeland Security. Within DHS, the
Federal Emergency Management Agencies grant programs provide
preparedness funding for States, local governments, and
nonprofit agencies to prevent and respond to terrorist attacks,
major disasters, and other emergencies.
DHS's cybersecurity and infrastructure security agency
leads our Nation's efforts to defend against cyber threat
actors that target critical infrastructure, Federal, State, and
local governments, the private sector, and every single
individual that calls America home.
The Department's Office of Intelligence and Analysis
delivers intelligence information to our State, local, Tribal,
and territorial, and private-sector partners. DHS's Countering
Weapons of Mass Destruction's office was established to help
its operational partners at the Federal, State, and local
level, to prevent the use of weapons of mass destruction
against the United States of America and promote readiness for
chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear threats.
Regardless of one's position as public servants, we must
follow the example of those heroes who sacrificed their lives
that day and used the authority and resources we've each been
given to put the lives of fellow Americans first. We must be
vigilant in confronting new threats as well as innovative as
those threats evolve. The United States' Armed Forces, law
enforcement, and the intelligence community has bravely fought
terrorist groups like al-Qaeda, the Taliban, ISIS, and many
others, but their radical ideologies continue to inspire
violence against the West. In fact, the FBI has expressed
concern about U.S.-based lone actors radicalized by Jihadism
and other radical ideologies. Additionally, other threats
include transnational criminal organizations which have
trafficked fentanyl into the United States of America causing
more than 100,000 deaths annually.
Cyber attacks and espionage also threaten our Nation's
hospitals, small businesses, and critical infrastructure.
Furthermore, antisemitism and hate crimes have skyrocketed in
the last 2 years. There's no doubt the evil we face is ever-
evolving, and although daunting, we must meet today's
challenges with the same commitment to protecting those we love
as those heroes who responded to the attacks on 9/11 and the
brave soldiers who fought on the front lines in Afghanistan.
We must be unwavering in our support of the Federal and
local law enforcement agencies as they intersect and disrupt
terrorist plots against this great Nation. We must support our
Nation's network of emergency responders as they safeguard our
home from unimaginable threats.
As we look to the future, let us remember those who gave
their lives on September 11, 2001, and who have courageously
fought to protect our freedoms. Freedom isn't free, so let us
be united in our resolve to protect our businesses, our places
of worship, and our way of life all which are beacons of light
in the greatest Nation in the world.
Thank you, again, to our witnesses for your commitment to
peace and security. I look forward to hearing from you about
your work.
[The statement of Chairman D'Esposito follows:]

Statement of Chairman Anthony D'Esposito
September 12, 2023
I first want to thank our witnesses for participating in today's
field hearing on ``Evolving Threats: Security and Safety in a Post-9/11
World.'' I am humbled to be able to conduct this hearing on such sacred
ground. As a life-long New Yorker, retired NYPD detective, former chief
of the Island Park Fire Department, and as Chairman of the Committee on
Homeland Security's Subcommittee on Emergency Management and
Technology, I want to thank each of you for your commitment to keeping
our Nation safe and to helping Americans during their time of need.
It is my firm belief that those serving in law enforcement and in
emergency management represent the very best of America. Our Nation
remains resilient thanks to their bravery, their tenacity, and their
ability to bring order into chaos. They choose to overcome fear with
courage every day, which they nobly demonstrated 22 years ago as they
helped our Nation respond to and recover from the deadliest attack the
United States has ever seen.
The terrorist attacks of 9/11 shook our great Nation and took the
lives of almost 3,000 innocent people--lives that were taken too soon.
Our sense of safety and security was shattered, highlighting the
presence of a very real and cruel enemy.
And, while the tragic fall of the Twin Towers will never be erased
from our memory, we also cannot forget the unparalleled heroism and
determination demonstrated by our first responders and law enforcement
that day. As former President George W. Bush declared in his address
later that evening, ``we responded with the best of America, with the
daring of our rescue workers, with the caring for strangers and
neighbors who came to give blood and help in any way they could.''\1\
Amid such pain and chaos, New York City's firefighters, police
officers, and paramedics ran toward the collapsing buildings with
unforgettable courage and compassion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/address-the-nation-
the-terrorist-attacks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The world may look different today than it did 22 years ago, but
there is no shortage of those who seek to do us harm and to disrupt our
way of life. From our Nation's first responders to those of us serving
in Congress, we each have a role to play in keeping our communities
safe and in protecting our right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness.
Following the attacks of 9/11, Congress demonstrated its commitment
to national security by reforming intragovernmental coordination and
terrorism prevention by creating the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS). Within DHS, the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA)
Grant Programs Directorate provide preparedness funding to States,
local governments, and non-profit agencies to prevent and respond to
terrorist attacks, major disasters, and other emergencies.
DHS's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency leads our
Nation's efforts to defend against cyber threat actors that target
critical infrastructure, Federal, State, and local governments, the
private sector, and the American people. The Department's Office of
Intelligence & Analysis (I&A) delivers intelligence information to our
State, local, Tribal, and territorial (SLTT) and private-sector
partners. And DHS's Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office was
established to help its operational partners at the Federal, State, and
local levels prevent the use of weapons of mass destruction against the
United States and promote readiness for chemical, biological,
radiological, and nuclear threats.
Regardless of one's position, as public servants, we must follow
the example of those heroes who sacrificed their lives that day and use
the authority and resources we've each been given to put the lives of
our fellow Americans first. We must be vigilant in confronting new
threats as well as innovative as those threats evolve.
The United States' armed forces, law enforcement, and intelligence
community have bravely fought terrorist groups like al-Qaeda, the
Taliban, and ISIS, but their radical ideologies continue to inspire
violence against the West. In fact, the FBI has expressed concern about
U.S.-based lone actors radicalized by jihadism and other radical
ideologies.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.fbi.gov/news/testimony/threats-to-the-homeland-
evaluating-the-landscape-20-years-after-911-wray-092121.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, other threats include transnational criminal
organizations, which have trafficked fentanyl into the United States,
causing more than 100,000 annual deaths.\3\ Cyber attacks and espionage
also threaten our Nation's hospitals, small businesses, and critical
infrastructure. Furthermore, antisemitism and hate crimes have
skyrocketed in the last 2 years.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/ATA-2023-
Unclassified-Report.pdf.
\4\ https://www.pbs.org/newshour/politics/antisemitic-incidents-on-
rise-across-the-u-s-report-finds.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is no doubt, the evil we face is ever-evolving. And, although
daunting, we must meet today's challenges with the same commitment to
protecting those we love as those heroes who responded to the attacks
on 9/11 and the brave soldiers who fought on the front lines in
Afghanistan. We must be unwavering in our support of Federal and local
law enforcement as they intercept and disrupt terrorist plots against
the United States, and we must support our Nation's network of
emergency responders as they safeguard our home from unimaginable
threats.
As we look to the future, let us remember those who gave their
lives on 9/11 and who have courageously fought to protect our freedoms.
Freedom isn't free, so let us be united in our resolve to protect our
businesses, our places of worship, and our way of life--all of which
are beacons of light.
Thank you again to our witnesses for your commitment to peace and
security. I look forward to hearing from you about your work.

Mr. D'Esposito. I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr.
Goldman, for his opening statement.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for convening this hearing in this now-hallowed place, the
Museum and Memorial for 9/11. I also just want to take note of
my colleagues who are here as well, many from New York, New
York City, and the surrounding suburbs, including New Jersey
suburbs, all of whose districts have been--were dramatically
impacted by the 9/11 attacks. Of course, I am the
Representative of this district, this location, and I'm very
grateful that although we have very many disagreements on a
number of different things, we have bipartisan unity in
supporting this site, this museum, the 9/11 World Trade Center
Health Program to make sure that we honor our commitment to the
first responders and simply pay for their health care from
their illnesses that have arisen from their heroic efforts
following 9/11.
I also want to thank our witnesses who are here today. We
appreciate all of your work responding to and preventing
terrorist attacks, and are really grateful for your presence
here today. I think the American people do not realize how many
potential terrorist attacks are thwarted by the fine men and
women in law enforcement. You don't hear about those for good
reason, but I know from my former years as a Federal
prosecutor, that they happen far more frequently than you would
realize.
First Deputy Commissioner Pfeifer, I also just want to take
a special moment to extend a thank you for your service. You
are a hero and among the brave first responders who responded
after those horrific attacks, and have continued your fine
service to our country.
I'd also like to thank the Memorial and Museum for hosting
us today and providing this space. I've been to the museum
several times. It is incredibly powerful and moving, and it is
a testament to the importance of that event that we honored
yesterday on the 22nd anniversary, which we will do every year
as a reminder that we can never forget what happened on 9/11.
We can never forget those people around the world, those
groups, those organizations who do not like us because we are,
as the Chairman said, the beacon of light of democracy.
That day is etched into our collective memory as a day that
brought this Nation to a standstill, a day that showed the
world the worst of humanity's capacity for hatred, but also,
the best of our resilience and unity as a city and as a Nation.
On that faithful Tuesday morning, beautiful skies, as we all
remember, and is commemorated in this museum. Nineteen
terrorists hijacked four commercial planes, flew two of them
into the two towers of the World Trade Center, one into the
Pentagon, and a fourth plane crashed in Shanksville,
Pennsylvania, through the heroic efforts of passengers who
thwarted what was expected to be an attack on our Capitol.
Nearly 3,000 people were killed that day. I vividly
remember--I lived about a mile north of here on Hudson Street.
I will never forget watching streams of people covered in soot,
dust. It looked like they had literally been showered on by the
white soot, walking startled, silent up the street. I will
never forget the pile burning for weeks and weeks. The smell
that has--that just constantly emanated from it. The missing-
person signs that were put up all around downtown, none of them
were ever recovered. It is a day etched in many of our
memories, because I know many of us here have stories to tell,
and it's a day that we can never forget.
I'd also like to acknowledge the survivors and families of
those who lost loved ones on 9/11, and who have continued to
fight every single day for the truth, justice, and care that
the New York heroes so deeply deserve. Those who are still
suffering from illnesses, it is troubling to say the least that
there were 343 members of the Fire Department of New York who
perished that day. Since 9/11, there are now 341 who have died
from 9/11-related illnesses. Those families, those survivors
need full transparency from the city of New York, and from our
Government, to make sure that they get the proper justice,
accountability, and transparency that they need.
In the days and weeks following 9/11, the world watched as
we came together in a display of unity and strength. The world
joined us, joined America, our allies, to share in the--both
the grief, but also the resiliency. We have transformed this
area now. We have rebuilt it as is the American way. And the
strength of our resiliency is a reminder of the mandate that we
have to ensure that evil never triumphs over the American
spirit, that our democracy and freedoms never succumb to those
who want to undermine it, both from abroad and from within.
The aftermath of 9/11 reshaped how our country had dealt
with terrorism and ushered in a need to strengthen our Nation's
national security to ensure that such events never happen
again. We have enacted new laws, establishing the 9/11
Commission, 22 agencies that joined together to become the
Department of Homeland Security, and what was the largest
reorganization of the Federal Government since World War II.
As we remember 9/11, we must also reflect on the lessons it
imparts, which is the need to continually strengthen our
homeland against terrorist attacks. Nine-eleven revealed
significant and fundamental security challenges. For example,
emergency communications challenges were identified by the 9/11
Commission as a contributing factor in the death toll. There
have been vast improvements in the 22 years, including the
creation of the First Responder Network Authority in 2012,
which established a single Nation-wide broadband specifically
for first responders, a broadband network. I hope to hear today
from our witnesses how advancements in technology and
communications have helped to improve city security as well as
the Nation's security.
Another great resource that was developed after 9/11 were
the Department of Homeland Security grant programs, which
provided dedicated funding to cities like New York to help
build and strengthen defenses against terrorism. We have
programs now, like the Urban Area Security Initiative and State
Security Grant Program, to assist in ensuring that first
responders have the resources they need to defend their
communities. So many cities, including New York and Washington,
rely on these resources.
I, and I know my colleagues here, commit to doing
everything we can to ensure these resources remain sufficient
and robust to stem any future terrorist attacks. It is my hope
that we use this hearing to commemorate the memory of the
victims and the bravery of the first responders. This is my
home. It is an honor to be here for this hearing to discuss how
we are going to keep our city, New York, strong. Let us
recommit to working together, transcending our differences, and
striving for a world where tragedies become relics of the past,
and we work together to promote American democracy here and
abroad.
I look forward to discussing all of this with our witnesses
today. I thank the Chairman, again, and I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Goldman follows:]

Statement of Honorable Daniel S. Goldman
September 12, 2023
September 11, 2001, is etched into our collective memory as a day
that brought the Nation to a standstill, a day that showed the world
the worst of humanity's capacity for hatred, but also the best of our
resilience and unity as a city and as a Nation.
On that fateful Tuesday morning, 19 terrorists hijacked four
commercial airplanes and flew two of them into the World Trade Center,
one into the Pentagon and a fourth plane crashed in Shanksville,
Pennsylvania en route to the Capitol that day. Nearly 3,000 people were
killed that day.
Living in downtown Manhattan on September 11, I will never forget
watching the second plane hit the Towers and the soot-covered people
walking down Hudson Street. Now, as the Member of Congress who
represents this district, I am honored that we are holding this hearing
in my district to honor the lives lost on September 11 and the grief
that families who lost loved ones continue to experience.
I would also like to acknowledge the survivors and families of
those we lost on 9/11 who have continued to fight every single day for
the truth, justice, and care that these New York heroes so deeply
deserve. And for those who are still suffering from illness arising
from the horrific attacks that day, please know that I and others in
Congress are fighting every day so that you can receive the basic
health care you so deserve for the sacrifice you made for this country
and the victims of 9/11.
For me and so many others, the immediate aftermath of 9/11 was a
surreal mixture of shock, disbelief, and sorrow. First responders
rushed into the chaos without a second thought, demonstrating
extraordinary courage. Their bravery and deep sense of duty saved many
lives that day. And it also caused 343 lives of members of the FDNY to
perish that day.
In the days and weeks following 9/11, the world watched as we came
together in a display of unity and strength. Our community is home to
countless heroes who have cared for, rebuilt, and transformed our city
in the aftermath of the attacks. Their strength is a reminder of the
mandate we have to ensure that evil never triumphs over the American
spirit. That our democracy and freedom never succumb to those who want
to undermine it.
The aftermath of 9/11 reshaped how the country dealt with terrorism
and ushered in a need to strengthen our Nation's national security to
ensure that such events never happen again. The Federal Government
changed its counterterrorism efforts following 9/11, enacting new laws,
establishing the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the
United States (also known as the 9/11 Commission), and combining 22
agencies to establish the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)--in
what was the largest reorganization of the Federal Government since
World War II.
As we remember 9/11, we must also reflect on the lessons it
imparts, which is the need to continuously strengthen our homeland
against terrorist attacks. Nine-eleven revealed significant and
fundamental security challenges. For example, emergency communications
challenges were identified by the 9/11 Commission as a contributing
factor in the death toll.
Twenty-two years later, there have been vast improvements in
communications, including the creation of the First Responder Network
Authority (FirstNet Authority) in 2012, which established a single
nationwide broadband network specifically for first responders. I hope
to hear today how advancements in communications have helped improve
the city's security posture and also what further investments are
needed.
Another great resource that was developed after 9/11 is the
Department of Homeland Security's grant programs, which provide
dedicated funding to cities like New York City to help build and
strengthen their defenses against terrorists. Programs like the Urban
Areas Security Initiative (UASI) and the State Homeland Security Grant
Program assist in ensuring that first responders have the resources
they need to defend their communities against threats. New York City,
Washington, DC, and so many other places rely on these resources. I
commit to doing everything that I can to ensure that these resources
are robust.
It is my hope that with this hearing we will commemorate the memory
of the victims and the bravery of the first responders.
New York City is my home. And it is an honor to be here for this
hearing to discuss how we are going to keep our city New York Strong.
And let us commit to working together, transcending our differences,
and striving for a world where such tragedies become relics of the
past.
I look forward to discussing with our witnesses today on how
Congress can best support their efforts to help strengthen New York
City.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member.
Other Members of the subcommittee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statements of Ranking Members Thompson and Carter
follow:]

Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
September 12, 2023
Twenty-two years ago, everything we knew about our Nation's
security changed. September 11, 2001, was a pivotal moment in our
history--it left an indelible impact on our country and, of course, New
York City. On that tragic day, four hijacked airplanes were used as
weapons, claiming the lives of 2,983 people. We continue to mourn their
loss and keep their families in our prayers.
To the first responders who served on 9/11 and to their loved ones
left behind that terrible day and in the years since, we express our
continued, unwavering support to you.
It is fitting that the Committee on Homeland Security is meeting,
again, on this hallowed ground today. The committee was established in
the wake of 9/11, so that Congress could do its part to oversee and
support those on the front lines securing our country and our
communities.
Since its inception, this committee has worked with the Department
of Homeland Security, which was also stood up after 9/11, to secure the
homeland and provide grants to State and local partners. We have made--
and must continue to make--significant investments in grant programs
like the Urban Area Security Initiative, the State Homeland Security
Grant Program, the Nonprofit Security Grant Program, and the Transit
Security Grant Program. This funding is critical to firefighters,
paramedics, police, and other first responders.
I hope the witnesses today will share what we can do to better help
them protect communities against the ever-evolving threat landscape.
The threat of terrorism persists, but as a Nation we are better
prepared than we were 22 years ago.
As someone who has served on the Committee on Homeland Security
since its creation, I remain committed to supporting first responders
and communities fighting this threat, both domestic and foreign. I look
forward to your testimony on how the committee can support your efforts
to protect New York City.
______

Statement of Ranking Member Troy A. Carter
September 12, 2023
I want to extend my gratitude to the witnesses here today. First
responders, like yourselves, keep communities safe from terrorist
threats.
Today, we are gathered in the 9/11 Memorial and Museum to mark a
solemn occasion.
Twenty-two years ago, 19 terrorists hijacked four commercial
airplanes, leading to the death of nearly 3,000 people.
I want to send my heartfelt condolences and unwavering support to
the families of each victim who died on that ill-fated day.
September 11, 2001, will forever be imprinted into our hearts as a
day that terrorists tried to destroy our Nation. While we lost
thousands of lives, brave first responders, including one of our
witnesses here today, First Deputy Commissioner Pfeifer, helped save
thousands more by rushing into burning buildings without thinking about
their well-being. Their courageous actions then and now are the reason
why New York City is still standing here today.
The events on 9/11 revealed significant homeland security
challenges, including the lack of dedicated funding to help State and
local officials manage terrorist threats. In the aftermath of 9/11, the
Department of Homeland Security was established, and grant programs,
such as the Urban Area Security Initiative, the State Homeland Security
Grant Program, and the Securing the Cities Program, were created to
provide funding to cities and States to help improve preparedness and
response to terrorist threats.
Limited communications technology was also a challenge during 9/11
response, which the 9/11 Commission highlighted in their report. First
responders did not have an effective way to communicate with one
another, contributing to a higher death toll.
Since 9/11, Congress has worked to strengthen our communications
abilities and created the First Responder Network Authority in 2012,
establishing a nationwide broadband network for first responders.
While we have made vast improvements, more needs to be done.
I look forward to discussing how we can best support our first
responders and secure our communities.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Mr. D'Esposito. I am very pleased to have such an important
panel of witnesses before us today. I ask that the witnesses
please rise and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you will give
before the Committee on Homeland Security of the U.S. House of
Representatives will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth so help you God?
Thank you. Please be seated. Let the record reflect the
witnesses have answered in the affirmative.
Would like to now formally introduce our witnesses. Mr.
Joseph Pfeifer, the first deputy commissioner of the New York
City Fire Department. Mr. Pfeifer was the first fire chief to
respond to the World Trade Center attacks on September 11, and
we certainly thank him for his bravery and heroism on that day,
and for being here with us today. Mr. Pfeifer also the founding
director of the FDNY Center for Terrorism and Disaster
Preparedness. Sir, thank you for your service.
Ms. Laura Kavanagh is the 34th fire commissioner for the
city of New York's Fire Department. Commissioner Kavanagh
oversees administration of the agency's 17,000 employees and
was a key leader for the Department's responses to the 2015
Ebola outbreak as well as the COVID-19 pandemic. Commissioner,
thank you for your time and your commitment to safety.
Ms. Rebecca Weiner, head of the New York City Police
Department's intelligence and counterterrorism bureau. Deputy
Commissioner Weiner has been with the NYPD since 2006 and
previously served as legal counsel to the Department's
intelligence analysis unit. She also served as the first
representative of local law enforcement on the director of
National Intelligence's National Intelligence Council.
Commissioner, thank you for being here. Thank you for welcoming
us to 1PP earlier this month, and thank you for serving the
NYPD well.
Mr. Patrick Ryder is the commissioner of the Nassau County
Police Department. Commissioner Ryder has dedicated 38 years of
his life to law enforcement first starting in the NYPD in
Brooklyn North, the best borough to work in. Thirty-six of
those years with the Nassau County Police Department.
Throughout his career with the Nassau County Police Department,
Commissioner Ryder has implemented several programs and
initiatives to ensure officer and public safety, including the
creation of the counterterrorism unit. I will say as a lifelong
resident of Nassau County and proud to represent now in
Congress, I thank Commissioner Ryder every day for his
commitment to keeping Nassau County safe. Commissioner, thank
you for being here.
Mr. Greg Ehrie is the chief security officer of the Port
Authority of New York and New Jersey. He served in the United
States Air Force and is a veteran of Desert Storm and gave an
impressive 22 years of service to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. Sir, thank you for being here, and thank you for
your time, and thank you for your service to this great county.
I thank the witnesses for being here today. As a proud New
Yorker, thank all of you for your service to the great State of
New York.
I now recognize First Deputy Commissioner Pfeifer for 5
minutes to summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH PFEIFER, FIRST DEPUTY FIRE COMMISSIONER,
NEW YORK CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT

Mr. Pfeifer. Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Goldman,
and subcommittee Members, thank you for letting me speak today
and testify in this historical location on such an important
topic.
Twenty-two years ago yesterday, on a bright summer day, I
was the battalion chief standing in the street with my fire
units responding to an odor of gas when suddenly I heard a loud
noise of a plane coming overhead and flying so low that I could
read the words American on the fuselage. Then I saw the plane
aim and crash into the World Trade Center.
In a flash, I knew this was no accident, but a terrorist
attack, and thousands of people were in their greatest moment
of need. I was the first fire chief to arrive at the World
Trade Center, and with my firefighters and first responders, we
looked at the burning building, and knew we were going to the
most dangerous fire of our lives. Without hesitation,
firefighters approached me and asked, Chief, what do you need?
I directed them to go up, evacuate everybody, and rescue those
that couldn't get out.
Seventeen minutes after the first attack, a second plane
crashed into the South Tower, and within 60 minutes a third
plane would crash into the Pentagon, and a fourth into the
fields in Pennsylvania. Then the unthinkable happened. I heard
a loud rumbling sound of the 110th story World Trade Center
towers collapsing to the ground, and in bunker gear, you don't
run too far or too fast in 11 seconds. Then this beautiful
summer day turned completely dark in a cloud of crumbled
concrete and twisted steel, and I couldn't see the hand in
front of my face.
I wondered in that moment if I was still alive. In 102
minutes, our world changed forever as we witnessed the mass
murder of nearly 3,000 people, including 343 of my
firefighters, one of whom was my brother. In the aftermath, the
9/11 Commission report identified several critical changes that
municipalities to improve intergovernmental, interagency
communications, and coordination. The Fire Department embraced
that mandate to adapt to the threat of terrorism by enhancing
emergency response capabilities. We conducted an in-depth,
after-action review and strategized ways to make improvements.
We created a state-of-the-art fire department operations
center located at FDNY headquarters. It enables senior leaders
to manage complex emergencies by seamlessly sharing information
and coordinating with local partners, like the New York City
Police Department, New York City Emergency Management, and
other city agencies, as well as State and Federal partners.
One significant development from our post-9/11 discussions
is FDNY's creating a center for terrorism and disaster
preparedness. Through information gathering, intelligence
analysis, and coordination with Government partners, the center
enabled the Department to understand the risk better and
prepare to respond to terrorist attacks, natural disasters and
extreme events. Members of the center created emergency
response plans, developed strategies to prepare for emerging
threats. This includes working with NYPD Emergency Management
to establish operational roles and train for terrorist attacks
and other complex events.
We have worked diligently to strengthen the interagency
relationships via training with other agencies. We have
bolstered communication, enabling us to share voice, video, and
data effectively to--to effectively manage situational
awareness and coordination. This includes frequently engaging
with State and Federal partners, such as the Port Authority of
New York and New Jersey, surrounding counties, the United
States Coast Guard, the National Guard, the FBI Joint Terrorism
Task Force, the Federal Aviation Administration to just name a
few.
Another lesson from 9/11 was the Fire Department needed to
increase capability and capacity. A good example of this was
FDNY's marine units for the water operations. Before 9/11, our
marine division was comprised primarily of 60-year-old fire
boats designed to respond to boat and peer fires along the
waterway. We now have built marine operations into a robust
fleet of boats on various sizes and capabilities designed for a
tiered response to all types of emergencies. We acquired two
140-foot vessels, two medium-sized, 60-foot vessels with more
maneuverability and a variety of small boats capable of
responding to emergencies.
We built our new fire boats to deal with terrorist threats
against critical infrastructures, such as bridges and to be a
regional asset. I'm sure you remember the miracle in the Hudson
with passengers standing on the wings of United Airways--U.S.
Airways floating down the Hudson River. Our fire boats rescued
many of those passengers. We also built up capabilities to
repair those boats more quickly.
Thankfully, no subsequent terrorist attack in New York City
has created such destruction as we saw on 9/11 of the World
Trade Center. However, as this subcommittee is well aware of,
the city continues to experience acts of terrorism and mass
violence. In recent years, the Fire Department and our partners
have responded to multiple terrorist attacks. This has included
individuals attempting to detonate a pipe bomb in a narrow
subway corridor, a bomb fashioned from a pressure cooker, set
to explode in a suitcase in Chelsea's neighborhood of Lower
Manhattan, and terrorists who drove a truck down the West Side
Highway, and crowded bike path, and hit people and pedestrians,
and hit a school bus.
Last year, the city experienced a mass shooting in a subway
in Brooklyn, involving a smoke grenade and handguns that
injured 29 people. Since 9/11, FDNY training has evolved,
including focusing on responding to active-shooter incidents.
Using Federal funding, we created a counterterrorism rescue
task force, selecting EMS and fire personnel undergoing
extensive training with our colleagues from NYPD. In an active-
shooter response, police aggressively subdued the shooter while
another police team creates a warm zone in which EMS and
firefighters provide lifesaving care for victims under NYPD
forced protection. Patients needing care are then rushed to the
hospitals. We call this dual mission stopping the killing and
stopping the dying.
The threat environment is changing as terrorism evolves and
new methods of attack. We analyzed innovative threats and
prepared to counter them with our security partners through an
information-sharing network. FDNY's Center for Terrorism and
Disaster preparedness has written intel documents and trained
with members to confront the threat of vertical terrorism in
high-rise buildings where fire and smoke are used as weapons.
Potential innovative attacks may also involve targeting
large energy storage battery systems. We are working with the
private sector to safeguard these facilities. We have also
taken proactive approaches involving cyber threats. To do so,
we have leveraged Homeland Security funding to build a variety
of in-house resources and tools for security testing,
firewalls, intrusion detection, and prevention. We have also
explored ways to conduct incident management of a cyber attack
with physical consequences.
Finally, we do not limit our preparation to responding to
threats brought about by deliberate attacks of terrorism as an
integral part of Homeland Security that fire departments, such
as the FDNY, must confront is one of climate security. National
disasters have devastating effects here in New York City and
around the world.
Recent history has shown more frequent and more powerful
events. During Hurricane Sandy, the Fire Department faced many
emergencies across the city. We responded to water rescues,
flooding where people were trapped, and thousands of downed
trees and utility lines, and scattered debris, along with
various medical emergencies, and the largest residential fire
in FDNY's history. As luck would have it, I was the first chief
at that fire.
We have seen recent examples of climate-driven disasters
causing wide-spread destruction, such as the wildfires in Maui,
flooding in New England, and similar events in locations
throughout the country. Municipalities need your help to
prepare for these events to reduce the death toll and the
skyrocketing property costs. Climate security is an essential
element of homeland security that we are incorporating into our
preparedness.
In conclusion, I want to thank the committee for your time
and interest in these critical issues. We are here at the 9/11
Memorial Museum as a sign of resilience to reflect on the past,
and envision the future so we can enhance the present. Tragic
events can be challenging to talk about. But with these stories
comes a responsibility to improve response operations to save
lives.
I am grateful to Congressional Members here today, and your
colleagues, for ensuring that these discussions continue and
for providing the Department, like FDNY, with the tools to do
our best in these dangerous situations. Through your support,
we will turn traumatic memories into hope and greater national
preparedness and security.
Thank you so much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pfeifer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Joseph Pfeifer
September 12, 2023
a day we will never forget
Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and subcommittee
Members thank you for letting me testify at this historical location
about such an important topic.
Twenty-two years ago yesterday, on a bright summer day, I was a
battalion chief standing in the street with my fire units responding to
an odor of gas when suddenly I heard the loud noise of a plane
overhead, flying so low that I could read the word ``American'' on the
fuselage. Then I saw the plane aim and crash into the North Tower of
the World Trade Center. In a flash, I knew this was a terrorist attack,
and thousands of people were in their greatest moment of need.
I was the first fire chief to arrive at the World Trade Center.
With my firefighters and first responders, we looked at the burning
North Tower and knew that we were going to the most dangerous fire of
our lives. Without hesitation, firefighters approached me to ask,
``Chief, what do you need?'' I directed them to ``Go up, evacuate
everyone, and rescue those who could not get out.'' Seventeen minutes
after the first attack, a second plane crashed into the South Tower.
Within the next 60 minutes, a third plane would crash into the Pentagon
and a fourth into the fields of Pennsylvania.
Then the unthinkable happened. I heard the loud rumbling sound of
each 110-story World Trade Center Towers collapsing to the ground. In
the dark dust cloud of crumbled concrete and twisted steel, I could not
see the hand in front of my face, and I wondered if I was still alive.
In just 102 minutes, our world had changed forever as we witnessed the
mass murder of nearly 3,000 people, including 343 of my firefighters,
one of whom was my brother.
lessons of 9/11
In the aftermath, the 9/11 Commission Report identified several
critical changes for municipalities to improve intra-agency
communications and coordination. The Fire Department embraced the
mandate to adapt to the threat of terrorism by enhancing emergency
response capabilities. We conducted an in-depth after-action review and
strategized ways to make improvements. We created a state-of-the-art
Fire Department Operations Center. Located at FDNY headquarters, it
enables senior leaders to manage complex emergencies by seamlessly
sharing information and coordinating with local partners like the New
York Police Department (NYPD), New York City Emergency Management
(NYCEM), and other City agencies as well as State and Federal partners.
One significant development from our post-9/11 discussions is FDNY
creating a Center for Terrorism and Disaster Preparedness (CTDP).
Through information gathering, intelligence analysis, and coordination
with government partners, the CTDP enables the Department to understand
risk better and prepare to respond to terrorist attacks, natural
disasters, and extreme events. Members of the CTDP create emergency
response plans and develop strategies to prepare for emerging threats.
This includes working with NYPD and Emergency Management to establish
operational roles and train for terrorist attacks and other complex
events.
We have worked diligently to strengthen interagency relationships
via training with other agencies. We have bolstered communication,
enabling us to share voice, video, and data more efficiently for
situational awareness and coordination. This includes frequent
engagement with State and Federal partners such as the Port Authority
of New York and New Jersey, the United States Coast Guard and National
Guard, the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force, and the Federal Aviation
Administration, to name just a few.
Another lesson of 9/11 was the Fire Department's need to increase
capabilities and capacity. A good example of this is FDNY's Marine
Units for water operations. Before 9/11, our Marine Division was
composed primarily of 60-year-old fireboats designed to respond to boat
and pier fires along the water. We have now built Marine Operations
into a robust fleet of boats of various sizes and capabilities designed
for a tiered response to all types of emergencies. We acquired two
large 140-foot vessels, two medium-sized 65-foot vessels with more
maneuverability, and a variety of smaller boats capable of responding
to emergencies. We built our new fireboats to deal with terrorist
threats against critical infrastructure like bridges and to be a
regional interstate asset. I'm sure you remember the Miracle in the
Hudson with passengers standing on the wing of U.S. Airways floating in
the Hudson River. Our fireboats rescued many of those passengers. We
also built up the capability to perform repairs at FDNY facilities,
eliminating the need to transport them to distant shops and
significantly boosting the time our marine assets are in service and
available.
preparing for emerging threats
Thankfully, no subsequent act of terror in New York City has
created destruction and devastation on the scale of the World Trade
Center attacks. However, as this subcommittee is well aware, the city
continues to experience acts of terrorism and mass violence. In recent
years, the Fire Department and our partners have responded to multiple
terrorist attacks. This has included an individual attempting to
detonate a pipe bomb in a narrow subway corridor, a bomb fashioned from
a pressure cooker set to explode in a suitcase in the Chelsea
neighborhood of Lower Manhattan, and a terrorist who drove a truck down
a crowded bike path, ramming cyclists and pedestrians, and hitting a
school bus. Last year, the city experienced a mass shooting on a subway
train in Brooklyn involving smoke grenades and handguns that injured 29
people.
Since 9/11, FDNY training has evolved and now includes a focus on
responding to active-shooter threats. Using Federal funding, we created
the Counterterrorism Rescue Task Force. Select EMS and fire personnel
undergo extensive training with colleagues from NYPD. In an active-
shooter response, the police aggressively subdue the shooters while
another police team quickly creates a ``warm zone'' in which EMS and
firefighters provide life-saving care to victims under NYPD force
protection. Patients needing care are then rushed to the hospital. We
call this the dual mission of NYPD and FDNY, ``Stopping the killing and
stopping the dying.''
The threat environment is changing as terrorism evolves with new
methods of attack. We analyze innovative threats and prepare to counter
them with our security partners through an information-sharing network.
FDNY's Center for Terrorism and Disaster Preparedness has written intel
documents and trained members to confront threats such as Vertical
Terrorism in high-rise buildings where fire and smoke are used as
weapons. Potential innovative attacks may also involve targeting large
energy storage battery systems. We are working with the private sector
to safeguard these facilities.
We have also taken a proactive approach to evolving cybersecurity
threats. To do so, we leverage Homeland Security funds to build a
variety of in-house resources and tools for security testing, firewall
protection, intrusion detection, and prevention. We have also explored
ways of conducting incident management for cyber attacks with physical
consequences.
Finally, we do not limit our preparation to responding to threats
brought on by deliberate acts of terrorism. An integral part of
Homeland Security that fire departments such as FDNY must confront is
one of Climate Security. Natural disasters have had devastating effects
here in New York and around the world. Recent history has shown more
frequent and powerful climate events. During Hurricane Sandy, the Fire
Department faced many emergencies across the city. We responded to
water rescues, flooding, thousands of downed trees and scattered
debris, various medical emergencies, and the largest private dwelling
fires in FDNY's history. As luck would have it, I was also the first
chief to arrive at that fire. We have seen recent examples of climate-
driven disasters causing widespread destruction, such as the wildfires
in Maui, flooding in New England, and similar events in locations all
over the country. Municipalities need your help to prepare for these
events to reduce the death toll and skyrocketing property losses.
Climate Security is an essential element of Homeland Security that we
are incorporating into our preparedness.
In conclusion, I want to thank the committee for your time and
interest in these critical issues. We are here at the 9/11 Memorial
Museum as a sign of resilience to reflect on the past and envision the
future so we can enhance the present. Tragic events can be challenging
to talk about. But with these stories comes a responsibility to improve
response operations to save lives. I am grateful to the Congressional
Members here today and your colleagues for ensuring these discussions
continue, and for providing departments like FDNY with the tools to do
our best in these dangerous times.
Through your support, we will turn traumatic memories into hope and
greater national preparedness. Thank you.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Pfeifer. I just want to
remind, your opening statements will be submitted for the
record. If we could try to just summarize the opening
statements, keep it to 5 minutes. Again, Mr. Pfeifer, thank you
so much for your service.
I now recognize Commissioner Kavanagh for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LAURA KAVANAGH, FIRE COMMISSIONER, NEW YORK CITY
FIRE DEPARTMENT

Ms. Kavanagh. Thank you. I think as you heard from
Commissioner Pfeifer's testimony, you know, the New York City
Fire Department suffered the ultimate tragedy 22 years ago, but
it's the ultimate sign of resilience, including Commissioner
Pfeifer's decision to come back and continuing serving like so
many of your members have.
One way that we can honor those who have fallen is to
protect and nourish those who've survived. Many of our members
are suffering World Trade Center health conditions, as the
Chairman mentioned today. For our responders who now suffer
from cancer, our data shows is those receiving treatment
through the World Center Trade Program live longer than cancer
patients in New York State who were never exposed to the World
Trade Center. Remarkably, 5 years after a cancer diagnosis, 86
percent of responders are still with us today. Despite its
success, we are forced to continually fight to maintain funding
for this program. In July, the Senate approved necessary
funding for the World Trade Center Health Program as part of
the National Defense Authorization Act. We are hopeful that the
House will approve it as well.
As First Deputy Commissioner Pfeifer poignantly
highlighted, one quality that has always strengthened the Fire
Department is our ability to learn from experience and improve,
and our ability to have Federal funds integral to continuing
that improvement. A couple of things that I'd like to highlight
on that. We are the premiere fire department in the country.
That means that we are a regional and a national asset. We are
proud that our fellow first responders from across the
continent look to us for innovation, and we gladly share our
knowledge and best practices.
For example, recently we received requests from various
municipalities about our advanced drone and robotics program.
Using Federal dollars, we have gone from a single-tethered
drone to a fleet of drones and robotic devices that we
regularly use at scene of emergency operations. We were the
first fire department in the country to use a drone, and we
have continued pushing the technology forward working directly
with the FAA to improve processes for departments like ours.
Initially, drones were just static observational devices,
but we now employ these drones and robotic devices as tactical
tools that save lives of first responders. For example, in
April, we deployed our robotic dog to search for signs of life
in a parking garage collapse. In the summer, we used the drones
to analyze a construction crane that had caught fire and
dangled 45 stories above 10th Avenue. We also use these
regularly at fires and emergencies on a daily basis.
We have also transformed into a regional and national
asset, that includes a 285-member incident management team that
manages and coordinates emergencies across the country. This
concept, which came out of the wake of 9/11, allows the
Department to send talented emergency managers nationally and
even internationally to provide assistance. Some examples just
this year, the Ridge Creek forest fire in Oregon, the wildfires
in Quebec, in Canada. We also formed the FDNY's Urban Search
and Rescue Team, which is specialized teams that are trained to
carry out live-saving operations in complex environments. They
have been deployed to New England, assist in search-and-rescue
operations during severe flooding. They also gone to Florida,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and to help with hurricane
responses across the country. We frequently deploy search-and-
rescue teams, including in recent years to Louisiana, Georgia,
Florida, the Carolinas, Puerto Rico, New Jersey, Massachusetts,
Texas, as well as several islands in the Caribbean.
Finally, we are grateful for every dollar of Federal
funding that we receive, and we appreciate the attention paid
to this issue by the Members of this subcommittee and the
Committee on Homeland Security. We believe it is critical to
allow grant funds to be used for training as well for
management and administrative costs. There is great value in
purchasing tangible innovative equipment, and we do a lot of
that. As a grant recipient, we also put a priority on making
sure that we track and administer grant dollars appropriately
and efficiently to great lengths to be good stewards of Federal
funds.
Having the equipment is only one part of the equation. The
other is being certain that FDNY personnel can expertly deploy
it at the appropriate moment, and it is only possible when
their training is current and substantial. I also want to
stress the importance of keeping funding tied to risk. The
number of cities eligible for UASI funding has grown, and while
I would never discourage the Government from allocating funds
to other cities, it is important that areas of the country
where the risk is greatest are able to access Federal funding
to successfully manage that risk.
Cities like New York have a great need for Homeland
Security funding, as I hope First Deputy Commissioner Pfeifer
and I have demonstrated today. We greatly appreciate the
partners that we have in this room. Your support, and the
support of your colleagues in Congress, has enabled the
Department to modernize, innovate, and equip ourselves to keep
pace with the evolving set of challenges that we face.
Sometimes those innovations are the result of very difficult
days, but I am grateful to live in a country that works
together to ensure that an attack like 9/11 can never happen
again. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Kavanagh follows:]
Prepared Statement of Laura Kavanagh
September 12, 2023
Good morning Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and all of
the Members of the Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology
who are here today.
As commissioner of the New York City Fire Department, I want to
express gratitude to the Members of the subcommittee for conducting
today's hearing at the National September 11th Memorial & Museum.
Twenty-two years ago, the Fire Department lost 343 members here on this
hallowed ground as they raced to save as many New Yorkers as they could
from the towering infernos of the World Trade Center. The loss of even
a single firefighter shakes the entire FDNY family; losing this many
all at once was an unfathomable blow.
In the wake of September 11, the men and women of the FDNY worked
around-the-clock for months at Ground Zero to recover the victims'
remains, including their own fallen comrades. The tragedy of 9/11
didn't end on that day. Our members are still dying of illnesses
sustained because of the brave and selfless time they spent at the
World Trade Center site. Last week, we added 43 names to the World
Trade Center Memorial Wall. We are now at the point where nearly as
many members have died of World Trade Center illnesses as died in the
attack itself.
But as our 158-year history has shown, the FDNY is resilient. I am
proud that, despite the great risks involved, FDNY members respond
every day to help their fellow New Yorkers. Our ranks today include
many legacy members who lost loved ones on 9/11 but continue to serve.
There is no better example of that than First Deputy Commissioner
Joseph Pfeifer, who, as you just heard, was a Battalion Chief on
September 11, 2001.
One way we can honor those who have fallen is to protect and
nourish those who survive. We established the FDNY WTC Health Program
in response to the large numbers of survivors affected by WTC-related
health conditions, including cancers and lung disease. Every day this
program provides our members with the therapies they need: medical
monitoring, mental health and physical health treatments,
chemotherapies, respiratory medications and organ transplants, all at
no cost. In the last 18 months, six members of our Department have
received lung transplants, freeing them from constant oxygen therapy
and the very real threat of death. And for our responders who now
suffer from cancer, our data shows that those receiving treatment
through the WTC Health Program live longer than cancer patients in New
York State who were never exposed to the World Trade Center.
Remarkably, 5 years after a cancer diagnosis, 86 percent of responders
are still with us today. Despite its success, we are forced to
continually fight to maintain funding for this program. In July, the
Senate approved necessary funding for the World Trade Center Health
Program as part of the National Defense Authorization Act. We are
hopeful that the House will approve it as well.
As First Deputy Commissioner Pfeifer poignantly highlighted, one
quality that has always strengthened the Fire Department is our ability
to learn from experience and improve, and our ability to Federal funds
is integral to continuing that improvement. The lessons of September
11--hard-earned as they were--have led to innovation and great leaps
forward in our ability to plan, prepare, and execute emergency
responses. On a constant basis, we analyze an evolving landscape of
threats and hazards. We work with local, State, and Federal partners to
improve our State of preparedness and the tools that we use to respond.
Without Federal support, that wouldn't be possible.
federal support--put to good use
The FDNY values every dollar of Federal funding that we receive,
and we work incredibly hard to make sure that the American taxpayers
are getting their money's worth. We use Federal funding--primarily from
Urban Area Security Initiative and Port Security grants--to strengthen
the Department and enhance our capabilities so that we can provide
lifesaving response and emergency care here in New York City and across
the country.
Federal funding has transformed FDNY's training capabilities. Using
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) grants, we have created several
advanced training facilities. These include a Subway Simulator, a
Shipboard Firefighting Simulator, a marine-based Damage Control
Simulator, and the Downey All Hazards Collapse Simulator, which
includes a decommissioned airplane to create collapse or plane crash
environments. We also conduct joint training exercises with local,
State, and Federal partners. The Counter-Terrorism Rescue Task Force--
equipped with Federally-funded equipment such as ballistic vests and
helmets--trains constantly with NYPD partners so that they are prepared
to deploy whenever the need arises.
We also use DHS grants to enhance interoperable communications, and
specifically our on-scene situational capabilities. We invest funds to
protect our information systems by building capabilities to monitor,
detect, and respond to potential threats.
The FDNY is the premier fire department in the country. We are
proud that our fellow first responders from across the continent look
to us for innovation, and we gladly share our knowledge and best
practices. For example, recently we have received requests from various
municipalities about our advanced drone and robotics program. Using
Federal dollars, we have gone from a single, tethered-drone to a fleet
of drones and robotic devices that we regularly use at the scene of
emergency operations.
We were the first Fire Department in the country to use a drone,
and we have continued pushing the technology forward, working directly
with the FAA to improve processes for departments like ours. Whereas we
initially used drones merely as static observational devices, we now
employ drones and robotic devices as tactical tools, employing infrared
cameras to detect heat signatures and maneuverability to use for
search-and-rescue purposes in ways that would be very dangerous or
impossible to replicate with humans. For example, in April, we deployed
our robotic ``dog'' to search for signs of life in a parking garage
collapse and this summer we used drones to analyze a construction crane
that caught fire and dangled 45 stories above 10th Avenue. We also use
these devices at routine fires and emergencies on a daily basis.
Thanks to Federal funding, the Department has built assets and
capabilities that have transformed the FDNY into a regional and
national asset.
This includes a 285-member Incident Management Team that manages
and coordinates emergencies, including large incidents such as
explosions, major fires, and weather events. This concept--which came
out of sharing best practices with the Forestry Service in the wake of
9/11--allows the Department to send talented emergency management and
logistics nationally and even internationally to provide immediate
assistance where communities are struggling. This year, the FDNY has
deployed members to Idaho to assist with the Ridge Creek forest fire;
to Oregon to assist with the Lookout forest fire; and to Quebec to
provide assistance with wildfires.
Federal funding and cooperation also led to the creation of FDNY's
Urban Search and Rescue Team (USAR) teams and other specialized teams
that train to carry out life-saving operations in complex environments
such as tunnels, subways, building collapses, waterways, and high
rises. In July, we deployed a USAR team to New England to assist in
search-and-rescue operations during severe flooding. Though we have
only just entered hurricane season, FDNY members have already responded
to Florida, North Carolina, and South Carolina to assist with Hurricane
Idalia. We frequently deploy search-and-rescue teams around the country
following hurricanes. In recent years, we have sent teams to provide
hurricane relief in Louisiana, Georgia, Florida, the Carolinas, Puerto
Rico, New Jersey, Massachusetts, Texas, as well as several islands in
the Caribbean.
We also use Federal funding to purchase vessels for FDNY's Marine
unit. The largest boats in our fleet are capable of pumping 50,000
gallons of water per minute, have air filtration and pressurization
protection, and are useful for firefighting, water and ship rescue, and
hazardous material detection. They assist with securing the waterways
around New York and are equipped to handle chemical, biological,
radiological, and nuclear (CBRN). These vessels are a regional asset
that we use to assist neighboring jurisdictions through mutual aid
agreements and requests. A recent example that some local members of
the subcommittee may recall was when FDNY units assisted over several
days in resolving a large cargo ship fire in New Jersey. Tragically,
two Newark firefighters died in the line of duty; FDNY members assisted
their Newark counterparts in locating their fallen members.
key elements of the grant process
We are grateful for every dollar of Federal funding that we
receive, and we appreciate the attention paid to this issue by Members
of this subcommittee and the Committee on Homeland Security. We believe
it is critical to allow grant funds to be used for training as well as
for management and administrative costs. There is great value in
purchasing tangible, innovative equipment, and we do a lot of that. But
as a grant recipient, we also put a priority on making sure that we
track and administer grant dollars appropriately and efficiently. We go
to great lengths to be good stewards of Federal funds, and having the
ability to pay grants staff allows us to do that. It's also critical
that funds continue to support new training programs and sustain
successful legacy programs. Having the equipment is only one part of
the equation; the other is being certain that FDNY personnel can
expertly deploy it at the appropriate moment, and that is only possible
when their training is current and substantial.
I also want to stress the importance of keeping funding tied to
risk. The number of cities eligible for UASI funding has grown, and
while I would never discourage the Government from allocating funds to
another city, it is important that areas of the country where the risk
is greatest are able to access Federal funding to successfully manage
that risk.
Cities like New York have a great need for Homeland Security
funding, and as I hope First Deputy Commissioner Pfeifer and I have
demonstrated today, we use Federal funding efficiently and in ways that
benefit the entire country.
We greatly appreciate the partners that we have in this room. Your
support, and the support of your colleagues in Congress, has enabled
the Department to modernize, innovate, and equip ourselves to keep pace
with the evolving set of challenges that we face. Sometimes those
innovations are the result of very difficult days, but I am grateful to
live in a country that works together to ensure that an attack like 9/
11 never happens again.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Commissioner.
I now recognize Deputy Commissioner Weiner for her opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF REBECCA ULAM WEINER, DEPUTY COMMISSIONER,
INTELLIGENCE AND COUNTERTERRORISM, NEW YORK CITY POLICE
DEPARTMENT

Ms. Weiner. Good morning, and thank you all. Good morning.
Thank you so much, Chairman D'Esposito and Ranking Member
Goldman, and all of you here today. On behalf of Police
Commissioner Edward A. Caban and Mayor Eric Adams, I want to
thank you for having me today.
Twenty-two years ago, the attacks that we have all been
discussing happened in this hallowed space. A lot has happened
since, and our terrorism landscape manifests very differently
today. However, the threat is no less proximate and it is no
less concerning, and it requires our collaboration, absolutely
intensively.
Today's threat environment in New York City is more
dynamic, more diffuse, and unpredictable than ever. What hasn't
changed, however, is that the city remains a singularly
priority target, due to its unique draw of iconic location,
high-profile events, and a vibrantly diverse population. Since
9/11, violent extremists and malicious actors across the
ideological spectrum have targeted New York City in over 50
disrupted plots and attacks. Commissioner Pfeifer mentioned a
couple of them earlier, from foreign terrorist organizations
and the individuals they inspire, to adversarial nation-states,
to domestic violent extremists, and lone actors motivated by a
wide range of grievances, including racial and ethnic hate,
anti-Government extremism, and conspiracy theories.
In 2022 alone, there were eight terrorist incidents in the
greater New York area, which demonstrate the diversity and the
range of threats we encounter. I'll touch on some of these
briefly in the interest of time, but they're enumerated at
greater length in my written submission for the record. The
year began with two incidents motivated in part by race-based
conspiracy theory, the assassination of two of our officers in
January 2022.
As was mentioned, a mass shooting on the subway in
Brooklyn. During that summer, two incidents took place within
weeks of one another with links to the government of Iran and
the ideology that the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps Quds
force inspire and an assassination plot against a Brooklyn-
based woman's rights activist, and a brutal attack against
author Salman Rushdie.
There was, of course, the horrific attack targeting the
black community in Buffalo carried out by a racially- and
ethnically-motivated violent extremist, and a disrupted plot
against a New York City synagogue last fall by an adherent to a
neo-Nazi ideology.
The year ended with the Jihadist attack against three of
our officers just outside the security perimeter in Times
Square as revelers were gathered to support the new year.
Compounding these issues are public safety risks that are newer
to us. In particular, I wanted to flag those associated with
emerging technology, artificial intelligence generative AI.
Generative AI offers clear and present risks, the proliferation
of disinformation and deep fakes at scale and at cost, bot-
generated and voice-cloned threats, scams and swatting
campaigns, lower barriers to entry for the creation of malware,
phishing, and other cyber threat vectors, the provision of
targeting and tactical guidance, which we've started to see on-
line, and even the potential creation of novel illicit
narcotics, explosive compounds, or bioweapons. We're only just
beginning as a law enforcement collective to understand the
public safety implications of emerging technology, and
generative AI is only dimension of the challenge.
It's important to note that we can't keep New Yorkers safe
without critical partnerships with the Federal Government, and
this occurs at every level with every agency. We participate in
numerous task forces with Federal agencies, from the Joint
Terrorism Task Force, to the counterintelligence task force, to
fusion centers. Every day, we gather Federal, State, and local
counterparts to focus our resources on drivers of gun violence
in the city through our gun violence strategies partnership.
While these active partnerships are critical, funding our
local counterterrorism efforts is equally important,
particularly given competing priorities that have begun to
stretch the resources of many agencies today. The NYPD expects
to receive $123 million in Homeland Security grants from the
Federal Government during fiscal year 2023, vitally important
funds. These funds are integral to our public safety mission,
and should be allocated based on risk.
New York City remains the priority target in this country.
We use these resources to provide equipment and training to our
counterterrorism officers deployed around the city, and to
support our critical response command, especially trained and
equipped group of officers, who you probably saw upstairs as
you were walking in, who deploy throughout the city based on
intelligence protecting people, infrastructure, and events,
deterring and detecting acts of terrorism and targeted
violence.
We rely on this funding to acquire chemical, biological,
radiological, and nuclear explosive detection equipment that we
use around the city, and to support our intelligence analysis
efforts to detect and deter threats.
We depend on it to maintain our domain awareness systems,
an important intelligence-sharing tool. Cuts to these vital
funding strains will imperil these programs at a time that many
of our partners are struggling with competing challenges,
priority challenges as well, outside of the counterterrorism
domain, such as Russia's war in Ukraine, rising threats posed
by the CCP, and other priorities.
Last, we wanted to highlight a lesser-known element of our
counterterrorism response, which is partnership with the
Federal Park Service. For years, the Federal Park Service has
allowed the NYPD to house our counterterrorism unit, aviation
division, special operations division, and emergency services
unit at Floyd Bennett Field. Grouping these units together in
one location allows us to properly train for and rapidly
respond to emergency situations where every second counts.
Our lease recently expired, and we've been working
collaboratively with the Parks Department to extend it. No
agreement has yet been reached, and there is simply no other
place in New York City that can provide the same space and
access. We appreciate the support that several of you and your
colleagues have provided in helping broker an agreement that
would allow us to remain our footprint there. Thank you again
for the opportunity to testify today, and I will be happy to
answer any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Weiner follows:]
Prepared Statement of Rebecca Ulam Weiner
September 12, 2023
Good morning Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and
Members of the Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology. I
am Rebecca Ulam Weiner, deputy commissioner of intelligence and
counterterrorism for the New York City Police Department (NYPD). On
behalf of Police Commissioner Edward A. Caban, and Mayor Eric Adams, I
thank you for inviting me to testify before your subcommittee today,
and I am pleased to discuss the Federal efforts that support State and
local law enforcement in mitigating the threats posed by terrorism and
targeted violence.
Twenty-two years after 9/11, terrorism manifests differently today
than it did in the first decade after 9/11, or during the heyday of
ISIS's external operations. Today's threat environment in New York City
is more varied, diffuse, and unpredictable than ever. What has not
changed, however, is that the city remains a singularly priority target
due to its unique draw of iconic locations, high-profile events, and a
vibrantly diverse population. Since 9/11, violent extremists and
malicious actors across the ideological spectrum have targeted New York
City in over 50 disrupted plots and attacks--from foreign terrorist
organizations and individuals they inspire, to adversarial nation-
states, to domestic violent extremists and lone actors motivated by a
wide range of grievances, including racial and ethnic hate, anti-
Government extremism, and conspiracy theories.
Since just 2020, there have been over one dozen terroristic
incidents--to include attacks, disrupted plots, and on-going threat
streams--in New York State, motivated by a wide range of ideologies and
carried out by a diverse set of individuals. To cite a few:

Our Federal partners are currently investigating a human
smuggling network, including at least one person allegedly
linked to ISIS, which facilitated the migration of more than a
dozen Uzbek nationals into the United States.

On New Year's Eve in 2022, an individual traveled from Maine
to attack three NYPD officers with an edged weapon right
outside the Times Square security perimeter.

Last November, the NYPD and FBI conducted a joint
investigation into social media posts threatening to conduct a
shooting targeting a synagogue. This investigation led to the
arrests of two men in Penn Station and the recovery of an 8-
inch military-style knife, a firearm with a 30-round magazine,
a Swastika arm patch, and a ski mask.

In a years-long campaign of threats, harassment, and an
attempted assassination, an Iranian women's rights activist
from Brooklyn has been targeted by a transnational criminal
network emanating from Iran. Separately, in the summer of 2022,
a New Jersey man allegedly inspired by the Islamic
Revolutionary Guards Corps traveled to a literary festival in
Chautauqua, New York and attacked--and nearly killed--well-
known author and free speech advocate Salman Rushdie.

In May 2022, New York State experienced the deadliest
racially-motivated mass casualty attack in its history when a
white supremacist entered a grocery store in a predominantly
Black neighborhood in Buffalo and killed 10 people in an attack
targeted against the Black community.

A Staten Island man was arrested in the fall of 2020 for
posting death threats against protesters, politicians, and
police officers on social media; he had in his possession
various weapons including a semi-automatic pistol, a Taser, a
crossbow, and an expandable baton.

An ISIS-inspired man from Texas pleaded guilty to material
support for terrorism for activities involving a plot to bomb
Trump Tower and the New York Stock Exchange in November 2020.

In the wake of civil unrest following the police-involved
murder of George Floyd, New York City experienced a sharp rise
in anti-Government extremist violence targeting the NYPD and
its infrastructure. Malicious actors intent on harming police
officers set fire to NYPD vehicles on multiple occasions. In
one case, a man crawled under an NYPD marked van and sliced
wires, with the purpose of cutting the brake lines.

Also during the height of the civil unrest that summer, a
Brooklyn resident attacked two NYPD officers on an anti-looting
foot patrol, slashing one with a knife and stealing his weapon
in an opportunistic assault allegedly motivated by violent
Islamist extremism.
New York City has also witnessed a new rise in violence associated
with conspiracy theories. Last year, two high-profile acts of violence
were carried out by individuals who espoused race-based conspiracy
theories--the ambush assassination of two NYPD officers in January
2022, and an attack on the New York City subway in the spring. As we
prepare for what may be a highly contested national election cycle, we
are cognizant that political violence and anti-Government extremism are
likely to continue to rise, and that conspiracy theories will play a
role in fueling them.
Transnational repression is also rising in New York City, whereby
government actors linked to countries like the People's Republic of
China and Iran seek to target dissidents and perceived political
adversaries. Mere steps from where we sit today, an overseas police
station operated clandestinely by the People's Republic of China was
recently identified, investigated, and shut down.
Compounding all these issues are public safety risks associated
with emerging technology, particularly generative artificial
intelligence (AI). Generative AI has begun to profoundly change the way
many industries and individuals operate, creating tremendous
efficiencies. However, it also offers clear and present risks: the
proliferation of disinformation and deepfakes, at scale and at cost;
bot-generated and voice-cloned threats, scams, and swatting campaigns;
lower barriers to entry for the creation of malware, phishing, and
other cyber threat vectors; the provision of targeting and tactical
guidance; and even the potential creation of novel illicit narcotics,
explosive compounds, or bioweapons via large language models. Local law
enforcement is only just beginning to understand the public safety
implications of emerging technology, and generative AI is only one
dimension of that challenge.
It is important to note that we cannot keep New Yorkers safe
without our critical partnerships in the Federal Government. We
participate in numerous task forces with Federal agencies, which are
critical to keeping the city and region safe, notably including the
Joint Terrorism Task Force. We utilize fusion centers with our State
and Federal colleagues to share intelligence and thwart crime. Every
day, we gather Federal, State, and local law enforcement partners to
focus our resources on the drivers of gun violence in this city,
through our Gun Violence Strategies Partnership.
While these active partnerships with Federal agencies are critical,
funding our local counterterrorism efforts is equally important,
particularly with the competing priorities that stretch the resources
of Federal agencies today. The NYPD expects to receive about $123
million in Homeland Security grants from the Federal Government during
fiscal year 2023. These funds are integral to our public safety
mission. When issuing grants, it is critical that the Government
allocate funds based on risk so they are utilized most effectively. We
use these resources to provide equipment and training to our
counterterrorism officers, and to support our Critical Response
Command, a specially trained and equipped group of officers who
regularly deploy throughout the city to detect and deter acts of
terrorism and targeted violence. We rely on this funding to acquire
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosive detection
equipment to support intelligence analysis preparedness efforts. We
depend on it to maintain our Domain Awareness System, which is an
important intelligence-sharing tool for law enforcement officers. Any
decrease in this funding will imperil our ability to continue these
programs that are absolutely critical for the prevention of terrorist
attacks and would fundamentally erode our ability to detect and prevent
terrorist attacks on the Nation's largest city and potentially impact
the safety of our law enforcement personnel who protect our community.
Last, we wanted to highlight a lesser-known element of our
counterterrorism response, which is our partnership with the Federal
Parks Service. For years, the Federal Parks Service has allowed the
NYPD to house our Counterterrorism Unit, Aviation Division, Special
Operations Division, and Emergency Services Unit at Floyd Bennett
Field. Grouping these units together in one location allows us to
properly train for and rapidly respond to emergency situations where
every second counts. Our lease recently expired, and we have been
working collaboratively with the Parks Service to extend it. However,
no agreement has yet been reached. Our footprint on Floyd Bennett Field
is unique, and there is simply no other place in New York City that can
provide the same space and access. We appreciate the support that
several of you and your colleagues have provided in helping broker an
agreement that would allow us to maintain our footprint at Floyd
Bennett Field, and we look forward to working with our Federal partners
to continue and enhance this critical partnership.
Thank you again for this opportunity to testify today. I will be
happy to answer any questions you may have.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you very much Deputy Commissioner
Weiner.
I now recognize Nassau County Police Commissioner Patrick
Ryder to summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PATRICK J. RYDER, COMMISSIONER OF POLICE, NASSAU
COUNTY POLICE DEPARTMENT

Mr. Ryder. Good morning, and thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
this committee for giving us the opportunity to speak here
today, the opportunity to give our victims a voice, and the
opportunity to let law enforcement and all first responders
know there are still people that are out there in Government
that support us in our battles every day.
I am going to start my 41st year this January, and I, too,
am a first responder down at Ground Zero. I woke up that
morning, my father-in-law, retired FDNY, was standing there
watching my three kids. They were newly-born triplets in their
bouncies. He was watching the TV staring in silence. I walked
down, putting my tie on, and he says, Something bad happened.
He knew. That instinct took over. He knew it was going to be a
bad day for the FDNY. The second plane hit, and he just tapped
me on the shoulder, and he said, Go. Go we went, like every
first responder did, without question, without hesitation, go.
I remember going down the West Side Highway on Day 2, it
took a while to put some supplies that were donated by the
communities, and we drove down the West Side Highway. We
dropped them off at the Intrepid. As I'm pulling down, the dust
that was kicking up behind the cars in front of me, now knowing
that was the DNA of our loved ones that were down crushed in
those buildings by that terrorist attack.
As we went down even further, there was signs being held
up, thanking us, supporting us, sending their love and praise
to us, and I knew that moment that no matter what you take from
us, you will never take the will of the people, not the will of
the great people of the State of New York or anywhere in this
country, that they all stood together united like we do in our
pledge, united together to fight.
I got down, and I pulled up, and I remember walking up to
the first pile. It was gigantic. I couldn't imagine anything so
big in my life. I met a cop there Gary Wall. Gary Wall was a
Limerick police officer. Gary was filthy dirty. We just pulled
up, and I remember saying, Gary, how long you been here? I've
been here since yesterday. My brother Glenn was in Tower One.
He worked for Camden. Glen was my best friend growing up. That
was my first attachment to someone dying in the Towers.
Then everybody climbed on that hill, can by can handing
down, hoping that they'd find somebody. Then when somebody
yelled out, Quiet, you got thousands of people to be absolutely
silent to hear if somebody was knocking on a pipe. Then,
crawling through one of the tunnels, I'm about 100 yards in,
and the first time ever, I understood what the blasts from the
horn of a fire truck means, Get out, something's bad. You can't
turn around. The tunnel's 2\1/2\, 3 feet round, and I'm backing
out 100 yards on my knees. My brother-in-law grabs me, and we
just start to run. The building stops shaking, back on the
pile.
That day, I met a man I'll never forget, and he's, to this
day, one of the smartest academic minds I ever met. Chauncey
Parker with the NYPD as a deputy commissioner, and also the
director of the New York/New Jersey HIDTA. He said to me, he
goes, Pat this was complete failure of the intelligence-sharing
community. A complete failure. He goes, we have to do more if
we're going to go forward. The next day, we started developing
what was called the HIDTA RIC. Nassau County was one of the
first to have a regional intelligence center. HIDTA stands for
the High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas, and we started
sharing and building partnerships that grew and grew every day.
Just this past week, we've connected to cameras and license
plate readers through the NYPD, through the FDNY. The
partnerships are invaluable. But I live in a State that is now
trying to take away the rights from law enforcement of flying
our drones, as you just heard the testimony, and how important
they are to saving lives. The first persons they come after are
law enforcement.
We're overreaching. We're sending up drones that are
unmanned, and we're watching, big brother looking down. No.
This is big brother trying to protect you, the same big brother
that ran into those buildings that morning of 9/11, the same
big brothers that were crushed in those buildings that day in
trying to rescue those people.
We are challenged every day when it comes to technology,
whether it's drones, whether it's arable official intelligence,
facial recognition, our license plate reader program, these
thing invaluable to us. But every day, my great State of New
York tries to take more and more away from me. This is how we
defend you. This is how we defend our victims. This is how we
give them a voice.
I've got no notes in front of me because a guy told me a
long time ago, if you speak about what you're passionate about,
you don't have to write it down. Speak from the heart. That's
coming from the heart. You heard the testimony. I just watched
the special with Chief Pfeifer on it the other day. It brings
me to tears 22 years later, and too many people were lost that
day because we failed. We won't fail again, not the people on
this side of the table. We will not fail again. Bad guy has to
be right once. We have to be right every single time.
So thank you for the opportunity to speak, and thank you
for giving our victims a voice.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Commissioner Ryder.
I now recognize Mr. Ehrie for his opening statement.
Mr. Ryder. See the partnership?
Mr. Ehrie. Always together.

STATEMENT OF GREG EHRIE, CHIEF SECURITY OFFICER, PORT AUTHORITY
OF NEW YORK & NEW JERSEY

Mr. Ehrie. Thank you, Chairman D'Esposito. My name is Greg
Ehrie, and I am the chief security officer for the Port
Authority of New York and New Jersey. Like many of my fellow
witnesses, I was also 22 years ago here at Ground Zero as a
first responder during my service with the FBI. I appreciate
the opportunity to come before the subcommittee today and talk
about these very important critical issues.
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is a vast
multimobile transportation agency that builds, operates, and
maintains infrastructure, including five airports, two tunnels,
the Lincoln and the Holland, four bridges, the Port Authority
Bus Terminal, the path rail system that connects New York and
New Jersey, the Ports of New York and New Jersey, and the
iconic 16-acre World Trade Center complex where you now sit.
Port Authority facilities have the unfortunate distinction
of being targeted multiple times by terrorists. In 1975, an
explosive device was detonated at the TWA baggage reclaim at
LaGuardia Airport that killed 11 and injured 74. In 1993, a
truck bomb was detonated beneath the Twin Towers of the World
Trade Center, killing 6 and injuring over a thousand people. On
September 11, the Port Authority lost 84 employees, including
37 police officers responding to Zero and saving countless
lives. This gives us an unfortunate distinction of being the
police department that faced the single worse loss of life in
any department in the United States.
In 2017, as Chief Pfeifer mentioned, in an MTA corridor at
the doorstep of the Port Authority bus terminal, a would-be
suicide bomber partially detonated an IED injuring four people,
including himself. Two decades after 9/11, the transportation
sector continues to be an attractive target of terrorism.
Particularly acute are the Port Authority's high throughput
assets that are critical to the Nation and the region, as we
operate the Nation's largest airport system, the busiest bus
terminal, and most-traveled bridge in the country. This legacy
has resulted in a tireless commitment to safety and security to
protect our facilities and those who depend on them. This is
evident as security accounts for 26 percent of the agency's
personnel, and 26 percent of our operating budget.
Additionally, since 9/11, $1.7 billion has been invested in
capital projects to harden and strengthen existing facilities.
The Port Authority employs a risk-based, multi-layer security
approach to protect employees, customers, and transportation
assets. We protect Port Authority transportation by performing
all-hazard risk assessments to understand the current threat
landscape. Our assessments look across all agency assets, and
prioritize our risks so that we can better guide our security
investments. In doing so, we have enhanced both physical and
operational security, hardened our assets, and improved the
agency-wide resiliency.
We make investments in capital security projects that are
based on our risk assessment's findings and complete projects
that preserve life and safeguard our facilities. These projects
include the hardening of our underwater tunnels, strengthening
of our bridge suspender ropes, the hardening of bridge towers
and building columns, installation of bollards to prevent the
use of vehicle-borne IEDs at our facilities, and enhancement to
airport perimeter fencing and guard boosts.
We also deploy best-in-class security technology solutions.
We have a dedicated security technology department that focuses
on researching, evaluating, and deploying proven technology
solutions across our facilities. Additionally, we are an active
participant in the New York City Mayor's Office Security
Technology Task Force to collaborate with our local partners on
cutting-edge technological solutions. We maintain a robust
cybersecurity program that provides a broader way of cyber
defenses to include a 24/7 dedicated cybersecurity operations
center and other cyber centers.
We deploy a highly-trained and well-equipped
counterterrorism focused police force, members of who you see
before you today. The Port Authority Police Department has over
2,100 police officers who maintain a 24/7 presence at our
facilities. Since 2001, the PAPD uniform staff has grown
significantly to respond to new terrorism threat landscapes. In
addition to routine uniform patrols, our policing deployments
include high-visibility counterterrorism teams and emergency
service units, explosive detection K-9 units, radiological and
chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear capability
deployments, vehicle checkpoints and commercial vehicle
inspectors, and bag busts and path-trained inspections.
Additionally, we have a contract security guard force who
are trained in behavioral recognition techniques and
counterterrorism awareness. These security officers are posted
at locations throughout our facilities and staff a 24/7
security operation center. The Port Authority also has its own
Office of Emergency Management that leads our agency-wide
business continuity program and executes training and full-
scale exercises. These training and exercise programs integrate
our regional first responders, and focus on the incident
command system and unified command principles, active-shooter
response, rail emergencies, aircraft incidents, acts of
terrorism, and other natural and human-made hazards.
We also maintain, like many of my witnesses stated before
me, local, State, and Federal partnerships to enhance
situational awareness of the current and emerging threats
facing our region. Our investigators have a presence on task
forces to include the New York and New Jersey FBI JTTFs. The
Port Authority collaborates with the DHS Office of Science and
Technology, DHS Office of Health Affairs and Biowatch Program,
as well as the DOD Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency,
DARPA.
These partnerships have led to the development and piloting
of a variety of security technology programs at the Port
Authority. We also conduct quality assurance inspections and
seek independent third-party review. The Port Authority
regularly audits its security programs to proactively identify
and mitigate issues before our adversaries can exploit them.
An essential component to the implementation of this multi-
layered security approach is Federal grant funding. The Port
Authority does not receive tax revenue from New York or New
Jersey, but relies primarily on revenue generated from facility
operations. That being said, and considering the COVID-19
pandemic impacts to agency revenue, Federal grants are critical
to the continuation of our security programs. In 2023, the Port
Authority received $13.5 million in Federal grant funding from
the DHS FEMA Transit Security Grant Program, the UASI Program,
and the Port Security Grant Program. FEMA grant funding has
long supported Port Authority security initiatives to include
counterterrorism programs, police training and equipment,
emergency preparedness training and exercises, facility
hardening, and strengthening projects.
Furthermore, the Port Authority received $2 million in
grant funding through the body-worn camera program through DOJ.
This funding allows us to outfit our police department with
body-worn camera technology, and will help enhance
accountability and provide transparency to the communities we
serve. We appreciate Congress' past support of Federal security
grant funding, and ask that you continue to fund these vital
programs. They are essential to the Port Authority's financial
ability to maintain safety and security of our facilities and
implement initiatives to address the challenges of the ever-
evolving threat landscape.
In closing, I would like to thank all the Members of the
subcommittee and our Congressional delegation for their
unwavering support that allows us to better serve our employees
and customers, and better protect our regional assets and
infrastructure. I'm happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ehrie follows:]
Prepared Statement of Greg Ehrie
September 12, 2023
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is a vast multi-modal
transportation agency that builds, operates, and maintains
infrastructure, including:

five (5) airports, including JFK, Newark Liberty
International and LaGuardia,

two (2) tunnels--the Lincoln and Holland,

four (4) bridges, including the George Washington Bridge,

the Port Authority Bus Terminal,

the PATH rail system that connects New York and New Jersey,

the iconic 16-acre World Trade Center (WTC) complex, and

the Ports of New York and New Jersey.
Port Authority facilities have the unfortunate distinction of being
targeted multiple times by terrorists. In 1975, an explosive device was
detonated at the TWA baggage reclaim at LaGuardia airport that killed
11 and injured 74. In 1993, a truck bomb was detonated beneath the
North Tower of the World Trade Center, killing 6 and injuring over
1,000 people.
On September 11, 2001, the Port Authority lost 78 civilian
employees, as well as 37 police officers, who responded to the World
Trade Center attacks and helped save countless lives. This was the
worst single-day loss of life of any Police Department of the United
States.
In 2017, in an MTA corridor at the doorstep of the Port Authority
Bus Terminal a would-be suicide bomber partially detonated an IED
injuring 4 people, including the suspect.
Two decades after 9/11, the transportation sector continues to be
an attractive target of terrorism. Particularly acute are the Port
Authority's high-throughput assets that are vital to the region and the
Nation, as we operate the largest airport system, the busiest bus
terminal, the most traveled bridge and the busiest port system in the
United States.
This legacy has resulted in a tireless commitment to safety and
security to protect our facilities and those who depend on them. This
is evident, as security accounts for 26 percent of the agency personnel
and 26 percent of the operating budget. Additionally, since 9/11, $1.7
billion dollars has been invested in capital projects to harden and
strengthen existing facilities.
The Port Authority employs a risk-based, multi-layer security
approach to protect its employees, customers, and critical
transportation assets.
The layers in this methodology include:
measuring risk through a layered assessment process
The Port Authority has been proactive in assessing risks,
prioritizing vulnerabilities, and developing solutions designed to
mitigate those risks. In doing so, we have enhanced both physical and
operational security, hardened our assets, and improved agency-wide
resiliency.
investing in capital security projects and strengthening programs
Utilizing the findings of the agency risk assessment, the Port
Authority completed projects that preserve life and safeguard
facilities from threats. Such projects include, but are not limited to:

Column hardening at our facilities, such as the Port
Authority Bus Terminal.

Hardening of our underwater tunnels and installation of
protective mats. In 2019, the PATH Underwater Tunnel Breach
Mitigation Program received a Designation Award from the DHS
SAFETY Act office. The PATH was the first rail transit property
in the country to receive such a comprehensive Safety Act
award.

Strengthening of suspender ropes, hardening of our bridge
towers, and pier fender installations--adding enhanced
protection of the George Washington Bridge, Bayonne Bridge and
Outterbridge Crossing.

Bollard installation to prevent the use of vehicle-borne
improvised explosive devices (VBIED).

Enhancements to airport perimeter fencing and hardening of
guard posts.

Construction and implementation of redundant PATH Train
Control Center.
utilizing best-in-class security technology solutions
The Port Authority is constantly researching and piloting best-in-
class security technology solutions, adding another layer of security
to our facilities. In addition to our 8,500-plus CCTV cameras, the Port
Authority's security technology portfolio includes:

Robust card access control systems with door alarms at every
facility.

Perimeter intrusion detection systems at our airports and at
PATH underwater tunnel entrances.

Detection devices to help protect against chemical,
biological, and radiological threats.

Agency-wide P25 Radio System to ensure seamless internal and
interoperability with our local Port District partners.

License Plate Readers at our facilities.

And most recently--the installation of a gunshot detection
system at Liberty Newark International Airport Terminal B.
The Port Authority is also an active participant in the New York
City Mayor's Office Security Technology taskforce that was established
to foster collaboration with local partners to develop and pilot
cutting-edge technology solutions to enhance police and security
operations.
deploying police and security guard assets
The Port Authority has a highly-trained police force of over 2,100
members that maintain a 24/7 command presence at our transportation
facilities. Since 2001, the Port Authority Police department uniformed
staff has grown significantly to respond to new terrorism threat
landscape.
In addition to routine uniformed patrols, our policing deployments
include:

High-visibility counterterrorism teams and Emergency Service
Unit patrols,

Explosive detection canine (K-9) unit patrols,

Radiological detection and CBRNE capabilities deployments,

Vehicle checkpoint and commercial vehicle inspections,

Bag, bus, and PATH train inspections.
The Port Authority Police Department also maintains a presence in
29 Federal, State, and local law enforcement task forces, to include:
the FBI JTTF in both New York and New Jersey. We are confident that we
are connected to receive important and actionable intelligence and
information.
Additionally, we have an important contract security guard force
who are trained in behavioral recognition techniques and
counterterrorism awareness. These security officers are posted at
locations throughout our facilities and staff a 24/7 Security
Operations Center.
maintaining a strong emergency management program
The Port Authority has its own Office of Emergency Management (OEM)
that is vital to this multi-layered security plan. The OEM leads our
agency-wide business continuity program and execute agency-wide
training and full-scale exercises. These training and exercise programs
integrate our regional first responders and focuses on the incident
command system and unified command principles, active-shooter response,
rail emergencies, aircraft incidents, acts of terrorism, and other
natural and human-made hazards.
developing and maintaining strong federal, state, and regional
partnerships
The Port Authority understands the importance of maintaining strong
relationships with our Federal, State and local partners. These
cooperative partnerships are integral to our intelligence,
counterterrorism, security technology, and training efforts. The
support received through these partnerships helps us better secure our
assets and the information exchange is mutually beneficial to all
partners.
In addition to our partner agencies noted above, the Port Authority
has strong working relationships with various Federal agencies and
programs, to include:

DHS Office of Science and Technology (DHS-S&T),

DHS Office of Health Affairs (BioWatch Program),

DOD Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).
These partnerships are essential to information sharing regarding
emerging security technologies and have led to the development and
pilot of a variety of programs at Port Authority's facilities.
We ask Congress for their continued support of funding to these
research agencies to assist with the development and testing of future
technologies which aim to increase the effectiveness of detection
devices, screening devices, and police personal safety devices.
performing on-going quality assurance and seeking independent review
To maintain a prepared, unified, and accountable security
operation, the Port Authority regularly measures, audits, and inspects
its programs and systems. These internal auditing programs allow us to
proactively identify and mitigate issues and concerns before our
adversaries can exploit them.
Additionally, for over a decade, the Port Authority has
successfully utilized the DHS SAFETY Act office as an independent
third-party to review and validate the effectiveness of our security
programs and technologies against industry best practices.
Prior to 2013, SAFETY Act certifications and designations were
awarded to individual technologies. The Port Authority in collaboration
with the SAFETY Act office, helped redefine the eligibility criteria
for awards, and in 2013 we received a groundbreaking SAFETY Act
designation for the LaGuardia Airport Security Program. Since then, we
have continued to leverage the SAFETY Act office and have received
awards for some of the Port Authority's most used and relied-upon
facilities, including the George Washington Bridge, World Trade Center,
and PATH.
The SAFETY Act office has expanded its portfolio of participants to
include large private entities such as the National Football and Major
League Baseball. Although, the program continues to grow, the SAFETY
Act budget has remained relatively flat over the past 15 years. We
would request that Congress continue to support the SAFETY Act program
and provide the much-needed additional funding and resources to ensure
its continued success.
the importance of federal grant funding
A critical component to the implementation of this multi-layered
security approach is Federal grant funding. The Port Authority does not
receive tax revenue from New York or New Jersey and relies primarily on
revenue generated from facility operations. That being said, and
especially considering the COVID-19 pandemic impacts to agency revenue,
Federal grants are vital to the continuation of our security programs,
that can never remain static or, even worse, fall behind against the
backdrop of the ever-evolving threat landscape.
In 2023, the Port Authority received $13.5 million in Federal grant
funding from the DHS FEMA Transit Security Grant Program (TSGP), Urban
Area Security Initiative (UASI), and the Port Security Grant Program.
FEMA grant funding has long supported security initiatives to include:

Counter-terrorism programs,

Police training and equipment,

Cybersecurity programs,

Installations of CCTV and Access Control Systems at PATH,
Ports, and the Port Authority Bus Terminal,

Bollard protection initiatives,

Protection of the PATH tunnels,

Building column protection at the Port Authority Bus
Terminal,

WTC Transportation Hub security initiatives,

Emergency preparedness training and exercises and business
continuity Programs.
Furthermore, the Port Authority received $2 million dollars in
grant funding through the DOJ Bureau of Justice Assistance Body-Worn
Camera program. This funding allowed us to outfit our police department
with Body-Worn Camera technology that enhances accountability and
provide transparency to the communities we serve. We intend to apply
for 2024 grant funding through this program to further enhance our
training capabilities.
We appreciate Congress' support of Federal security grant funding
and ask that you continue to fund these vital programs; they are
essential to the Port Authority's financial ability to maintain safety
and security at our facilities and implement initiatives to address the
challenges of the evolving threat landscape.
In closing, I would like to thank the Members of the Subcommittee
on Emergency Management and Technology and our Congressional delegation
for their unwavering support that allows us to better serve our
employees and customers and better protect our regional transportation
infrastructure and all those who depend upon it.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Ehrie.
Before we get into questioning, I just want to point out,
as I look around, there was a reason why we wanted to have this
hearing here at the 9/11 Museum, and we wanted to make sure
that those who visited this hallowed ground could be part of
this. As we look around, we see people visiting the 9/11
Museum.
I just want to point out to all of you here, whether you
are proud New Yorkers, or whether you're visiting from any
corner across this Nation, many days you may watch the
mainstream media and see a very divided government, division in
Washington, division amongst parties. I just want to be very
clear that on this dais, you have Members of the U.S. House of
Representatives from many corners of this great Nation
representing both sides of the aisle.
But this morning, we are not Democrats or Republicans, we
are here as Americans. This is your Government at work. We are
united, not divided, united in funding innovation and education
and equipment, fighting for the health care of 9/11 survivors,
and most importantly, keeping us and our first responders safe.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning
may be called after all Members have been recognized. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Deputy Commissioner Weiner, you mentioned it briefly in
your opening remarks, but I think if--if you could perhaps give
us 2 to 3 minutes, can you gives a sense--and I know that this
is something that we discussed when we had met a few weeks ago,
and I think for everyone to hear, especially my colleagues is
of super importance. Can you give us a sense of the threat that
foreign terrorist groups pose today and how it has changed over
the past 20 years?
Ms. Weiner. Absolutely. Thank you for the question. This is
an enduring threat. It's a persistent threat. As I mentioned,
though it manifests differently today than it did on September
12, 2001, it's a threat that we have arrayed tremendous
resources and need to continue to array tremendous resources to
combat al-Qaeda and ISIS, continue to inspire home-grown
violent extremists across the country and here in our area of
responsibility, in New York, every day.
This continues through propaganda; this continues through
plotting; this continues through the investigations that we
collectively, with our Federal, State, and local counterparts
across the country, carry out to make sure that it doesn't
manifest in violence on our streets.
This is in addition to threats posed by nation-states. I
mentioned Iran briefly earlier, but the emboldened Iran and
activities targeting dissidents here in our city, targeting
former U.S. officials in threat streams are of great concern to
us at the NYPD and in concert with our Federal partners. The
nexus to international terrorism remains strong, and it will
continue to do so. The programs that we've just described are
put into place to ensure that collectively we can meet threats
where they emanate from before they materialize here on our
streets.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you very much.
One of the things that Mr. Goldman mentioned in his opening
remarks was about FEMA's nonprofit security grant program.
Commissioner Ryder is charged with protecting one of the
largest Jewish populations across the Nation, and I am honored
to represent that same population. The nonprofit security grant
program provides funding support for target hardening and other
physical security enhancements and activities to nonprofit
organizations that are at high risk of a terrorist attack. In
New York alone, antisemitic attacks have increased by 39
percent from 2021 to 2022, reaching a record high.
Commissioner, have you observed the use of a nonprofit
security grant program within Nassau County's large Jewish
community?
Mr. Ryder. Yes, we have. So in Nassau County we have been
very fortunate that we reach out to all of our--our schools. We
have 56 school districts, 450 buildings. We have over 100
yeshivas that are out there and synagogues and houses of
worship. Every one of them has received an assessment from the
Nassau County Police Department. Our homeland security office
has done the security assessment with them.
We've advanced their security as far as going--giving them
the Rave app, which is a response app that we use in Nassau
County. It's in every one of our institutions, and also the
hardening of that security, putting in the bollards, putting
parking conditions, lighting, anything that would make it a
safer--the, as we call them, the person trap in the front of
the building. So we've done a lot with our leaders, both from
the religious side and school side, but we always can do more,
and they can always use more funding.
Mr. D'Esposito. So do you believe that the nonprofit
security grant program has been successful?
Mr. Ryder. It's been invaluable. It really has. It's
sometimes not waiting for that, but that perception of security
is so important to those people that go to pray on the Sabbath,
on a Sunday or a Friday at a mosque. It's--they want to make
sure that they feel secure when they go to pray. So the fact
that we put these security measures in place is important, but
the intelligence side is probably more--more important.
Mr. D'Esposito. So just to stick on that for one moment, in
Nassau County, it has been successful because I think the lines
of communication have been great and you have been at the
forefront of making sure that it's implemented. What can we do
as Members of Congress from all walks of this country to make
sure that local police departments as well as the larger ones
have the same resources that--that you are utilizing in Nassau
County?
Mr. Ryder. Well, supply and demand. Where is it needed the
most, you know. Look, nobody is a bigger target than the New
York City area, and we know that. That's why we have five of
their detectives that sit in my intel center to share
intelligence back and forth.
But when it comes to the technology and the support of the
public side, there's a foundation out there that has to start
with at home with the kids and stuff where we are starting to
teach our children about antisemitism and hate. It doesn't--
it's not spent enough time of building that foundation with
them. Then they grow into those people that become those--that
want to target us.
The more we spread that wealth throughout the country, it
is important. But there is needs that are, in some places, a
lot less than it would be in like, again, like the greater New
York City area.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you very much, Commissioner.
I now recognize Mr. Goldman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would just note that I have also heard from my
communities the nonprofit security grant program has been
invaluable. The President's budget recommended an increase of
$55 million to $360 million. Unfortunately, the House
Appropriations homeland security amount that has been proposed
is much less than that. It's only $315 million. So I hope that
my colleagues on the other side of the aisle can address that
discrepancy and boost it to what the President commanded so
that it can continue its success.
Deputy Commissioner Weiner, you--I appreciate your comments
about the international terrorist threats, but you also
mentioned in your opening statement domestic terrorism, which
has grown pretty significantly in recent years. Can you talk
about how that threat has evolved over the past several years?
Ms. Weiner. Absolutely. Thank you for the question. So this
certainly has been an area of growth across the country, and
including in New York City. You can look at an event that
tragically took place very recently in Jacksonville, Florida,
or I mentioned earlier the Buffalo attack, for important
reminders of how that threat can manifest.
Individuals who are often radicalized in a different way
than we see among those who are inspired by al-Qaeda or ISIS,
spending a lot of time in the digital sphere, the on-line
environment and technology has been studied very intensively,
has played a role in radicalizing and mobilizing individuals to
violence across the ideological spectrum, but very much to
include domestic violent extremism.
It's a label that includes a broad category of people who
are motivated by different grievances, but uniting them all is
hatred, hatred against particular ethnic groups, particular
races, anti-Government extremism, and really important as we
think about the sacrifice that so many of our colleagues have
made on 9/11 and years subsequent about the role of law
enforcement officers as targets for domestic violent
extremists.
This has been true in recent years in a number of different
examples of what we call accelerationist or--is one
manifestation of race-based sort of conspiracy, as well as
racially- and ethnically-motivated extremism. You see a lot of
hallmarks of different attacks, the creation of manifestos that
are disseminated on-line, a lot of on-line kudos for attackers
that have come before attackers.
We see this as a transnational threat, not just a domestic
threat. Here I think we've done a lot of work collectively in
thinking through the difference between international
terrorism, as I was describing earlier, and domestic terrorism.
These are elements that are growing, they are fueled by
conspiracy, they are fueled by disinformation, and they are
really, at their basis, animated in hate, and something that
we've provided a lot of resources in trying to address. We
created a unit, our racially- and ethnically-motivated
extremist task force, in 2019, to do a lot of the tactics,
techniques, and procedures that we have applied in the context
of international terrorism, but focused on this rising threat
with funding that we are grateful for from your committee,
funding from our grants that focus on training and equipping
officers, intelligence analysts, and investigators to
understand this element of the threat just as much as we've
resourced understanding the international terrorism
environment.
Mr. Goldman. You also mentioned the prevalence of
disinformation, misinformation, AI, deep fakes. I'm going to
combine two questions into one. You know, addressing both that,
I would appreciate understanding a little bit more. Then also,
what can we, in Congress, what can the Federal Government do
more to both help combat disinformation, and I'd like for you
to talk about why it's dangerous, but also to combat domestic
violent extremism.
Ms. Weiner. Absolutely. So we are staring down the barrel
of a pretty fraught and contentious election season coming up.
Chairman D'Esposito, I'm so grateful that you reinforced
the united nature of this hearing and your subcommittee.
Disinformation is, in many ways, operating like a toxic sap
that is hardening and dividing our individuals here, our
citizens, and this is occurring in many ways. But our focus at
the NYPD, and in our bureau, is understanding the ways in which
people are consuming information that may be deliberately used
sometimes by foreign adversaries. I think about the case of
Russia and election interference as a good example of
disinformation that's intentionally disseminated into our on-
line environment in order to divide us.
So that's an area where we as local law enforcement need to
understand the threat. We need the resources to try to combat
it. Whether that is intelligence analytical support that is,
again, funded Federally; whether those are tools that can be
used to identify when information is not grounded in reality,
this is going to become increasingly important in the era of
generative artificial intelligence where creating information
that is inauthentic is democratized to anyone who chooses to do
so. So our abilities to detect that inauthenticity become
really important, and these are new priority areas for us to
invest in going forward as the threats continue to evolve.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you. The gentleman's time is expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from New York, and my fellow
Long Islander, Mr. LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman.
We said we'd never forget that 22 years ago we were
attacked by folks motivated by hatred and envy for our great
Nation; that our innocent friends and family, who merely went
to work that day, riding the subway, a train, maybe they drove
in, perished that day. We said we'd never forget the first
responders and civilians who rushed toward danger knowing it
might be fateful for them to save innocent people, did so
valiantly.
We said we'd never forget the troops who were deployed two
decades afterwards to ensure this country remains safe, and the
first responders are still on watch today in this city and
beyond to ensure we remain safe. We said we would never forget.
As I look to my left and to my right, and this point has
been hit a little bit, on the bipartisan nature of this panel,
but it's not just New York and New Jersey Members, the
gentleman to my right is from Alabama, two to my right is from
Oklahoma, I hope that we personify Congress' commitment to
ensuring that this city remains safe, that we fight our enemies
as far abroad as we can, that we identify the issues is which
would put our people into danger, and that we don't forget; and
that we here are committed to ensuring that we give you the
resources, the tools, the policies, the rhetoric, things that
we can do to ensure that you can do your jobs effectively.
I appreciate you all being here today and the work that you
do every day. My dad was a cop and his dad was a cop, and my
brother served in the Marines, and I was in the Navy. This is a
team effort that you see before you, and we appreciate your
dedication and support to our common constituents.
Yesterday, I visited Persistent Systems on Midtown West,
about 26th Street, and they produced for the military and first
responders communications gear, things that, Deputy
Commissioner, you talked about in your opening statement,
things that share data and voice and video in near-real-time
and real-time capacities.
Commissioner, you hit this when you spoke as well, this was
a failure 22 years ago of intelligence sharing, of
communications sharing. We didn't know the things that we
needed to know 22 years ago to thwart this incident, nor to
respond to it in a maximum capacity. I appreciate collectively
your efforts to get better at this.
Deputy Commissioner, my first question is to you, sir, you
mentioned this in your opening statement, the improvements
we've made in those sorts of communications, data sharing,
voice sharing, video sharing. Can you explain in about a minute
or so into greater detail, sir, as to the advancements that
you've made and to the extent that you share, the FDNY shares
with Port Authority, NYPD, or other agencies that your
equipment is interoperable with them, that your tactics,
techniques, and procedures are compatible with other agencies.
Can you tell me, sir, what advancements we've made in the last
22 years?
Mr. Pfeifer. We've made a lot of advancements in the last
22 years. We share radio frequencies. We share video. In our
emergency operations center, there's a live feed video from
NYPD helicopters. I certainly would have loved to have seen
that 22 years ago, but we do--we do it now. We've also worked
with the private sector getting live feed videos from their
helicopters. We work with the Port Authority.
Not long after 9/11, there was a threat against the
bridges, particularly the George Washington Bridge. I sat at a
law enforcement meeting, and just this meeting, a bunch of
police and one fire guy in the back. I raised my hand, and I
said, how do you collapse a bridge? Nobody knew. Then Port
Authority invited me into a meeting the next day with the
engineers, and we sat down and Port Authority, NYPD, FDNY, and
we found out how that would occur, and then I gave them some
ideas and then we changed procedures.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Deputy Commissioner. I'm going to
interrupt you really quickly----
Mr. Pfeifer. OK.
Mr. LaLota [continuing]. Because my time is running out.
Mr. Pfeifer. I'm sorry.
Mr. LaLota. Would you, sir, commit to working with our
offices to let us know what more the Federal Government can do
to ensure that we continue to communicate and collaborate?
Mr. Pfeifer. Absolutely.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you.
Mr. Pfeifer. We need to work together, and we need to do it
in a physical, but also through technology and sharing
digitally.
Mr. LaLota. I appreciate that.
Commissioner, my last few moments are for you, sir. There's
no mistake why D'Espo respects you so much. Your statement
fired me up and has me focused even more so on this issue. I
want to give you a moment to maybe discuss a little bit more
about our State's policies and how they affect your job,
especially how they negatively affect your job as it pertains,
sir, to recruitment and retention. You know, what have current
policies in this State done for your department's recruitment
and retention, sir?
Mr. Ryder. Understand that law enforcement is not perfect.
We have made mistakes 100 percent, and after reform that
changed, justice reform that came in when it came to discovery
information and bail reform, and then we get the blame of why
crime is continuing. Well, the crime is continuing is because
we don't keep bad people where they belong and that's in jail.
So laws need to get refocused back where they were. They
did some adjustments for us when it came to the bail reform,
but on the discovery side, the work that is done, especially
when it comes to technology, every camera, every video, every
body camera all has to be turned over within that 14-day period
or we're dismissing charges, and that's what's happening.
So when it comes to the technology side of things,
extracting that information and then turning it over to defense
counsel, he has more rights now than our victims do.
Unfortunately, we get the burden of trying to pick up that
slack without funding it. They've made no--you know, they've
made mandates that are unfunded, and that's the problem that
we're going through. The size of the discovery people and the
analysts that are now hired to extract that information, nobody
is picking up the tab.
So when you look at the laws, and now--again, they're now
looking to go after restricting the flights of unmanned drones,
there are thousands of drones in the air every single day that
civilians are buying and have the same usage that my drone has,
ability to film and go into areas that you can't reach. But
they're not under any restrictions. The first person they come
and ask is the law enforcement, let's make sure that they're
doing it right, or the first responders in the FDNY. The focus
has got to go back where it belongs. Get it off our back and
put it back on where it belongs on the bad people, not on the
good people who are trying to protect you.
Mr. LaLota. Thanks, Commissioner. I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman's time is expired.
I now recognize my good friend from the State of New
Jersey, Mr. Menendez.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member. Thank you for convening today's hearing, allowing me to
waive on to discuss a topic that's so important to my district,
which sits right across the river in New Jersey.
This region, our country, to our witnesses, thank you all
for coming. Thank you for your service.
To the museum staff, thank you for hosting us today.
To the Port Authority on whose campus we sit, who I
consider family, privileged to be here with you today and
yesterday as we commemorate this 22nd anniversary of 9/11 and
also remember the lives lost in 1993.
In remembering and honoring the lives lost, we must commit
ourselves to the work that remains to preventing future
tragedies. As the Chairman and Ranking Member and other
colleagues have touched on, we approach these challenges not as
Republicans or as Democrats, but as Americans, and that's how
we're going to solve these challenges by doing it together. So
I am so grateful for the opportunity to be here today.
The events of September 11 prompted sweeping changes to how
our Nation considers the global threat landscape. While our
cyber and technological capabilities have evolved significantly
since 2001, so have those of our adversaries. As a Nation, we
must ensure that our efforts to improve counterterrorism post-
9/11 keep pace in order to keep Americans safe. This requires
continued development of innovative cyber capabilities that can
detect and counter cyber threats, ransomware attacks, unwanted
digital intrusions, and other attacks.
As representatives of entities that safeguard people, vital
networks, and critical infrastructure, many of you are at the
forefront of this fight.
Deputy Commissioner Weiner and Mr. Ehrie, how have the
terrorism threats your organizations encounter evolved in the
cybersecurity landscape, and how do your organizations utilize
Federal resources to deploy cyber defense measures? Deputy
Commissioner Weiner, you're first.
Ms. Weiner. Thank you. Another area of tremendous growth,
and here the technological revolution that has occurred in the
22 years since 9/11 have worked in ways that my co-witnesses
have described to empower law enforcement to combat threat, and
again, that goes back to having the support from the Federal
Government to continue funding to improve our own capabilities
internally.
Our information technology bureau spends a tremendous
amount of time and resources. I mentioned our domain awareness
system that helps us understand threats, whether that's threats
on the city streets or threats to our own internet footprint
and infrastructure and digital footprint. We rely tremendously
on technology. We leverage it to combat threat. We leverage it
to do everything that we do. That needs to be done safely.
So UASI grants, in particular, have been instrumental in
creating cybersecurity capabilities in our department that
allow us to continue our operations. The adversaries' playing
field has also improved unfortunately over the last two
decades. You know, we discussed artificial intelligence
briefly, but here is an element where the cyber threat
landscape is about to really change, and to continue the
trajectory that has been on-going in recent years. The threats
are often not new, certainly in terms of cyber threat vector.
What's different is the opportunity that AI allows to conduct
them at scale and at cost.
Mr. Menendez. So we'll need additional coordination between
local actors, and the Federal Government is considering how
quickly evolving that landscape is?
Ms. Weiner. Absolutely.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate you flagging that, and I want to
give Mr. Ehrie a chance to discuss cybersecurity at the Port
Authority.
Mr. Ehrie. No, absolutely. As always, Commissioner Weiner
has it correct. It's a delta that's growing, as we've watched
and worked to keep that delta closed. When we think of physical
security, the cyber world, especially with the emerging AI
issue, is just vastly outstripping our ability to deal with it
at this point. The grants are critically important, and that
interaction you're talking about between the local and the
State and the Federal Governments and the ability to
collaborate on that is going to be absolutely critical.
We are starting to see pieces of through the intel world,
ChatGPT, AI, asking it what's the best terrorist attack, what's
the best target, and you have something at the speed of light
that studies over. That piece of terrorism where there was
planning can be speeded up now through these uses of that. So
our ability to address that is something we're working on. We
focus on the technology piece. We depend on the Federal
Government for the funding for that and for that collaboration.
Mr. Menendez. We are partners in that. Our colleague,
Andrew Garbarino, chairs the Cybersecurity Subcommittee. We'd
love to have you down, and--because it's something that we are
laser-focused on.
Just one more quick question: Our first responders are
often faced with challenging and unique circumstances,
especially in these densely-populated districts like the ones
that we have the honor of representing. Just one example, this
July, a fire broke out on a cargo ship in the Port of Newark,
in New Jersey's 8th Congressional District. Despite the
unfamiliar terrain, firefighters did what firefighters do, and
two firefighters from Newark's Fire Department lost their lives
responding to that fire.
Urban areas present unique challenges for our first
response in a security scenario. Commissioner Kavanagh and
anyone else that would like to speak on it, how does it help
first responders to have specific funds dedicated to addressing
the unique security challenges presented by urban areas, some
of which are covered by the Urban Area Security Initiative?
Thank you.
Ms. Kavanagh. Absolutely. As you mentioned, that tragic
fire in Newark, you know, broke our hearts, also an example of
collaboration though. We sent over our specialized rescue
units, and they were able to find those two firefighters and
pull them out, so that their colleagues could begin to mourn
them.
I can't emphasize enough how much--you know, the theme of
this hearing has been bipartisan, and that's the same for us,
too. You know, all of the training that we do because of the
complexity of this city, because it requires us to always be on
top of new technology, to train regularly is a national asset.
Our teams have gone to, I think, almost every State represented
up here.
So, you know, this is--while it's--New York is certainly
the main target, this is not a New York problem alone, but it's
also not a New York solution. The assets that we build, the
technology that we build, and the people that we train are, you
know, uniquely qualified because of the challenges in our city
to go out and help their fellow Americans wherever an emergency
may be.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you.
Thank you again, Chairman, for allowing me to waive on. I
yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman's time is expired.
I now recognize fellow first responder, the gentleman from
Alabama, Mr. Strong.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the staff and especially the Members from
New York. You all have been great hosts. You might tell, I'm
from also across the river. I'm across the Tennessee River, OK,
but it's an honor to be here with you.
He mentioned first responder. My father was a 23-year fire
chief, inspired me, 39 years, myself, from a junior firefighter
to assistant chief. Four commissioners and a chief, I'm honored
to be here before you. You think about it, a lot has changed in
22 years from VHF radios, UHF radios, to digital
interoperability. That's what we learn from this. It's
unbelievable how many lives have been saved.
Ms. Weiner, you mentioned you were--a grant, I think of
$120 million. Does it concern you that the mayor, Mayor Adams,
is considering cuts because of so many illegal aliens coming to
New York?
Ms. Weiner. As we are here today and think through all of
the terrific collaboration that has sustained our operations
here, and all of the other issues that are confounding our
Government, whether it's Federal agencies dealing with other
problems now, great power conflict problems, or our city, which
is grappling with humanitarian crisis involving migrants; the
funding that we've just been talking about to support our
counterterrorism operations here; and to make sure that as we
navigate collectively all of these other priority areas, we do
not forget our counterterrorism operation is critically
important.
So again, Federal funds are what allow us to continue to do
that and to make sure that September 12, 2023, is a reminder
that we will never go back to September 12 of 2001.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. I agree.
I stand amazed after 22 years to see how many people have
chosen careers in the U.S. military, police, paramedics, and
firefighters. That's the one thing that really stood out,
especially yesterday.
In 2020, immigration and enforcement spending totaled about
$4 billion across departments and agencies that today make up
the Department of Homeland Security. President Biden's fiscal
year 2024 budget request for immigration enforcement was $25
billion. I think Americans would agree that we haven't seen a
proportionate increase in immigration enforcement, particularly
in the last 2 years.
Ms. Weiner, do you think this administration's immigration
and border crisis has diverted valuable time and resources away
from our national security mission?
Ms. Weiner. The fidelity that we apply to the
counterterrorism ecosystem here in the city and across the
country sustains our ability to protect the city. That's
critically important for all the reasons that we've just been
talking about. You know, I'm not in a position to say what is
or isn't a diversion. Unfortunately, we're in a period of time
globally, not just in this country, but around the world, where
we have to walk and chew gum at the same time. We have a number
of competing issues that we have to deal with adroitly. So,
from where we sit here in this space, on this day, we
understand the importance of continuing our posture on these
issues.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Commissioner Ryder, would it--your testimony--you testified
about taking away the rights of law enforcement to fly drones.
Would it surprise you that the Mexican cartel is flying 17
drones for every one flown by U.S. Border Patrol?
Mr. Ryder. Absolutely not. Of course they are. That's why,
again, we have to be right every time. They only have to be
right once. They're practicing every day, they're drilling
every day, they come up with new ideas. They've got nothing to
do but wake up every morning and figure out how they're going
to mess with the system. We have to go to work every day and
make sure the system works.
Mr. Strong. Would it surprise you that the Secretary of
Homeland Security continues to tell the American people that he
has operational control of the Southern Border?
Mr. Ryder. From my personal opinion, there is very little
control of that border right now.
Mr. Strong. I totally agree. I'm from Rocket City, U.S.A.,
Huntsville, Alabama. We have the ability to jam or drop these
drones. This administration allows them to fly freely in U.S.
airspace, and we cannot tolerate that any longer.
Our homeland is under attack once again at the Southern
Border, and you start looking at these first responders, each
of you and the people that work under your direction, sees it
every day. I've worked over 200 overdoses myself. We're
watching as fentanyl is killing a generation of Americans, and
something has got to be done about it. Illegal immigration,
fentanyl poisoning, human smuggling, this border failure is not
a Republican issue, it is not a Democratic issue, it is an
American issue. It is time that it be addressed. You look at
it, America deserves better.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Brecheen.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It's an honor to be with you all at Ground Zero here today.
The very existence of this committee is a result of what
happened here 22 years ago. I think most of us remember well
where we were at. It's inspiring to hear the stories of those
of you that were here not just watching it like many of us in
TV from Oklahoma, but we're actually responding. Your courage
and your bravery was an inspiration to our country. I think
there's a lot of us that remember the unity that existed in
those days after, and we're a Nation that's in need of that.
With that said, there are problems we have to work through.
Today's mission, the mission statement before us, is the
evolving threat. You know, I'm--you've got a Democrat mayor who
last week said we're now getting people--talking about the
illegal immigration situation that New York is experiencing,
said we're getting people from West Africa, we're getting
people from all over the globe that made up their minds that
they're going to come through the Southern Border and come into
New York City. That same Democrat New York City mayor also said
that it's about 10,000 a month that are coming to your city.
So as we look at the mission of today's hearing, the
evolving threat, I would feel derelict in my duty representing
Oklahoma if I didn't in New York City, knowing that you have
people that are here, that have not gone through the same
scrutiny that they go through when they're flying in and they
have to present documentation.
I think we have to face the reality that there is a threat
that is here. As many of you have said, New York City is unique
because of its density of population, that you are a target.
So, it is uncomfortable. How do we talk to one another when
there's such, you know, differences in ideology, but also, you
know, focus on the things we have to be focused on. How do we
keep people who hate America from repeating heinous behavior?
I want to ask you, Mr. Ehrie, it's--it was--it's incredible
to know all that you actually represent with, you know, lead
security officers for the Port Authority, the number of
bridges, five airports I think you said are under your
inspection, 8,500 surveillance cameras that, you know--that
you--that you all have in operation trying to watch what's
going on.
What is occurring with the 100,000 more people in this
city? What are you all doing? What is your advice to other
cities as we make sure that we are trying to be wise in
stopping another 9/11-type activity, whether it's, you know, to
the same level, a smaller level, or that cybersecurity, what
actions are you all taking with the grant funding with this
illegal immigration situation, you know, front and center in
New York City?
Mr. Ehrie. Thank you for the question. We here at the Port,
obviously, and as has been said, we're dealing with a
humanitarian challenge with people coming here, like many
States and many cities. The Port, you know, supports as best we
can both the State and the city's efforts to house and to vet
these individuals when they come here.
From a security standpoint, we do--I won't say numbers are
often irrelevant, but we look at the challenge every way, we
deal with it collaboratively, we talk with our intel partners,
we do the best we can with the technology catching up with
that, but it's a concern, you know, more people of any stripe
coming to this city.
Much like today, or yesterday, when we had the festivities
and the commemorations here to think about the attacks that
happened on 9/11, people come here and it's a flooded area, and
we have to take those security precautions. But we do rely on
that funding to allow us, as you mentioned, the technology
that--not only here at the Port but throughout the city that we
have, the camera systems, the security alarms, the biological
alarms, they're all in place to deal with that. We look at that
stepping up. If there's more visitors that come to our
facilities, we appreciate that as the city does, but we do take
our security concerns just as seriously.
Mr. Brecheen. Mr. Ryder, the failure of the intelligence
community, you cited--it's come up another time, powerful
statement that you said that, you know, the bad guys only have
to be right once. We have to be right every time. What are your
comments? We know that we apprehended 98 people in the
terrorist watchlist 2 years ago. We've already apprehended 100
people coming across the Southern Border on the terrorist
watchlist, but what about those that didn't? What about those
who have gotten across without the documentation that may have
been caught through other screenings that are now potentially
in New York City? What are your thoughts on this?
Mr. Ryder. I am a child of immigrants. My parents came to
this country from Ireland, came through Ellis Island on the
Queen Elizabeth at the time. We are a country that welcomes
all, but a process has to be in place. You won't walk into an
NBC building, a CBS building, a FOX building without going
through a security process, controlled access. Then there's a
vetting process, show your ID and we'll give you it back. At
the end of the day, you get it back when you walk out.
There's no controlled access at the border, so we don't
know who's coming through that border. That makes my job and
the commissioner's job harder. I have to vet the normal
domestic terrorist people that are evolving in this country.
Now, I've got to take everything from around the world that's
coming through the border with no vetting process and now try
to figure out who's going to be my next potential target. How
many hundreds have gotten through that border already that are
building up right now to do an attack on our country? We don't
know it. You know what, but because of the great work that
we're doing on this side of the table and the support that
we're getting, we're going to try to stay on top of that and
make sure that the people are safe.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you.
I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Goldman. Mr. Chairman, will you yield for 1 minute just
to respond to that?
I would just like to point out, first of all, this is about
9/11, and I hope we can continue to focus on this, but the
migrants who have come to New York City have been vetted.
Nearly every single one has come through a port of entry and
has been vetted and has gone through that process, and that's
part of the reason why there has been so little criminal
activity from those 100,000-plus that have come here. Thank you
for your indulgence.
Mr. D'Esposito. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Malliotakis.
Ms. Malliotakis. First, I want to thank each and every one
of you for your service to our State.
I want to thank the Chairman for--Anthony D'Esposito, for
his service to our city as a former NYPD detective.
I want to say that this is about 9/11, and it is about
preventing the next terrorist attack, and that is why we have a
responsibility as Members of Congress to make sure that our
homeland is secure, and that includes our borders, and that
includes making sure that the Department of Homeland Security
does not have an open border process that is allowing millions
of people to enter into our country.
With that said, I am very concerned about DHS, which was
created post 9/11; TSA, which is under the DHS, allowing
individuals to use warrants to board aircrafts completely
against the recommendations of the 9/11 Commission. But here
locally, we should be talking about the people that we don't
know about. You mentioned--we know that there are about 7.4
million. Does the NYPD vet those individuals, the ones that do
come to New York City?
Ms. Weiner. We rely on our Federal partners for screening
individuals, and, you know, you mentioned individuals who have
been turned away or apprehended, who would be part of our
terrorist screening database hits.
Ms. Malliotakis. Does NYPD cooperate with Federal detainer
requests?
Ms. Weiner. So NYPD, in terms of criminal enforcement--and,
you know, you're referring to sanctuary city policies and our
ability to partner with Immigration and Customs Enforcement and
Customs and Border Protection, and in the context, which is
where I operate of crime investigation and prevention, we
cooperate extensively with ICE.
Ms. Malliotakis. Extensively you do.
Ms. Weiner. Yes.
Ms. Malliotakis. However, does the city of New York
prohibit NYPD from cooperating with Federal detainer requests?
Because the last that I saw, out of all the retainer requests
this year, last year, and the year prior, there was zero
cooperation.
Ms. Weiner. In civil enforcement, that's where this policy
comes to play. However, in terms of protecting our city from
crime, that's where the cooperation and the collaboration is
robust and on-going, and we work extensively with those
agencies.
Ms. Malliotakis. OK. Well, and I would like to say that,
for the record, that there have been dozens of individuals that
are currently here in the current shelter system created by our
mayor for migrants that have been arrested and released back
onto our streets, because my colleague says that they're vetted
and everything is great.
I also want to ask--I also want to point out that there's
1.6 million individuals who have had zero interaction with any
Government official that have entered our Southern Border. We
don't know where they are. We don't know who they are. Does
that concern you?
Ms. Weiner. I think what's happening at the border is
certainly of concern. It's of concern in many different
dimensions. There's a humanitarian crisis in this city, one
that requires a lot of collaboration and a lot of funding and
support.
From a security perspective, which is my purview, it
absolutely does. I think one of the issues I wanted to flag was
tremendous partnership and cooperation with Federal agencies
surrounding some of the networks, human smuggling networks
related to individuals from Uzbekistan, and, you know, there
were press reports recently around links to ISIS of some of
those individuals.
Ms. Malliotakis. Yes.
Ms. Weiner. So that vetting and that intelligence and those
partnerships that we have come to rely on in terms of our
ability to investigate threats have allowed us, working
collaboratively with our Joint Terrorism Task Force officers,
NYPD officers assigned to those task force----
Ms. Malliotakis. You mentioned the Federal partners that
investigate the human smuggling network as it relates to ISIS.
The FBI reported that those individuals were already in the
country, so they were able to somehow get in despite this great
vetting process that my colleague says exists.
But aside from that, I'm concerned about the 1.6 million
got-aways that have had zero interaction, that are in our
country, we don't know who they are, we don't know where they
are. That is my greatest concern. We caught 250 individuals
over the last--this fiscal year and last fiscal year at the
border. That's great, but what about the 1.6 million?
Mr. Ryder, Mr. Ehrie, does that concern you?
Mr. Ehrie. Much like the commissioner said, from a security
professional's point of view, of course it concerns me. But
we're--as we deal with this humanitarian crisis we need to get
our arms around that and what's going on at the border and
these folks coming into the country.
Ms. Malliotakis. Mr. Ryder.
Mr. Ryder. Absolutely, it concerns me.
Ms. Malliotakis. Well, I want to thank you all for your
what you're doing. Again, I--I--your job is being made
difficult by what is going on at our border, that the
Department of Homeland Security was created to keep our
interior secure, so that's what we should all be focused on in
Congress is making sure you have the tools and resources, but
that the policies of this administration, this Congress are in
place to actually help you do your job, not make it more
difficult, because you shouldn't have to divert all these
resources from the current threats by--think there's 1.6
million people in the country, we don't know who they are,
where they are, and what they're planning. That's a--that, I
think, is the No. 1 thing that we should be concerned with.
I yield back to my colleagues, and I thank you for allowing
me to participate in this important hearing.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentlewoman yields.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Molinaro from New York.
Mr. Molinaro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
allowing me to waive on to the subcommittee. I, too, have been
serving in the State of New York in local government and as an
emergency responder for the last 30 years. I, too, recall early
that morning, 22 years ago, a flight--plane flying low above
the Hudson River, wondering what exactly was going on here,
from my viewpoint in the Hudson River Valley only to a few
moments later realize that that indeed was a plane headed
toward this very location.
I'm grateful certainly to all of you, to your service to
the city of New York, the region, and of course the State.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your own service, sacrifice,
and heroism, and service to your community and the city of New
York.
Deputy Commissioner Pfeifer, you had--and thank you, by the
way, for your leadership. I had the pleasure of sitting through
several of your leadership training seminars as a county
executive. You spoke after 9/11 of the efforts within the city
of New York to collect more data, to implement technology that
would allow for greater sharing of data communication,
interoperability. Have we achieved the goal of adequate
interoperability and data sharing within the city of New York
agencies?
Mr. Pfeifer. We're constantly trying to improve on that.
There's no doubt we're totally different than we were 22 years
ago, but we are improving on that. We need funding for
technology. So think of this, if I take out my phone and I
swipe to the left, I get my camera. Well, what happens if I
swipe to the right and I could get a locater so our--our people
within high-rise buildings or in any building, if they ever get
in trouble, they swipe right and they could get a locator. The
same thing if we're looking for firefighters and other first
responders, to be able to track them where they are, so when
they get in trouble, get in dangerous situations we can provide
help. So to answer, we're expanding our ability to communicate
with each other.
Mr. Molinaro. But we have significant needs to improve on
that interoperability.
Commissioner Ryder, to expand beyond the city of New York,
this State and this country is made up by countless emergency
responder agencies. Would you say on Long Island, that there is
adequate interoperability and communication among police
agencies and fire agencies volunteering career? Have we met the
task of the 9/11 Commission's pointing that we lacked
imagination? Have we gotten to the point where that technology
has met the need, or do we still have advancements----
Mr. Ryder. We have gotten better, but we need to go
further. We're very unique. In Nassau County, I believe there's
62 fire agencies--72 fire agencies alone, and they all have
their own fiefdom, if you will, what they control. In--law
enforcement has theirs with another 19 village police
departments in two cities. So it's complicated, but, yes, we've
gotten better in our communications, we're able to communicate
with our villages, I'm able to communicate with the NYPD on the
border, and, of course, Suffolk County to my east.
Mr. Molinaro. Thank you. I--only because I have no idea how
much time I have left.
Ms.----
Mr. D'Esposito. You have a minute and a half.
Mr. Molinaro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Weiner, is there adequate vetting by the Federal
Government of the migrants, immigrants, individuals,
undocumented that are now under the care of the city of New
York? Is there adequate vetting, yes or no?
Ms. Weiner. This is the challenge of our time----
Mr. Molinaro. No, I understand, Ms. Weiner. I----
Ms. Weiner [continuing]. And it's why we do what we do all
day.
Mr. Molinaro. Is--Ms. Weiner, is there--has there been
adequate vetting so that the communication sharing that exists
is sufficient for the city of New York to know who and what
individuals are dealing with, and then share that information
with other agencies? Is that adequate?
Ms. Weiner. I think----
Mr. Molinaro. Ms. Weiner, I apologize, is the Federal
Government vetting adequate?
Ms. Weiner. If everybody had a crystal ball and was able to
understand the dimensions----
Mr. Molinaro. Yes, I----
Ms. Weiner [continuing]. Of these people and this crisis--
--
Mr. Molinaro. Ms. Weiner, I appreciate the sentence. I
really do. I'm not trying to cause any conflict. I believe that
it is inadequate.
Commissioner Ryder, would you suggest--would you--knowing
that the city of New York, under Mayor Adams' policy of moving
individuals to other parts of the State, would you say that
there is adequate sharing of criminal background, health
concerns, risk as those individuals are moved to communities
beyond the city of New York?
Mr. Ryder. If anybody is moved to Nassau County, we've
received no information on it whatsoever.
Mr. Molinaro. Thank you, Mr. Ryder, Commissioner Ryder.
Two things, certainly as Mayor Adams said only days ago, we
are dealing with a crisis that will, in quotes, destroy the
city of New York. Now, whether that's hyperbole or rhetoric, I
really don't care. What I do care about is that the lessons we
learned 22 years ago, or were to have learned 22 years ago, is
that a porous border, that access to flight training, that
being able to access documents and identification in order to
conduct and orchestrate an attack on this country was far too
easy then than we hope it is today.
However, adequate or inadequate response to the border
would suggest to us--inadequate background check and vetting
would suggest to us that we are open to some risk today. That,
to me, is alarming and concerning, and ought to be to all
Americans, not because we don't care about the individuals, we
do. It was my responsibility as a county leader to locate
residents shelter. But there's a concern here.
Mr. Chairman, I just want to end--and I apologize--the
reason I point to the inadequate--and I think that we're--we've
made advances, but we have not adequately created
interoperability and joint communication beyond regional
agencies--is because this State participates, as several do,
not many, as several do, Mr. Chairman, in collecting, as every
State does, thanks to the FCC, a surcharge on cellular phones.
This State redirects those--that surcharge.
Millions upon millions of dollars that should be getting to
agencies on the ground, like the Port Authority, like FDNY,
like the Nassau police agencies and fire agencies, they
redirect that aid that was meant to create an interoperability
and communication to general fund obligations. I believe that
this is a failure of significant magnitude that is limiting our
capacity to protect the homeland and to provide emergency
responders with the tools necessary to respond here in our
community and our State.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman's time is expired.
I want to take this opportunity to thank all of our
witnesses for being here today. I think this was a meaningful
subcommittee hearing in obviously a place that holds so much
meaning to many of us.
I also want to thank the staff here at the museum and the
staff from Homeland Security for the great job that they did in
organizing this hearing.
The Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we would ask the witness to
respond to these in writing. Pursuant to committee rule VII(D),
the hearing record will be held open for 10 days.
Without objection, this subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:19 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
