- THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY IN AVIATION SECURITY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY IN AVIATION SECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 19, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-33

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-142 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida, Chairman
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Shri Thanedar, Michigan, Ranking
Nick LaLota, New York                    Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Robert Garcia, California
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Vacancy, Subcommittee Staff Director
Alex Marston, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Shri Thanedar, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable C.A. Dutch Ruppersberger, a Representative in
Congress From the State of Maryland:
Prepared Statement.............................................     1

Witnesses

Mr. Austin Gould, Assistant Administrator, Requirements and
Capabilities Analysis, Transportation Security Administration:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................    10
Ms. Tina Won Sherman, Director, Homeland Security and Justice,
U.S. Government Accountability Office:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    15
Mr. Mario Wilson, Assistant Administrator, Acquisition Program
Management, Transportation Security Administration:
Oral Statement.................................................    25
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................    10

Appendix

Question From Honorable C.A. Dutch Ruppersberger for the
Transportation Security Administration.........................    37
Questions From Honorable Robert Garcia for the Transportation
Security Administration........................................    37
Question From Honorable C.A. Dutch Ruppersberger for Tina Won
Sherman........................................................    37

THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY IN AVIATION SECURITY

----------

Thursday, October 19, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Transportation and
Maritime Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Carlos A. Gimenez
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Gimenez, LaLota, Thanedar, and
Garcia.
Also present: Representative Menendez.
Mr. Gimenez. The Committee on Homeland Security
Subcommittee on Transportation and Maritime Security will come
to order.
Without objection, the Chair may declare the subcommittee
in recess at any point.
Today's hearing will examine the role of technology in
aviation security.
I recognize Ranking Member Thanedar for the purposes of
seeking unanimous consent.
Mr. Thanedar. Good morning, everybody.
Mr. Chair, I ask unanimous consent that Mr. Menendez be
permitted to sit with the subcommittee and question today's
witnesses; and further, that Mr. Ruppersberger be permitted to
submit a statement and questions for the record, please.
Mr. Gimenez. Without objection, so ordered.
[The statement of Mr. Ruppersberger follows:]
Statement of Honorable C.A. Dutch Ruppersberger
Thank you, Chairman Gimenez and Ranking Member Thanedar, for
holding this hearing on a topic of paramount importance to our National
security and for allowing me to participate.
Earlier this year, the TSA made history by screening the most
passengers ever in a single day in the agency's history--nearly 2.9
million travelers. On any given day, this year, TSA screened an average
of 2.3 million passengers.
As demand for commercial flights in the United States continues to
increase, so do the ever-evolving threats that TSA screeners must
anticipate, detect, and stop before lives are jeopardized. Ensuring
that TSA possesses the latest technology is foundational to this
mission.
The good news is that Congress created a mechanism in the wake of
9/11 to fund TSA's security efforts by establishing the Passenger
Security Fee. The bad news is that, since 2014, a large portion of the
funds collected have been diverted to the General Treasury rather than
spent on new technologies, system maintenance, and checkpoint
reinforcement. By 2027, $19 billion will have been diverted. Let's not
mince words: This is opening the door for terrorists to attack our
democracy.
Continued diversion of the Passenger Security Fee is short-sighted
and dangerous. I am eager to hear from our esteemed witnesses on the
importance of following through on our commitment to airline passengers
by creating a devoted Aviation Security Checkpoint Technology Fund.

Mr. Gimenez. I now recognize myself for an opening
statement. Today, our subcommittee is discussing the role of
technology in TSA's mission to secure the American
transportation and aviation industry.
One of our chief concerns is the slow time line of TSA's
rollout of the new technology in the passenger screening
process, and what this subcommittee can do to expedite the long
time lines outlined by the agency.
After the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, Congress
tasked TSA to protect the Nation's commercial and aviation
sector. TSA cannot carry out this mission without the
technological systems it deploys at airports around the
country. These systems allow transportation security officers
and other TSA personnel to screen for weapons, explosives, and
other dangerous items that threaten passenger safety.
Additionally, TSA's technological systems facilitate
passenger identification verification and ensure that known or
suspected terrorists and other dangerous criminals do not board
commercial flights.
These functions are essential for TSA to carry out its
statutory mission. The new systems that TSA are bringing on-
line make the agency more effective in carrying out its
missions by reducing the possibility of human error and
allowing TSOs to focus more attention on interfacing with
passengers to resolve pressing issues.
However, I am concerned that TSA has not appropriately
prioritized the development and deployment of new technological
systems within its passenger screening process. Earlier this
year, Administrator David Pekoske informed the subcommittee
that the agency projects it will fully integrate the new
computed tomography, or CT machines, used to screen carry-on
luggage and second-generation Credential Authentication
Technology, or CAT-2 systems, used for passenger identification
verification by fiscal year 2042 and 2049, respectively. These
time lines mean that the agency will take over 20 years to
adopt the technologies it needs today--frankly, obviously, way
too slow.
I'm concerned that TSA has not adequately prioritized
accelerating this time line. TSA budget request for fiscal year
2024 included only around $70 million to procure additional
systems within the CPSS program, an amount significantly lower
than what was appropriated in the previous fiscal year.
TSA's request of $11 million for CAT-2 machines also does
not make a serious dent in the lengthy time lines for the
replacement of the current CAT-1 machines, which currently is
projected to take 26 years.
TSA is also forgoing opportunities to invest in other
technologies, like detection-at-range, that would further
increase TSA's capabilities at passenger checkpoints and
decrease the need for screening procedures, like physical pat-
downs, that some consider to be invasive. There are two ways in
which we can address this issue: Funding and focus.
Regarding funding, I was pleased that the House-passed
Homeland Security appropriations bill included a $35 million
increase from TSA's original budget request to fund the
acquisition of new CT machines. In our previous hearing with
Administrator Pekoske, we discussed the possibility of
redirecting the September 11 security fee back to TSA. That
fee, which is $5.60 for every air passenger per trip is
intended to fund TSA's operations at airports. However, over $1
billion in collected fees are currently diverted to the
Treasury to pay for unrelated Federal debt.
I believe it is time that we revisit the fee diversion and
discuss ways in which ending it would help the agency develop
and deploy technologies faster. Actually, it's passengers that
are paying this fee. Passengers are expecting the best security
system. Frankly, I find it quite objectionable that $1 billion
that the passengers are paying for are going somewhere else.
They're not really being used for what they're paying for.
With regard to focus, I believe the TSA ought to be
prioritizing its new technological systems more. Anyone can do
anything with an unlimited budget, but even with an unlimited
budget, I still believe TSA can be doing more to bring these
new technologies on-line more quickly. In addressing this
critical issue, we can ultimately ensure that American air
passengers are safer and American citizens are getting good
return on their security fee.
For our panel of witnesses, I thank each of you for
testifying before our subcommittee today, and I look forward to
hearing your testimony.
[The statement of Chairman Gimenez follows:]
Statement of Chairman Carlos A. Gimenez
Today, our subcommittee is discussing the role of technology in
TSA's mission to secure the American transportation and aviation
industry.
One of our chief concerns is the slow time line of TSA's rollout of
the new technology in the passenger screening process and what this
subcommittee can do to expedite the long time lines outlined by the
agency.
After the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, Congress tasked
TSA to protect the Nation's commercial aviation sector.
TSA cannot carry out this mission without the technological systems
it deploys at airports around the country.
These systems allow Transportation Security Officers and other TSA
personnel to screen for weapons, explosives, and other dangerous items
that threaten passenger safety.
Additionally, TSA's technological systems facilitate passenger
identify verification and ensure that Known or Suspected Terrorists and
other dangerous criminals do not board commercial flights.
These functions are essential for TSA to carry out its statutory
mission.
The new systems that TSA are bringing on-line make the agency more
effective in carrying out its mission by reducing the possibility of
human error and allowing TSOs to focus more attention on interfacing
with passengers to resolve pressing issues.
However, I am concerned that TSA has not appropriately prioritized
the development and deployment of new technological systems within its
passenger screening process.
Earlier this year, Administrator David Pekoske informed this
subcommittee that the agency projects it will fully integrate the new
computed tomography, or CT, machines used to screen carry-on luggage
and the second-generation Credential Authentication Technology, or CAT-
2, systems used for passenger identity verification by fiscal years
2042 and 2049 respectively.
These time lines mean that the agency will take over 20 years to
adopt the technologies it needs today.
Frankly, this is too slow.
I am concerned that TSA has not adequately prioritized accelerating
this time line.
TSA's budget request for fiscal year 2024 included only around $70
million to procure additional systems within the CPSS program, an
amount significantly lower than what was appropriated in the prior
fiscal year.
TSA's request of $11 million for CAT-2 machines also does not make
a serious dent in the lengthy time line for the replacement of the
current CAT-1 machines, which currently is projected to take 26 years.
TSA is also forgoing opportunities to invest in other technologies
like ``detection at range'' that would further increase TSA's
capabilities at passenger checkpoints and decrease the need for
screening procedures like physical pat-downs that some consider to be
invasive.
There are two ways in which we can address this issue: funding and
focus.
Regarding funding, I was pleased that the House-passed Homeland
Security appropriations bill included a $35 million increase from TSA's
original budget request to fund the acquisition of new CT machines.
In our previous hearing with Administrator Pekoske, we discussed
the possibility of redirecting the September 11 Security Fee back to
TSA.
The fee, which is $5.60 for each air passenger per trip, is
intended to fund TSA's operations at airports.
However, over $1 billion in collected fees are currently diverted
to the Treasury to pay for unrelated Federal debt.
I believe it is time that we revisit the Fee Diversion and discuss
ways in which ending it would help the agency develop and deploy new
technologies faster.
With regard to focus, I believe that TSA ought to be prioritizing
its new technological systems more.
Anyone can do anything with an unlimited budget, but even within a
limited budget, I still believe TSA can be doing more to bring these
new technologies on-line more quickly.
In addressing this critical issue, we can ultimately ensure that
American air passengers are safer and American citizens are getting a
good return on their security fee.
To our panel of witnesses, I thank each of you for testifying
before our subcommittee today, and I look forward to hearing your
testimonies.

Mr. Gimenez. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Thanedar, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez, and thank you
for holding this hearing today on this important topic, and
thank you to our witnesses to be here.
My job, you know, calls for me to be traveling on an
airline very often, and invariably, I get a chance to observe
TSA workers in action. I get to see the technology, and I've
seen over the years how the technology has changed.
I've seen how hard these TSA officers work every day, long
hours. You know, sometimes it's a thankless job, you know.
People are in a hurry and they always look at a TSA officer as
a, you know, intrusion as opposed to someone who is doing their
job to keep America safe.
You know, the more I see their hard work the more I
appreciate. I'm bothered by the huge turnover in these
hardworking people, because we've got to compete for their
services not only with other Federal agencies, but we got to
compete for their services. They have options. They have
choices. They could go to private sector. They could do a whole
lot of other things.
I'm a businessman. I ran businesses. I took care of my
employees. It's good business to be good and take care of your
staff, your employees. We got to take care of these hardworking
men and women of TSA. What does that mean? We've got to--we've
got to, you know, make sure they're happy, that they're paid
fairly, that they have benefits, they have rights, and we help
them enjoy and feel productive at their work and feel
appreciated for what they do. You know, I have more of that
appreciation every time I'm going through and passing, you
know, an airport.
So the Transportation Security Administration carries out a
critical mission to secure transportation systems. To do so,
TSA relies on a well-trained work force and the sophisticated
technologies capable of detecting the latest threats.
Thanks to funding Democrats provided in last year's omnibus
spending bill, a few months ago TSA workers finally began to
receive long-overdue pay raises to put them on par with other
Federal workers.
To build on this progress, we must provide additional
funding to not only preserve those pay raises for this fiscal
year, but to empower TSA workers with next-generation
technology that will maximize TSA's detection capabilities,
technologies such as Computed Tomography machines and
Credential Authentication Technology machines provide
significant enhancements to security while also improving the
passenger experience.
I would like to see Congress provide sustained funding for
checkpoint security technologies, which is why I am a cosponsor
of Ranking Member Thompson's bill, the Fund the TSA Act, which
would direct a modest increase to passenger security fees to
provide consistent funding for checkpoint technologies, TSA
work force initiatives, and other transportation security
programs.
As TSA deploys technologies to airports, it must also make
sure to provide equitable treatment to all passengers. Last
year, the Government Accountability Office issued a report
finding that TSA has not assessed the extent to which its
policies and technology result in certain passengers being
referred for additional screening more often than others.
For too long, some passenger populations have been
disproportionately subjected to invasive pat-downs due to
alarms from screening technology. This population includes
transgender passengers, passengers with religious headwear,
passengers with disability, and passengers with coarse hair,
including African-American women.
Under the Biden administration, TSA has made impressive
progress in addressing these issues by deploying an updated
algorithm that reduces false alarms by 50 percent. TSA must
build on this progress and protect against discriminatory
outcomes in emerging technologies.
Finally, we must ensure TSA fosters innovation in its
technology programs by encouraging the participation of a wide
range of vendors, including small and minority-owned
businesses. Many small businesses have trouble to compete for
TSA technology awards, given the long time lines necessary for
technology development, testing, and evaluation. We must
support small businesses, since they are some of the biggest
drivers of innovation and progress.
Chairman Gimenez, I thank you and I thank our witnesses and
look forward to listening to you. I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thanedar follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Shri Thanedar
October 19, 2023
The Transportation Security Administration carries out a critical
mission to secure transportation systems. To do so, TSA relies on a
well-trained workforce and sophisticated technologies capable of
detecting the latest threats. Thanks to funding Democrats provided in
last year's Omnibus spending bill, a few months ago TSA workers finally
began to receive long-overdue pay raises to put them on par with other
Federal workers.
To build on this progress, we must provide additional funding to
not only preserve those pay raises for this fiscal year, but to empower
TSA workers with next-generation technologies that will maximize TSA's
detection capabilities. Technologies such as Computed Tomography
machines and Credential Authentication Technology machines provide
significant enhancements to security while also improving the passenger
experience.
I would like to see Congress provide sustained funding for
checkpoint security technologies--which is why I am a cosponsor of
Ranking Member Thompson's bill, the Fund the TSA Act, which would
direct a modest increase to passenger security fees to provide
consistent funding for checkpoint technologies, TSA workforce
initiatives, and other transportation security programs. As TSA deploys
technologies to airports, it must also make sure to provide equitable
treatment to all passengers.
Last year, the Government Accountability Office issued a report
finding that TSA has not assessed the extent to which its policies and
technology result in certain passengers being referred for additional
screening more often than others. For too long, some passenger
populations have been disproportionately subjected to invasive pat-
downs due to alarms from screening technology. These populations
include transgender passengers, passengers with religious headwear,
passengers with disabilities, and passengers with coarse hair,
including African American women.
Under the Biden administration, TSA has made impressive progress in
addressing these issues by deploying an upgraded algorithm that reduces
false alarms by 50 percent. TSA must build on this progress and protect
against discriminatory outcomes in emerging technologies.
Finally, we must ensure TSA fosters innovation in its technology
programs by encouraging the participation of a wide range of vendors,
including small and minority-owned businesses. Many small businesses
have struggled to compete for TSA technology awards given the long time
lines necessary for technology development, testing, and evaluation. We
must support small businesses since they are some of the biggest
drivers of innovation and progress.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Ranking Member Thanedar.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
October 19, 2023
Thank you to Chairman Gimenez and Ranking Member Thanedar for
convening today's hearing to examine the Transportation Security
Administration's aviation security technology programs. Thank you to
our witnesses as well for sharing their expertise.
We meet today under a cloud of chaos and dysfunction, as the
Republican Majority has failed to elect a Speaker for more than 2 weeks
and counting.
Each day that passes without a Speaker brings us 1 day closer to
the deadline to fund the Government, which is now less than a month
away.
A Government shutdown would be detrimental to the TSA workforce,
along with other workforces across the Government, and it would place
our transportation systems at risk.
I hope my Republican colleagues will figure out a way to bring the
House back to regular order as quickly as possible.
Now, turning to the topic of today's hearing. Throughout the past
two decades, TSA has worked to field technologies capable of detecting
threats to aviation and processing a large and diverse population of
travelers and their baggage.
TSA has succeeded in developing some impressive technologies--and
has also made its fair share of missteps.
Many of us remember the expensive yet ineffective ``puffer''
machines TSA purchased, as well as the whole-body imaging machines that
could not be outfitted with appropriate privacy filters.
In both cases, TSA ultimately had to pull machines from the field,
at great expense to the taxpayer.
Too often, TSA has relied on a handful of large technology
manufacturers to provide screening equipment, resulting in limited
competition.
In recent years, at my urging, TSA has worked to create additional
opportunities for small and minority-owned businesses to compete for
technology contracts.
These businesses provide innovative approaches and help spur
improvements to TSA's capabilities, but they sometimes need support to
be able to withstand the long time lines TSA requires for testing and
evaluating new technologies.
TSA must continue to foster increased competition and innovation
within the screening technology marketplace by expanding opportunities
for small and minority-owned businesses.
TSA must also continue to improve its technologies to ensure they
do not impact certain passenger populations in a discriminatory manner.
We have long seen some groups of passengers alarm TSA's screening
technologies at much higher rates than others.
Transgender passengers have been forced to undergo invasive pat-
downs because their bodies do not conform to an arbitrary standard.
Black women have been subjected to pat-downs of their hair because
many of their hairstyles do not conform to TSA's standard.
Passengers wearing religious headwear or using assistive devices
have caused alarm after alarm because, again, they do not conform to a
standard.
TSA must do a better job of considering the needs of all passengers
when developing the requirements for technologies.
Thankfully, under this administration, TSA is moving in the right
direction.
In June, TSA finished deploying a new software algorithm to
Advanced Imaging Technology machines across the country. The algorithm
allows for gender-neutral screening and reduces false alarms for all
passengers by 50 percent.
TSA must build on this success to further reduce invasive pat-
downs, and the agency must refine its processes to ensure new
technologies are thoroughly vetted to prevent discrimination.
TSA must also continue its efforts to procure and deploy Computed
Tomography machines, which provide important improvements to TSA's
screening of carry-on luggage.
Deploying these machines to all screening lanes across the country
will require sustained and dedicated funding.
My bill, the Fund the TSA Act, would establish a fund dedicated to
checkpoint security technologies paid for by a modest increase to
passenger security fees.
I look forward to continuing to work with TSA, GAO, and
stakeholders to ensure TSA's security technologies meet the needs of
the traveling public.
Thank you again to our witnesses.

Mr. Gimenez. Again, I am pleased to have a distinguished
panel of witnesses before us today on this critical topic.
I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise their right
hand.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you will give
before the Committee on Homeland Security of the U.S. House of
Representatives will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Mr. Gould. I do.
Mr. Wilson. I do.
Ms. Sherman. I do.
Mr. Gimenez. Let the record reflect that the witnesses have
answered in the affirmative. Thank you, and please be seated.
I would like to now formally introduce our witnesses.
Austin Gould serves as the assistant administrator for
requirement and capability analysis; and Mario Wilson serves as
the assistant administrator for acquisition program management
for TSA; Tina Won Sherman serves as director for the Government
Accountability Office's homeland security and justice team.
I thank each of our distinguished witnesses for being here
today.
I now recognize Assistant Administrator Austin Gould for 5
minutes to summarize his opening statements.

STATEMENT OF AUSTIN GOULD, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR,
REQUIREMENTS AND CAPABILITIES ANALYSIS, TRANSPORTATION SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Gould. Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member
Thanedar, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I am
Austin Gould, the assistant administrator for requirements and
capabilities analysis at the Transportation Security
Administration. I am joined today by my colleague, Mr. Mario
Wilson, the assistant administrator for acquisition program
management. We'd like to thank you for the opportunity to
appear today to discuss the role of technology in aviation
security.
I would like to begin by thanking the committee for your
strong support of the new TSA pay plan, which ensures that TSA
employees are paid similarly to their Federal counterparts.
This significant change will enable TSA to recruit and retain a
highly-skilled work force to operate the technologies that we
will discuss today. Early indicators show that attrition is
down nearly 30 percent, thanks to this effort.
Although today's hearing is focused on technology, it is
important to note that sustaining this increase in pay for our
entire work force ensures that those who we need to operate
TSA's technology are appropriately paid.
The TSA uses robust risk analytics to assess risk and
vulnerabilities in the aviation domain. These risks are
incorporated into research and development priorities for the
agency, where we collaborate closely with the DHS Science and
Technology Directorate and National Labs to ensure that R&D
funding is focused on the most pressing needs.
The risk outlook in R&D is then used to develop the
operational requirements for security technology. These
requirements are validated through the DHS Joint Requirements
Council, shared with other components for potential
applicability, and form the basis for TSA technology
acquisitions.
There are many on-going acquisition efforts at TSA. The
Credential Authentication Technology, or CAT, is a device which
scans a passenger's ID and assesses the security features for
validity. The CAT displays the result of the security scan, the
passenger's biographics and image from the ID to the officer,
and returns the passenger's secure flight vetting status in
near-real time so they can be directed to the appropriate level
of screening.
The newest version of CAT includes biometric and digital
identity functionality. The biometric capability allows for
consenting passengers to be photographed at the checkpoint and
have their image compared to the ID. This process is fast,
highly accurate, and does not require any biometric information
to leave the checkpoint. Digital identity functionality is
being tested in States that have issued mobile driver's
licenses. With current funding levels, the TSA will complete
CAT deployment in 2049.
The TSA is also updating X-rays at the checkpoint with
advanced computed tomography, or CT machines. The CTs are a
significant improvement in security effectiveness as they can
more accurately identify threats, enable the officers to slice
and rotate images, and provide the ability to virtually remove
laptop computers to assess them for tampering. These systems
can be networked to allow officers to review images from other
lanes, and can be connected to remote screening rooms where
officers can view images in a quiet environment.
The TSA is further exploring the development of prohibited
item algorithms for CTs, which will automatically recognize
knives, guns, and other weapons. The deployment of CT will
reduce the need for passengers to remove items from their bags,
and with current funding levels, the TSA will complete CT
deployment in 2042.
Advancements in on-person screening are also being
developed and implemented. The TSA recently deployed a low
false alarm algorithm for the Advanced Imaging Technology, or
AIT machines, which lowers the false alarm rate for on-person
screening, resulting in fewer pat-downs and improves threat
detection. The TSA is researching advanced panel systems which,
if successful, may allow a passenger to pause only briefly
while being screened.
These technologies and the others I mentioned will be field
tested at the TSA innovation checkpoint at Harry Reid
International Airport in Las Vegas, Nevada.
When potential threat items are detected in primary
screening, TSA officers need the ability to quickly ascertain
if the item is actually a threat. This process is known as
alarm resolution, and the TSA is researching advanced
technologies to improve this capability.
Many of the technologies I just described incorporate open
architecture principles. Open architecture is an engineering
philosophy where equipment is designed to standards so that
third parties, such as algorithm providers, can provide best-
of-breed technology solutions to the TSA. This ensures not only
the best security capability, but also increases opportunities
for small businesses to engage with TSA.
It is clear that the TSA is actively leveraging advanced
technology to both enhance security and improve the passenger
experience. In order to execute this, the TSA needs dedicated,
predictable resources for technology investment. Dedicated
resources will both enable the TSA to deploy security-
enhancing, game-changing technologies years ahead of the
current schedule and also encourage industry to invest in new
technologies.
The TSA would welcome any legislation providing this
funding, including ending the diversion of the 9/11 passenger
security fee to deficit reduction.
On behalf of Mr. Wilson and myself, I would like to thank
you for the opportunity to appear today, and we look forward to
your questions. Thank you.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Gould and Mr. Wilson
follows:]
Joint Prepared Statement of Austin Gould and Mario Wilson
October 19, 2023
introduction
Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me
and my Transportation Security Administration (TSA) colleague, Mr.
Mario Wilson, to testify on the role of technology in aviation
security. Our testimony will highlight the development of requirements
for new checkpoint technologies, acquisition time lines with the
associated funding requirements, and how the technology is used in the
field to both enhance security effectiveness and improve the passenger
experience.
First and foremost, I would like to thank the committee and
Congress for your continued support of our workforce, most notably
through approving funding for TSA's pay plan which was included in the
fiscal year 2023 Omnibus Appropriations Act. Although today's hearing
is focused on technology, it is important to note that sustaining this
increase in pay for our entire workforce ensures that those who we need
to operate TSA's Government-funded technology are properly and
comparably paid. This is especially important as we have seen record-
breaking passenger volume in recent months. This necessary and
significant increase in pay that occurred in July upon conversion to
the new pay plan brought the salaries of TSA personnel to a level equal
to our Federal counterparts, and will enable the TSA to recruit, and
most importantly retain, top candidates for Federal employment.
Positive impacts are already being seen. The TSA is committed to
providing the very best tools, training, and procedures to our
personnel to enable them to efficiently and effectively secure the
aviation system.
Second, TSA has seen the benefits of dedicated annual funding for
our checked bag systems and are supportive of any legislation that
would establish a similar concept for our checkpoint security screening
technology. Dedicated funding would enable TSA to complete the
deployment of new technologies years, if not decades, ahead of its
current deployment time lines of 2042 and 2049. Ending the diversion of
the Security Service Fee is critical to TSA's mission. In the aftermath
of the terrorist attacks of 9/11, Congress authorized the collection of
a fee from commercial flight passengers to offset the costs for civil
aviation security services: the Security Service Fee. In 2014, Congress
passed legislation to increase the fee to $5.60 per one-way trip with a
maximum of $11.20 per round trip. However, the legislation also
diverted a large portion of the fees collected away from TSA and to the
Treasury General Fund--not for aviation security. If the diversion of
the fee away from TSA is terminated and the fees collected are directed
back toward TSA as originally intended, it will provide TSA
approximately $1.6 billion annually to offset the agency's appropriated
funding. This funding is essential as TSA has seen an unprecedented
increase in passenger volume in recent months, which is projected to
increase even further in the future.
Passenger volumes have recovered and are exceeding pre-pandemic
levels. TSA is screening an average of 2.3 million passengers per day.
In fiscal year 2023, TSA screened a total of 838.1 million passengers,
a 13.8 percent increase from the prior year; 99.1 percent of passengers
waited 30 minutes or less in standard lanes and 98.7 percent of
passengers waited 10 minutes or less in TSA PreCheck lanes. This
summer, TSA screened 150 million checked bags. In fiscal year 2023, TSA
experienced 6 of the busiest travel days on record, the highest being
June 30, 2023 with 2.88 million passengers screened.
checkpoint security screening technology
Given this staggering volume, it is imperative that TSA develop and
deploy the most effective technologies available to promote safe air
travel of passengers, checked baggage, and cargo, while ensuring that
the system supports a positive and streamlined customer service
experience. To do this, TSA uses robust risk analytics to inform the
operational requirements for screening equipment, ensuring that
investments are made in technologies that provide the most security
benefit. These risk analytics are then used to inform research
priorities for the agency to ensure research and development (R&D)
funding is applied to the most pressing needs.
Recent research efforts include biometric identification
technologies, advanced algorithms for explosives and prohibited items
(guns, knives, grenades, etc.), detection in carry-on baggage, and
advanced on-person screening equipment. Additional critical research is
being conducted into what is called Alarm Resolution. Alarm Resolution
is the process Transportation Security Officers (TSOs) use to resolve
alarms that occur during on-person or luggage screening to quickly
determine if the alarm is the result of an actual prohibited item.
TSA coordinates all of these R&D activities with the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) Science and Technology (S&T) Directorate,
ensuring no redundancies. TSA also actively participates in S&T's
research portfolio development process to ensure that the
administration's basic research needs are addressed.
What follows is a summary of TSA's major procurement efforts and
plans for future technology development and fielding.
credential authentication technology
Credential Authentication Technology (CAT) is one example of the
agency's major procurement efforts. From a security perspective,
positive identification of passengers is critical to aviation security.
In fiscal year 2023, TSA discovered a total of 452 fraudulent IDs at a
checkpoint. The CAT is a technology that scans a passenger's identity
credential (driver's license, passport, etc.) for security features,
displays it on a screen for the TSO to compare it to the passenger's
face, and connects to TSA's Secure Flight passenger prescreening
system, returning the passenger's screening status (i.e., Standard, TSA
PreCheck, or Selectee) in near-real time. This enables the officer to
more accurately identify the passenger and direct them to the
appropriate level of screening, and it negates the need to produce a
boarding pass. Currently, a total of 2,054 CAT machines are deployed at
227 locations.
Building on the success of the CAT, TSA is integrating digital
identity capabilities, namely the interoperability of state-issued
mobile Driver's Licenses, into the second generation CAT system known
as the CAT-2. The CAT-2 incorporates biometric matching and digital
identity functionality into the CAT unit. The biometric capability on
the CAT-2 is a 1:1 facial match where the system compares a live photo
of the individual's face with the image on the physical credential. The
passenger allows permission for their smart device to transmit their
credential information to TSA using the CAT-2 unit, where the CAT-2
performs biometric matching against the digitally-provided credential.
In September 2023, TSA began retrofitting the existing CAT units with
upgrade kits providing CAT-2 functionality, including the ability to
interact with digital identities. The TSA will continue to deploy these
upgrade kits to existing CAT units throughout fiscal year 2024.
Given the wide diversity of the millions of passengers moving
through airport checkpoints daily, accuracy in biometric solutions is a
key issue for TSA. Therefore, TSA is grounding its exploration of
biometric solutions in rigorous scientific study and analysis to ensure
the full benefits of biometrics technology are realized. We are aware
of a variety of public concerns related to performance errors and take
this issue seriously. Along with its Federal partners, TSA is carefully
studying matching performance differences across biometric systems and
operational environments to identify the existence of disparities on
these and other grounds. TSA works closely with Department of Homeland
Security's Science and Technology Directorate and National Institute of
Standards and Technology to independently assess the performance of
biometrics solutions and found no statistically significant differences
in biometric performance across gender, race, and skin tone under
varied test conditions for the CAT-2 system. Accuracy in biometric
solutions is a priority for TSA, and one that is being carefully
studied to ensure TSA realizes the full benefits of this technology and
makes informed decisions to mitigate risks.
TSA is also conducting a ``1:n'' facial identification touchless
proof of concept for passengers with a Known Traveler Number (KTN) who
are eligible to participate in TSA PreCheck. 1:n is a process that uses
the Customs and Border Protection's Traveler Verification Service
(TVS); galleries of day-of travelers are built of passengers who have
met the requirements and have opted-in to the touchless experience. TSA
PreCheck passengers in these locations can step up to the system, have
their face photographed, and have their image matched against the day-
of gallery in TVS. If there is an identity match, they are allowed to
enter the security checkpoint without having to produce any physical or
digital forms of ID. Through this innovation, TSA PreCheck passengers
now can process through the security checkpoint significantly faster
than through the standard CAT-2 protocol. Passengers must take several
steps to participate and already have a photo on file for the purpose
of travel. Privacy is protected through opt-in consent and deletion of
the photo collected at the checkpoint within 24 hours after flight.
If a passenger decides not to opt-in to using biometrics
identification, then a normal manual verification process is used. This
is addressed in the Privacy Impact Assessment for this touchless proof
of concept, and signage is prominently displayed near the 1:n prototype
devices.
All of TSA's identity management, facial recognition, and biometric
programs are reviewed internally by TSA Privacy and TSA Civil Rights &
and Liberties offices, as well as by the DHS Privacy and DHS Civil
Rights and Civil Liberties offices to ensure the protection of privacy,
civil rights, and civil liberties of the traveling public.
Last, the careful development and deployment of biometric and
digital identification capabilities will significantly streamline the
passenger identification process while ensuring privacy is enhanced.
checkpoint property screening system and computed tomography
Another major technology advancement that TSA is currently
procuring is the Checkpoint Property Screening System, or CPSS. At the
current rate, TSA will surpass last year's record of 6,542 firearms
prevented from getting on-board an aircraft. The CPSS consists of a
computed tomography (CT) three-dimensional X-ray scanner. A three-
dimensional CT image enables the TSO to rotate the image, scan through
items in order to better identify potential threat contents, and
virtually remove laptops in the image to assess for signs of tampering.
The system is capable of using advanced detection algorithms to detect
explosive materials. TSA, in conjunction with the CPSS manufacturers,
are currently developing Prohibited Item algorithms to detect weapons
such as knives and firearms. There are currently 781 CPSSs installed in
the field, and TSA currently has contracts in place with three vendors
to deliver additional CT capability. These new CPSSs come in one of
three configurations: base, mid-size, and full-size, depending on the
size of, and space at, the airport checkpoint.
cat and cpss deployment time lines
Due to funding constraints, TSA does not have the resources needed
to purchase and deploy all of the necessary equipment to airports
Nation-wide. Based on the current funding levels, TSA will not be able
to deploy all of the 3,585 CAT machines needed to airports until
approximately 2049. Similarly, it will take until approximately 2042
for TSA to be able to deploy all of the 2,263 CPSS machines to
airports.
on-person screening technology
TSA is currently in the development phase of the next generation of
on-person screening technology. On-person screening technology
currently consists of the Walk-Through Metal Detector (WTMD) and the
Advanced Imaging Technology (AIT). The WTMD is currently used
predominantly for TSA PreCheck passengers to screen for metallic
objects. The AIT is used to screen standard, non-PreCheck passengers
for metallic and non-metallic objects. The WTMD is unable to detect
non-metallic items, to include explosives, but it provides for expanded
passenger throughput for the vetted TSA Trusted Traveler and TSA
PreCheck populations. The AIT screens standard, non-PreCheck passengers
without physical contact for both metallic and non-metallic threats,
including weapons and explosives that may be concealed under a
passenger's clothing. Utilization of AIT decreases the need for pat-
downs for both metallic and non-metallic threats, including weapons and
explosives.
In June 2023, TSA concluded deployment of the low probability of
false alarm algorithm on AIT units to increase detection capability,
decrease false alarm rates, and reduce the need for a pat-down by 50
percent. Additionally, High-Definition AIT is currently being tested in
the DHS S&T Transportation Security Laboratory in Atlantic City, NJ. If
successful, this new technology will both significantly increase
security through enhanced threat detection and decrease the false alarm
rate even further, which would also help accelerate passenger
throughput.
TSA is also evaluating screening technologies to replace the WTMD.
These technologies show promise in detection of both metallic and non-
metallic items when passengers pause, or walk through, the equipment at
a slow speed.
advanced alarm resolution capabilities
The TSA is also currently conducting extensive research into
advanced Alarm Resolution (AR) capabilities. The AR program will
replace older and limited resolution systems (e.g., the current Bottle
Liquid Scanners) with next-generation solutions such as Bulk Resolution
Technology that will positively identify a significantly increased
number of threat materials concealed in containers.
checked baggage capabilities
The TSA is also investigating the next generation of checked
baggage (CB) screening systems. TSA has developed a CB road map
outlining the needed capability enhancements and technology upgrades
over the next several years. The road map defines the TSA's current
state and future vision for CB capability and is designed to guide
investments into the long-term research, innovation development, and
acquisition strategy. The TSA must seek technology aimed at closing the
capability gaps in today's CB screening systems. Through dedicated
research and innovation, the agency will introduce new technologies
with the ability to detect an expanded set of threat materials, lower
false-alarm rates, and lower life-cycle costs. Ideally, all future
capabilities will reduce the cognitive burden on the TSOs and improve
their operator experience and detection ability, which will ultimately
improve the passenger experience. Historically, some airports lacked
the infrastructure to accommodate the large and heavy Explosive
Detection System (EDS) machines. Those airports were required to rely
solely on the use of Explosive Trace Detection (ETD) to screen
passengers and their luggage. To improve CB security effectiveness, the
TSA is transitioning from ETD-only to EDS at locations that are now
capable of supporting EDS. Additionally, TSA recently tested Dual Use
Computed Tomography (DUCT) in some airports, which utilizes one piece
of screening equipment to screen both carry-on and checked baggage.
Early results show that the use of DUCT systems would significantly
increase security effectiveness. DUCT systems could be deployed at low-
volume airports that currently rely on ETD physical search.
cargo capabilities
TSA is also responsible for the oversight of the screening of
cargo. TSA established the Certified Cargo Screening Program in 2009
under which it certifies cargo screening facilities in the United
States in order to meet the mandates of the 9/11 Act to screen 100
percent of cargo transported on passenger aircraft. The TSA requires
Certified Cargo Screening Facilities (CCSF) or their authorized
representatives to use TSA-approved methods which include diverse
methods of screening such as X-ray systems, EDS, ETD, explosives
detection canine teams certified by TSA, or a physical search together
with manifest verification. The range of air cargo commodity types is
extraordinarily wide, and this poses challenges to developing
appropriate screening systems. TSA is aggressively pursuing next
generation solutions including systems that combine X-ray, ETD, or EDS
enabling technologies to not only rely on images but leverage the
ability to detect trace components; large aperture systems that enable
screening an entire pallet at one time; fast parcel systems to increase
throughput; and automated alarm software that is currently being
developed in partnership with DHS S&T to mitigate complete reliance on
screeners.
open architecture
The technologies discussed above, and any future acquisitions, will
be grounded in Open Architecture (OA). OA is a design approach where
components such as software and hardware are standards-based and
interoperable to allow any vendor to create improved subcomponents such
as new detection algorithms, enhancements to user interfaces, and
reporting systems to support improved business intelligence.
Ultimately, these components come together to create a superior
combined system.
Leveraging OA will improve TSA's ability to rapidly respond to
emerging threats and work with all of industry to address capability
needs. OA strengthens TSA's ability to stay ahead of ever-evolving
threats through greater agility and flexibility in the acquisition of
innovative, interconnected, and advanced transportation security
technologies. It will define an improved approach to delivering
enhanced capabilities to the field in a timely manner, providing the
workforce access to the most effective security technology while
simplifying the processes and procedures used to help keep the Nation
secure. TSA published the Open Architecture Roadmap in July 2023 and is
actively working to operationalize key OA concepts in fiscal year 2024.
passenger experience
As TSA develops and deploys new checkpoint security screening
technology and procedures, the agency's primary focus is on
strengthening aviation security while enhancing the passenger
experience. CAT enables TSOs to validate a traveler's reservation
without having to request a boarding pass thus reducing documentation
requirements for the traveling public to access our security
checkpoints. The deployment of CT three-dimensional X-ray machines will
reduce the need for passengers to remove items from their bags, greatly
improving throughput at the checkpoint. The development of advanced
detection algorithms will enable TSOs to focus on potential threats
that are automatically identified, both improving security and
increasing efficiencies. New on-person screening capabilities will
further reduce the need for pat-downs, significantly improving the
passenger experience.
Any investments in technology to improve security enhancements must
be placed in the hands of a talented and well-trained workforce. The
TSA is committed to providing the very best tools, training, and
procedures to our personnel to enable them to efficiently and
effectively secure the aviation system.
conclusion
To carry out its aviation security mission, TSA needs dedicated,
predictable, and robust funding to continue to develop and deploy next-
generation checkpoint security screening technology and procedures. TSA
is actively pursuing these technologies in partnership with multiple
vendors, including small businesses. The single biggest limiting factor
is that TSA is inadequately funded to fully implement checkpoint
technology acceleration plans to address known and evolving threats. As
passenger throughput continues to increase, TSA must have the tools and
technology necessary to ensure the safety and freedom of movement of
people and commerce.
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
on the role technology plays in aviation security. My colleague and I
look forward to your questions.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Gould.
I now recognize Director Tina Won Sherman for 5 minutes to
summarize her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF TINA WON SHERMAN, DIRECTOR, HOMELAND SECURITY AND
JUSTICE, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Sherman. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify this morning on behalf of the agency I represent, the
Government Accountability Office.
As threats to domestic aviation are wide-ranging and can
lead to devastating results if unaddressed, the Transportation
Security Administration has the difficult mission of ensuring
the security of our Nation's transportation system.
The agency's almost 50,000 Transportation Security Officers
verify the identity of, and screen over 2 million passengers
each day at more than 400 airports across the country, and it
does so in a fast-moving and high-pressure situation where
there is little margin for error.
At the same time, it is critical for TSA to uphold the
public's confidence in its efforts to counter these threats.
Only in this way can the agency conduct its security activities
in the most effective and efficient manner.
However, upholding the public's confidence can be
incredibly challenging, as a traveler's perception of their
screening experience is uniquely their own and is as real and
as valid as that of the Transportation Security Officer who is
carrying out the screening.
Thus, TSA also has a responsibility to ensure that it
considers the potential impact of its technologies and
practices on passengers as they move through security
checkpoints. For well over a decade, GAO has reviewed numerous
aspects of TSA's layered security approach, and testified on
that work before this committee. My comments today center on
two GAO reports really focused on TSA technologies and its
implications.
In 2019, GAO reviewed TSA's detection standards for
screening technologies, and found that the agency did not
ensure those technologies, such as explosive detection systems
and advanced technology X-rays, continued to meet the
requirements it set forth for detection standards over time.
This means that TSA's technologies may not always identify
potential threat items such as weapons or explosives after
deployed to an airport.
Two years ago, the Department of Homeland Security's Office
of Inspector General also found that TSA did not adequately
oversee its acquisition as well as the testing and evaluation
of 300 computed tomography systems to ensure they met key
performance parameters prior to their acquisition.
More recently, in 2022, GAO studied TSA's screening
practices to determine if they could result in potential
discrimination of passengers. We found that the agency's
screening practices can refer certain passengers for additional
screening more often than others. This includes, for example,
transgender passengers, passengers with religious headwear,
with natural or braided hair or with disabilities.
This is because TSA's advanced imaging technology cannot
adequately screen some of those passengers, resulting in alarm
followed by a referral for additional screening, such as a pat-
down by a Transportation Security Officer, which can be viewed
by some passengers as invasive and sometimes traumatic.
We recommend that TSA take several actions to address the
issues identified in these reviews, including to develop and
implement a way to ensure its screening systems continue to
meet detection standards and requirements post-deployment, and
to collect and assess data on passenger referrals for
additional screening to determine whether its practices align
with the agency's nondiscrimination policies.
TSA has provided us with updates on their progress in
implementing our recommendations, which we are actively
reviewing.
In closing, I want to thank my GAO colleagues for their
support in advance of this hearing and to the subcommittee for
bringing attention once again to these issues.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sherman follows:]
Statement of Tina Won Sherman
October 19, 2023
gao highlights
Highlights of GAO-24-107094, a testimony before the Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security, Committee on Homeland Security,
House of Representatives.
Why GAO Did This Study
TSA employs passenger and baggage screening technologies to
mitigate the threat of terrorism. TSA has faced challenges ensuring
these technologies consistently meet detection requirements. The agency
has also faced allegations that some of its screening practices, such
as the use of advanced imaging technology, may refer certain passengers
more frequently to additional screening.
This statement discusses TSA's efforts to: (1) Ensure passenger and
baggage screening technologies continue to meet detection requirements
after deployment, and (2) assess the extent to which its use of
advanced imaging technology refers certain passengers to additional
screening more often than others.
This statement is based primarily on reports GAO issued in December
2019 and November 2022 on detection requirements for TSA screening
technologies (GAO-20-56) and TSA's efforts to ensure its passenger
screening practices do not result in discrimination (GAO-23-105201). To
report on actions taken to address recommendations, GAO assessed
implementation reports and reviewed agency documents and responses.
What GAO Recommends
GAO made a total of 9 recommendations in the December 2019 and
November 2022 reports. DHS concurred with all 9 recommendations. Seven
remain open. However, TSA has taken steps to implement them, including
the 4 recommendations to address the issues discussed in detail in this
statement.
aviation security.--tsa could better ensure detection and assess the
potential for discrimination in its screening technologies
What GAO Found
In December 2019, GAO reported that the performance of technologies
the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) uses to screen
passengers and baggage at airports can degrade over time. However, TSA
does not ensure that such technologies continue to meet detection
requirements after deployment to airports.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

TSA certifies technologies to ensure they meet requirements before
deployment, and its officers are to regularly calibrate deployed
technologies to demonstrate they are minimally operational. However,
neither of these actions ensures that technologies continue to meet
requirements after deployment. In 2015 and 2016, the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) tested a sample of deployed explosives trace
detection and bottled liquid scanner units and found that some no
longer met detection requirements. GAO recommended that TSA develop and
implement a process to ensure technologies continue to meet detection
requirements after deployment. TSA began requiring reviews of
technologies after deployment in 2020 and is working to update its
policy. TSA has also begun to conduct reviews and report on the
results.
In November 2022, GAO reported that TSA officials at 4 selected
airports and representatives from 7 selected stakeholder organizations,
such as the National Center for Transgender Equality and the Sikh
Coalition, stated that the use of advanced imaging technology can
result in certain passengers being referred for additional screening
more frequently than others. These include transgender passengers and
those who wear religious headwear or have disabilities. GAO recommended
that TSA: (1) Collect data on referrals for additional screening, and
(2) assess the extent to which its screening practices comply with
agency non-discrimination policies. According to TSA officials, the
agency has taken steps to collect data on such referrals, including the
cause of additional screening, and plans to assess the data to inform
the development and use of advance imaging technology.
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of the
subcommittee: Thank you for the opportunity to contribute to today's
discussion on aviation screening technologies. The Transportation
Security Administration (TSA) is charged with the mission of protecting
the Nation's transportation systems, including preventing acts of
terrorism on these systems and responding to ever-evolving threats. To
mitigate these threats, TSA employs technologies to screen passengers
and their carry-on and checked baggage for explosive materials and
other prohibited items. The on-going threat of terrorism and the
projected growth in air travel highlight the importance of TSA
continually assessing the effectiveness of its screening operations.
However, the agency has faced challenges ensuring these technologies
consistently meet detection requirements.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ International Air Transport Association, Global Outlook for Air
Transport: Highly Resilient, Less Robust (Montreal, Quebec, Canada:
June 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSA's 2020 Biennial National Strategy for Transportation Security
states that while striving to enhance transportation security, the
Government must preserve and protect the fundamental civil rights and
civil liberties of the public it serves.\2\ As such, it is important
for TSA to carry out its security mission while ensuring its screening
practices do not result in discrimination against passengers.\3\ Yet
the agency has received allegations that some of its screening
practices, such as the use of advanced imaging technology, may refer
certain passengers more frequently to additional screening.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ TSA, 2020 Biennial National Strategy for Transportation
Security, Report to Congress (May 29, 2020).
\3\ TSA guidance states that prohibited discrimination occurs when
TSA provides members of the public lesser, segregated, or different
treatment (e.g., profiling, harassment, denial of services) based on
protected class characteristics (e.g., hair style, clothing, skin
color, manner of speaking, country of origin, name, religious articles
or jewelry). See Transportation Security Administration, Unlawful
Profiling: What It Is and How To Avoid It (Nov. 13, 2017).
\4\ Advanced imaging technology machines use automated recognition
software to screen passengers without physical contact and locate
potential metallic and non-metallic threats, such as weapons or
explosives, which may be concealed under clothing. Passengers who
trigger an alarm on the machines may be required to undergo additional
screening, which could include a targeted pat-down and, in some cases,
explosive trace detection screening.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My remarks today will focus on TSA's efforts to: (1) Ensure that
passenger and baggage screening technologies meet the requirements for
detection standards after deployment, and (2) assess the extent to
which its use of advanced imaging technology refers certain passengers
to additional screening more often than others. This statement is
primarily based on two reports--our December 2019 report about TSA's
efforts to ensure passenger and baggage screening technologies continue
to meet detection requirements after deployment and our November 2022
report about TSA's efforts to help ensure its airline passenger
screening practices do not result in discrimination against
passengers.\5\ This statement also includes selected updates on actions
TSA has taken to implement the recommendations from these two reports.
In doing so, we assessed technology implementation reports and reviewed
agency documents and responses.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ GAO, Aviation Security: TSA Should Ensure Screening
Technologies Continue to Meet Detection Requirements after Deployment,
GAO-20-56 (Washington, DC: Dec. 5, 2019); and GAO, Aviation Security:
TSA Should Assess Potential for Discrimination and Better Inform
Passengers of the Complaint Process, GAO-23-105201 (Washington, DC:
Nov. 7, 2022).
\6\ For the recommendations in our 2022 report, TSA provided its
last response to our follow-up questions on the actions taken to
implement them in July 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our work examining TSA's passenger and baggage screening included
analyzing documents on TSA's screening procedures, technology, and
detection requirements, and interviewing TSA officials. For our work on
screening technologies, we assessed operational requirements for
technologies that were subject to TSA detection standards and
calibration procedures. We compared TSA processes for ensuring deployed
technologies meet requirements against DHS acquisition regulations and
policies. Additionally, we observed screening operations and
technologies at 7 airports, which we selected based on airport category
and geographic location.
For our work on TSA efforts to prevent discrimination, we visited 4
airports, selected based on size, complaints filed, and other factors.
At these airports, we observed screening operations, interviewed TSA
officials, and conducted 12 discussion groups with Transportation
Security Officers who perform checkpoint screening. We also interviewed
7 stakeholder organizations, including those representing religious
groups and persons with disabilities, selected based on their work on
airline security screening. Detailed information about the scope and
methodology for our prior work can be found in the products cited
throughout this statement.
background
We conducted the work on which this statement is based in
accordance with generally accepted Government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that
the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
Terrorist organizations have a long history of targeting passenger
aircraft using conventional and homemade explosives and other
prohibited items, such as guns and knives. To mitigate this threat, TSA
procedures generally provide that all passengers pass through security
checkpoints where their person, identification documents, and carry-on
bags are screened to detect and deter the smuggling of prohibited items
into restricted airport areas and onto aircraft.\7\ TSA uses a variety
of screening technologies--a combination of hardware and software
designed to detect threats--to protect the Nation's civil aviation
system. Figure 1 depicts the various screening technologies TSA may use
in primary and secondary passenger and checked baggage screening.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Passengers' checked baggage are screened separately.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

For each screening technology, TSA develops detection standards
that identify and describe the prohibited items that the technology is
required to detect during the screening process.\8\ These standards,
which are classified, also identify how often the technology should
detect prohibited items and the maximum allowable rate at which the
technology incorrectly identifies prohibited items. For explosive
materials, the standards also identify what the screening technology is
required to detect in terms of: (1) The minimum amount or weight of the
material and (2) the chemical and physical makeup of the material.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ As of December 2019, the screening technologies for which
explosives detection standards were developed were advanced imaging
technology, advanced technology X-ray, bottled liquid scanner, computed
tomography, explosives detection system, and explosives trace
detection. According to DHS officials, the agency also screens for
``explosives precursors,'' which are chemical substances that, when
combined with another substance, could be used to create a homemade
explosive on board an aircraft. Explosives precursors can be used for
legitimate purposes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
tsa should ensure screening technologies continue to meet detection
requirements after deployment
TSA's Practices Do Not Ensure Screening Technologies Continue to Meet
Detection Requirements After Deployment
In December 2019, we reported that TSA's practices do not ensure
that screening technologies continue to meet detection requirements
after those technologies have been deployed to airports.\9\ According
to TSA officials, the agency uses two processes--certification and
calibration--to ensure screening technologies are operating as
intended. The certification process is designed to ensure that new
technologies meet detection requirements before they are procured and
deployed to airports.\10\ TSA officials also stated that daily
calibration helps ensure that the technologies are at least minimally
operational while in use at airports.\11\ However, while certification
and calibration serve important purposes in the acquisition and
operation of screening technologies, these processes do not ensure that
TSA screening technologies continue to meet detection requirements
after they have been deployed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ GAO-20-56.
\10\ During the certification process, DHS's Science and Technology
Directorate tests the technology under controlled conditions at its
Transportation Security Laboratory to determine whether it meets TSA's
detection requirements. After TSA certifies that a technology meets
detection requirements (and it undergoes additional testing for other
requirements), TSA may deploy the technology to selected airports for
operational testing and evaluation to determine how it performs in an
airport setting.
\11\ Calibration procedures vary in terms of frequency and type for
each screening technology.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The certification process, for instance, does not account for the
possibility that technology performance can degrade over time,
throughout the technology's life cycle. For example, in 2015 and 2016,
DHS tested a sample of deployed explosives trace detection and bottled
liquid scanner units and concluded that some deployed units for each
technology no longer met detection requirements.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ According to TSA officials, the units did not meet detection
requirements because they were not adequately maintained. Officials
stated that the agency has since introduced better controls to ensure
that routine preventative maintenance is performed as required.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Calibration, likewise, can demonstrate that the screening
technology is at least minimally operational, but it is not designed to
test whether the screening technology meets detection requirements. For
example, to calibrate explosives detection systems, TSA officers are to
run the manufacturer's operational test kit--which includes items of
various densities--through the unit and verify that the item is
correctly displayed on the system's monitor (see figure 2 below).\13\
This process demonstrates a level of base functionality of the system,
but it does not ensure that the system meets detection requirements. As
a result, a system can pass calibration even when its detection
capabilities have degraded.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ For the purposes of this statement, references to TSA
Transportation Security Officers may include both TSA-employed
screening personnel and personnel employed by a qualified private-
sector company contracted with TSA to perform screening services at
airports participating in TSA's Screening Partnership Program. See 49
U.S.C.  44920.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

TSA officials stated that there are challenges in designing a
process to ensure that screening technologies continue to meet
detection requirements after deployment. For example, TSA officials
stated that it is not feasible to conduct live explosives testing in
airports. Further, while it is relatively easy to temporarily transfer
smaller screening technologies, such as explosives trace detection
units, to a controlled setting for live explosives testing, it would
not be feasible to transfer larger installed units, such as advanced
imaging technology. However, as we have previously reported,
independent test measures exist to test these technologies such as a
national standard for measuring image quality in explosives detection
systems.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ GAO, Air Cargo Security: TSA Field Testing Should Ensure
Screening Systems Meet Detection Standards, GAO-21-105192 (Washington,
DC: July 29, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSA Is Developing and Implementing a Process to Better Ensure Screening
Technologies Continue to Meet Detection Requirements after
Deployment
We made two recommendations regarding these issues in our December
2019 report.\15\ The TSA administrator should: (1) Develop a process to
ensure that screening technologies continue to meet detection
requirements after deployment to commercial airports and (2) implement
that process. DHS concurred with both recommendations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ GAO-20-56. We also made recommendations for TSA to: (1) Update
its guidance for developing and approving screening technology
explosives detection standards; (2) require and ensure that it
documents key decisions, including testing and analysis decisions, used
to support the development of new screening technology explosives
detection standards; and (3) require and ensure that it documents its
assessments of risk and the rationale behind decisions to deploy
screening technologies. DHS concurred with the recommendations, has
fully implemented two recommendations, and is taking steps to implement
the third.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As of October 2023, TSA has partially addressed the first
recommendation. In April 2020, TSA issued the TSA Post Implementation
Review (PIR) and Periodic Review Policy (APM-20-031), which calls for
TSA to develop and conduct a Post-Implementation Review--or roadmap for
how TSA will assess technology performance--for each screening
technology after initial deployment.\16\ The policy identifies a
specific time frame for conducting this review and requires that TSA
determine system performance relative to effectiveness and suitability
as part of the review.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Transportation Security Administration, TSA Post
Implementation Review (PIR) and Periodic Review Policy, APM-20-031
(Springfield, VA: April 28, 2020). The Post-Implementation Review is
the first assessment of performance after the technology has been
deployed to airports; it is used to determine user satisfaction, system
performance relative to effectiveness and suitability, financial
compliance, and to identify lessons learned. The Post-Implementation
Review is to be conducted within 6 to 12 months after the technology
attains Initial Operating Capability or as directed by an acquisition
decision memorandum. Initial Operating Capability for software occurs
when the minimum capability necessary to field (deploy) the technology
is achieved. In its November 2019 concurrence with our recommendation,
DHS stated that TSA decided to examine the component performance of
technologies' detection chain rather than perform a direct measure of
detection requirements, due to the limitations of using live explosives
and simulants. A separate Post-Implementation Review is required for
each screening technology because each technology has unique logistics
data and a unique detection chain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, the policy calls for TSA to conduct periodic reviews
of each technology after the Post-Implementation Review, to assess
system performance over time and examine whether functionality changes
need to be made.\17\ However, time frames and other requirements for
conducting periodic reviews are less clear. For example, the policy
does not specify system performance requirements relative to
effectiveness and suitability for periodic reviews.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ According to TSA's policy, periodic reviews can be completed
through a variety of technical and non-technical means, such as a
program manager review, dedicated operational analysis, contractual
reviews, or a review of acquisition documentation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To fully address our recommendation to develop a process for
ensuring screening technologies continue to meet detection requirements
after deployment, TSA policy and guidelines should call for the same
requirements for periodic reviews as for post-implementation
reviews.\18\ In May 2023, TSA stated that it intends to adjust its
policy on periodic reviews to include the same type of requirements as
post-implementation reviews. According to TSA, such adjustments will
include a general time frame for conducting periodic reviews that
allows for management team judgment based on specific needs and the
assessment of system performance requirements relative to effectiveness
and suitability. TSA estimated this update would be completed by
December 31, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ For example, general time frames for conducting reviews that
allow for the individual judgment of the management team, and system
performance requirements relative to technology effectiveness and
suitability.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With respect to the second recommendation, TSA has begun to conduct
and report on the results of post-implementation and periodic reviews
for selected technologies. We assessed TSA's finalized and draft
reports of the post-implementation and periodic reviews and found that
TSA has made notable progress in implementing these policies.\19\ In
particular, TSA leveraged the national standard for image quality
testing of computed tomography systems to assess detection performance
of the checked baggage screening systems without the use of explosives
testing. As we previously reported, this standard can be used to verify
detection performance if properly employed.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ As of May 2023, TSA had conducted and provided reports for two
Post-Implementation Reviews and one periodic review, and was in the
process of conducting a third Post-Implementation Review and scoping a
plan for a fourth Post-Implementation Review.
\20\ GAO-21-105192. Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Standards Association, American National Standard for
Evaluating the Image Quality of X-ray Computed Tomography (CT)
Security-Screening Systems. (New York, NY: May 23, 2011). To properly
employ image quality tests in lieu of live explosive testing, TSA must
establish clear linkage back to the laboratory tests conducted with
live explosives. The agency also must use quantitative metrics of image
quality to establish when detection performance would begin to degrade.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to TSA officials, the agency is also working to develop a
similar image quality test for advanced imaging technology that would
evaluate degradation of detection performance without the use of live
explosives.
TSA officials reported in May 2023 that they have developed and
tested a kit to measure the parameters for this image quality test.\21\
We have not previously reported on an image quality standard for
advanced imaging technology and plan to continue to work with TSA
officials and independent experts to understand whether this test will
adequately identify degradation in detection performance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ According to TSA officials, they have scoped a Post-
Implementation Review for advanced imaging technology that is to be
implemented once the standards and pass/fail criteria have been
approved by a joint industry and Government committee. The image
quality test proposed by TSA is based on a draft National standard for
image quality testing of millimeter wave screening devices--the core
technology underlying advanced imaging technology systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, we continue to have concerns regarding the sufficiency of
the test data collected and reported during the periodic reviews, and
the absence of specific test plans to measure the detection performance
of the advanced imaging and computed tomography systems.\22\ According
to TSA officials, while the agency remains committed to implementing
its periodic review process of screening technologies, officials also
said that enduring resource constraints mean TSA will likely require
additional time to implement a periodic review process for all
screening technologies. To fully address our recommendation, TSA should
address the concerns discussed above, such as the absence of specific
test plans to measure the detection performance of specific
technologies. We will continue to work with TSA to evaluate the
agency's progress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Because TSA deems these reports to contain sensitive
information, we are not discussing the details of our assessments in
this statement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
tsa should collect data on and assess the potential for discrimination
in its screening practices
TSA's Advanced Imaging Technology Can Refer Certain Passengers for
Additional Screening More Frequently than Others
As discussed earlier in this statement, TSA may use advanced
imaging technology as part of its primary passenger screening at
airport security checkpoints (see figure 3). Passengers who trigger an
alarm on the advanced imaging technology machine may be required to
undergo secondary screening, which could include a targeted pat-down
and, in some cases, explosive trace detection screening.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

In November 2022, we reported that supervisory officers in all 4
airports we visited and Transportation Security Officers in all 12
discussion groups we conducted said that they have observed advanced
imaging technology machines alarming frequently on certain
passengers.\23\ These include transgender passengers, passengers who
wear religious headwear, or passengers with certain hair types and
styles. For example,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ GAO-23-105201.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The officers stated that they push a blue or pink button on
the advanced imaging technology machine to specify the gender
passengers are scanned as, based on their visual assessment of
the passengers' gender presentation. The officers stated that
passengers may undergo additional screening if the gender
button selected on the machine does not match the gender of the
passenger. In addition, officers noted that transgender
passengers may trigger alarms depending on the nature of their
transition, because the technology may register potential
threats in the groin and chest areas.

The officers also stated that the advanced imaging
technology cannot adequately screen certain hair types and
styles (e.g., heavy braids), which can result in some
passengers, including Black women, triggering alarms on the
machines.

Furthermore, officers stated that passengers who have
medical conditions, prostheses, or disabilities that prevent
them from holding the required position for advanced imaging
technology screening (i.e., stand with their arms positioned
over their heads) may be required to undergo additional
screening.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ According to TSA officials, individuals who cannot hold the
stance for advanced imaging technology screening are considered
ineligible, and the walk-through metal detector becomes the primary
method of screening.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some of the Transportation Security Officers we interviewed stated
that these referrals for additional screening are not due to
discrimination or profiling. Rather, they said that the alarms are a
result of the detection of potential threats that cannot be cleared by
the advanced imaging technology and need additional screening to
resolve based on TSA's operating procedures. According to lead officers
in one of the airports we visited, anything that differs from the
technology's standard algorithm will register as a potential threat and
trigger an alarm, regardless of race, religion, or other
characteristics. Officers in another airport noted that passengers who
are wearing baggy clothing or clothing with sequins can also trigger
alarms. According to the officers, they are required to perform
targeted pat-downs as a means of resolving alarms to help ensure that
passengers are not carrying potential threat items, such as weapons,
past the screening checkpoint.
Similar to the observations of the TSA officials at the airports we
visited, representatives from the 7 selected stakeholder organizations
we interviewed said that TSA's use of advanced imaging technology
affects certain passenger groups more often than others. Some of these
organizations have also raised concerns about the technology in
Congressional hearings. Representatives from some organizations stated
that the use of the technology has contributed to negative passenger
experiences with the security screening process that can be perceived
as discrimination or profiling. For example,

Representatives from the National Center for Transgender
Equality and American Civil Liberties Union stated that because
advanced imaging technology is based on a binary (i.e., male or
female) selection by the officer, transgender passengers
consistently trigger alarms and are subject to pat-downs of
sensitive areas that they consider to be invasive and
traumatic. These representatives noted that the prosthetic
devices transgender passengers may wear could also trigger
alarms on advanced imaging technology machines.

In addition, representatives from the National Disabilities
Rights Network and the Paralyzed Veterans of America stated
that passengers who use wheelchairs and are not able to be
screened by advanced imaging technology machines, are required
to undergo a pat-down, and at times may have to wait for
extended periods for an officer of the same gender to conduct
the pat-down.

Further, in testimony before this committee in June 2019, a
representative from the Sikh Coalition stated that Sikhs are
virtually guaranteed to receive additional screening because of
their turbans, which trigger alarms on advanced imaging
technology machines. According to the representative, this
perpetuates stereotypes that certain passengers, including
Sikhs, Muslims, Arabs, and Hindus, are security threats because
other passengers consistently see them trigger alarms on
purportedly neutral technology. Moreover, a representative from
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
Legal Defense and Educational Fund stated in the same hearing
that Black women wearing natural or braided hair have
frequently had to undergo pat-downs of their hair by TSA
officers because the advanced imaging technology is unable to
distinguish contraband from natural Black hair. Representatives
from both of these organizations alleged that the technology
singles out and imposes burdens on specific passenger groups,
which they said could be experienced as discrimination by these
groups.
TSA officials stated that the agency has a Disability and
Multicultural Coalition and holds annual conferences and quarterly
meetings with its members. This coalition includes over 400
organizations such as the Sikh Coalition, the National Center for
Transgender Equality, and the Paralyzed Veterans of America. According
to 3 of the 7 stakeholder organizations we interviewed, TSA's
Multicultural and Disabilities Branches, which collaborate with the
coalition, are aware of and receptive to hearing organizations'
concerns.\25\ However, representatives from 4 stakeholder organizations
stated that while TSA has taken some positive steps that may help
prevent discrimination, it has not made meaningful changes to address
the long-standing concerns they have raised. For example, a
representative from one of these organizations stated that when
advanced imaging technology machines were implemented, TSA told them
the technology would reduce the need for pat-downs. However, this
representative believes that this has not occurred. Representatives
from another organization stated that TSA's main focus is on security
and reducing wait times for the general public, and not enough emphasis
is placed on the civil rights and dignity of passengers with special
circumstances.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ The Multicultural and Disabilities Branches are responsible
for: (1) Promoting respect for civil rights and civil liberties in
policy and training creation and implementation; (2) educating TSA
personnel at headquarters and in the field on TSA's civil rights and
liberties responsibilities to the public; (3) collaborating with
organizations and advocacy groups to identify promising practices for
TSA's nondiscriminatory delivery of security, custody, and customer-
service programs and activities; and (4) investigating and resolving
civil rights and civil liberties complaints filed by the public
alleging discrimination in TSA's security screening activities at
airports.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We reported in November 2022 that TSA had taken some actions that
agency officials said may help better facilitate screening of
transgender and gender-nonconforming passengers.\26\ For example, at
the time of our review, TSA was in the process of developing an
algorithm update for its advanced imaging technology machines which,
according to officials, would increase detection rates and reduce false
alarm rates for the traveling public. The update was also expected to
remove the need for gender-identifying buttons on the machine.
Specifically, officers would only be required to press a gender-neutral
``scan'' button which, according to TSA, is expected to facilitate
screening of transgender passengers because officers will no longer
need to discern a passenger's gender prior to screening.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ GAO-23-105201.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSA Has Not Collected Data on Referrals for Additional Screening or
Assessed the Potential for Its Practices to Result in
Discrimination
In November 2022, we reported that TSA was aware of many of the
concerns that stakeholder organizations had raised regarding its
screening practices, but had not collected data on the extent to which
its practices refer certain passengers for additional screening more
than others.\27\ The agency also had not conducted assessments to
determine whether its screening practices comply with agency non-
discrimination policies. We recommended that TSA: (1) Collect
additional data on passenger referrals for additional screening, and
(2) conduct assessments to determine the extent to which TSA's
passenger screening practices comply with agency non-discrimination
policies to identify any needed actions to improve compliance.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ GAO-23-105201.
\28\ In our November 2022 report, we also made recommendations for
TSA to: (1) Take additional actions to better inform passengers about
its discrimination complaint process, and (2) strengthen its ability to
analyze passenger discrimination complaints. DHS concurred with the
recommendations, and TSA has taken steps to implement them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DHS concurred with both recommendations. In July 2023, TSA
officials told us that, in June 2023, the agency completed deployment
of the algorithm update to its advanced imaging technology machines at
about 340 airports.\29\ TSA officials stated that they collected data
at 20 selected airports from May 2023 through June 2023 during its
annual resource planning assessment to verify that the update was
working as intended. TSA reported that preliminary results show that
approximately 25 to 27 percent of passengers received a pat-down when
using the updated machines at the selected airports. Officials stated
that the 2022 assessment found that about 52 percent of passengers
received a pat-down.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ TSA reported that it is responsible for the security of nearly
440 Federalized airports, as of July 2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSA officials stated that the agency also plans to collect data at
selected airports where the advanced imaging technology update has been
deployed using a new form that captures information on the passenger's
experience during checkpoint screening. According to officials, the new
form captures: (1) The total screening time from travel document
verification through checkpoint exit; (2) the cause of any additional
screening; (3) the duration of any additional screening; and (4) any
qualifiers including risk status, use of wheelchair, and number of
traveling companions. TSA estimated that its data collection efforts
would be complete by September 29, 2023. As of October 16, 2023, we
have not received documentation of the data collected.
Officials stated that TSA plans to analyze the data collected to
identify the: (1) Rate at which passengers trigger advanced imaging
technology alarms, (2) percentage of false alarms, and (3) causes of
false alarms. They said that the results of this study will be cross-
referenced with complaint data and used to support further development
of advanced imaging technology algorithms. In addition, officials noted
that further research may be needed to identify root causes related to
any outcomes found and to expand upon the number of data points.
In addition to its data collection and analysis efforts, TSA
reviewed literature on passenger experiences and potential bias in on-
person screening and issued a briefing on its findings in March 2023.
The briefing summarizes common factors associated with additional
screening and potential strategies for using technology and procedures
to help mitigate or prevent unintended bias. Furthermore, TSA has
conducted focus groups to assess the pat-down process, and according to
officials, planned to issue a report summarizing the topics discussed
in July 2023. As of October 16, 2023, we have not received the report.
To fully implement our recommendations, TSA will need to provide
evidence that it has collected data on passenger referrals and used
these data to assess the extent to which its screening practices align
with its anti-discrimination policies to identify any needed actions to
improve compliance. We will continue to monitor TSA's data collection,
analysis, and other efforts to address these recommendations.
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of the
subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be pleased
to respond to any questions that you may have at this time.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Ms. Sherman.
Mr. Wilson, do you have anything you want to say? You have
5 minutes if you want.

STATEMENT OF MARIO WILSON, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, ACQUISITION
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT, TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Wilson. Good morning, Chairman, Ranking Member
Thanedar, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee.
As my distinguished colleague to my right said, I am
Assistant Administrator Mario Wilson. I am in charge of leading
the professional team responsible for the testing, procurement,
deployment, and sustainment or maintenance of all 16,000 pieces
of screening equipment that we have at TSA at this time.
In my office, we take the requirements and the innovative
solutions that Mr. Gould and his team identify, and we run them
through the gamut of the testing procurement process that I
just mentioned.
I look forward to answering any questions that you all have
today with regards to our practices, our procurement
strategies, the time lines and a lot of the great achievements
that we've made recently. We have plans for the future to, in
essence, continue to improve our technologies, our
capabilities, and ensure that the customer experience is much
better. Thank you.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Wilson.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Sherman, you talked about some people being screened
more than others. Is that due to profiling or is that due to
technology?
Ms. Sherman. As part of our 2020 review--2022 review, we
actually visited several airports across the country and spoke
with Transportation Security Officers to get their perspectives
in addition to reviewing procedures and other screening
practices.
I think it's probably helpful just to give a little bit of
context about the AIT machines themselves. The AIT machines are
scanning individuals for metallic or nonmetallic items that
potentially could be concealed on their person.
What we had observed is that not only are certain items
such as baggy clothing or sequins or jewelry are those which
the AIT software cannot adequately scan, but we also observed,
in talking with Transportation Security Officers, and as part
of other observations, that the AIT machines were not able to
adequately scan other items as well that are frequently,
certain passengers who are moving through the screening process
may have on.
Mr. Gimenez. Ms. Sherman, I only have 5 minutes, OK? So it
was a pretty simple question. Is it profiling or is it
technology?
Ms. Sherman. So in those conversations that we had with
Transportation Security Officers, the conversations really
centered around that it's not so much profiling or
discrimination that results in the AIT machines alarming but,
in fact, it is the practices of not being able to clear the
alarm on the AIT machine and asking for the passenger then to
be referred to secondary screening as a result. So it's the
technology's inability to scan.
Mr. Gimenez. So, again, it's a pretty simple question. Is
it technology or is it profiling? A pretty simple question.
What is it?
Ms. Sherman. We did not identify profiling.
Mr. Gimenez. Well, thank you very much. I appreciate it,
Ms. Sherman. I really do. OK. Thank you. So we need to do
something about technology. All right. Thank you.
Because I didn't want to disparage our TSA officers by
somehow feeling that we are somehow profiling somebody because
of their religion or transgender or whatever. So a very simple
answer: Yes, it's probably a technological problem. So I'm very
happy about that.
I don't know if this is a question for you, Mr. Wilson, or
Mr. Gould. I'm very concerned about the diversion of $1 billion
from our passenger fee to pay the national debt. As a
passenger, I pay that fee, and I expect that fee to go to what
I am paying it for, which is, enhance my security, enhance my
passenger experience.
I've also calculated that by the year 2049, I'm going to be
95 years old. Maybe they'll have a, you know, get-young pill by
then and I'll be OK, but, you know, 95 years old. Yes, OK, I'm
almost 70, got it. But still, it's 25 years from now, OK? So we
need to accelerate that.
By the way, do you think that by 2049 you'll have different
technology?
Mr. Wilson. Yes, sir. Based on what our experience is, we
will have different technology.
Mr. Gimenez. Yes, I would think so. So I think what we need
to do, and I think I've asked you, you all, is to what kind of
increase in the passenger fee do we need in order to stay
abreast of technology and in order to have an orderly
transition from one technology to another, a passenger fee that
will keep the industry occupied, the industry that you need, to
keep the production lines going and also to foster innovation?
So, if you could do that, I would appreciate it.
But also when you do that and when you come up with a fee,
you tell me how you're going to spend it, what your revenues
are going to be and also exactly how, line by line, that is
going to be spent. Because I understand bureaucracies, I used
to be a bureaucrat myself. All right? I know you're going to
pad it, OK? So I want to make sure you don't pad it.
So I'm going to see what you guys are going to say. OK, I'm
going to use this for the technology, this is for personnel,
this is for R&D, et cetera, et cetera, so that if we do--and I
sincerely think that we need to, because security is the
priority of--security is what--we have to make sure that our,
you know, traveling public is safe, but also safe, they're not
profiled, that you take into account, you know, differences in
people, but that it's also a better customer experience.
As we get newer and newer technologies, it's a better
customer experience, it's a safer experience, but it's also
better. We should be at the pinnacle of this around the world.
We are the United States of America. We also need to make sure
that the companies that provide this for us are also companies
that can compete with other companies around the world that may
be subsidized by adversarial powers.
So, I see that my time is up. Oh, my God. All right.
So I now recognize the Member--so I yield and I now
recognize the Ranking Member, the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Thanedar, for his 5 minutes and maybe 20 seconds of
questioning.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez. You're always
fair. I appreciate that.
Thank you all for your testimony. This is so important. I
remain concerned about disproportionately impact on certain
passengers. Help me understand how some of the technology
continues to disproportionately impact certain groups or
certain passengers and what can be done to improve that.
Mr. Gould. Sir, we take that very, very seriously at TSA,
and I appreciate the opportunity to address it. It is true that
certain demographics of people, certain people with different
kinds of clothing receive secondary screening more frequently
than others.
To answer, Mr. Chairman, your question, it is not profiling
at all. It's a technology issue. We've made a lot of progress
in this area recently. We rolled out a low false alarm
algorithm last year, which not only provides better security
detection on a--for on-person screening, but it lowers the
false alarm rate by 50 percent. That means fewer pat-downs.
That means fewer people are getting touched.
It helps us with keeping passengers happy as they go
through the screening experience and it helps us with keeping
things moving at the checkpoint. But that's only our first step
in that area.
We recently demonstrated at the Department of Science and
Homeland--Science and Technology's Transportation Security Lab
in New Jersey a high-definition, or HD, advanced imaging
technology machine. This HD AIT will further improve detection,
will allow us to rule out nuisance false alarms associated with
clothing and body styles and, you know, we'll be prototyping
that in the field next year.
So, we really do focus on best-of-breed equipment, best-of-
breed algorithms. As the technology gets better, our screening
capability will get better, and there will be reduced impact on
certain, you know, populations of passengers.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
Mr. Gould and Mr. Wilson, it seems that 4 years after the
issuance of this report, GAO's report, there are still
improvements that need to be made. What is TSA's time frame for
updating its policy on conducting periodic reviews of screening
technology performance to better ensure the technologies
continue to meet detection requirements or time?
Also, what additional resources, if any, will TSA need to
conduct these reviews for every passenger and baggage screening
technology?
Mr. Wilson. Thank you for the question, sir. As you pointed
out, the GAO report did identify the importance of those
periodic reviews, post-implementation reviews.
I'm pleased to say that, based on the wonderful feedback
that we did get from GAO, we have made those policy changes.
The new policy is in place today for post-implementation
reviews as well as periodic reviews. In fact, we have completed
two post-implementation reviews on specific technologies to
date, and we've also started conducting our periodic reviews.
Post-implementation reviews are a standard practice in
acquisition programs. Those are conducted typically 6--on
average, about 12 months after the initial deployment of
technology.
The periodic reviews, per our policy, is something that we
will be and have initiated that will occur on an annual basis.
The scope of those periodic reviews will differ technology by
technology, but we are very pleased to say that we have taken
the feedback and done something with it, changed the policy and
implemented that, and now it is a part of our standard program
practice.
With regards to the additional resources needed, the
continued--I would say the continued support of investment in
security technology is what we really need to continue down the
path to be able to consistently do post-implementation reviews
and periodic reviews.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. Do any of the witnesses know what
is an average time it takes for a passenger to go through the
screening process, and how has that changed over time? Because
our ultimate goal is not only to keep the passengers safe, but
also expedite the screening so we minimize, you know,
discomfort to the passenger.
Mr. Gould. Sir, passenger volume goes up by about 4 percent
a year. We screen around 2\1/2\ million passengers a day.
I can't give you the average time, you know, across the
whole enterprise for how long it takes a passenger to get
through screening, but I will tell you this: We look at every
opportunity we can to shorten our screening processes. If we
save a second here and a second there, if we cut down on pat-
downs, if we cut down on body searches, we save time.
Mr. Thanedar. My time is up so I give it back to you.
Mr. Gimenez. Twenty seconds over, very good. OK.
I now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman, for your leadership on
many issues, including this one.
I'd like to use my 5 minutes today to talk about $1 billion
bait-and-switch scam that is the passenger security fee, also
known as the September 11 security fee.
For my constituents and for Americans listening from home,
this is a scam. In the name of aviation security and post-9/11
airport security, you get charged an extra $11.20 every time
you fly round trip. Despite the name of that collection
program, many of the funds, $1 billion, have nothing to do with
aviation security. In fact, it's diverted to the Treasury for
things having nothing to do with keeping our skies safe. It's a
bait-and-switch scam perpetrated by our Federal Government, and
hardworking and unknowing Americans are being charged every day
and they're the victims.
To use September 11 to perpetrate this scam is especially
offensive to Americans and New Yorkers especially. Our skies
should be safe, and the fees collected to do so should go to
that purpose and 9/11 should not be used to that end.
Chairman, I appreciate you calling this meeting and drawing
attention to this important issue and for our witnesses to help
Congress help fix this issue and to right this wrong.
Mr. Gould, thanks for being here, sir. I understand you
served several decades in the Coast Guard. I appreciate your
service to our--continued service to our country.
I just want to confirm some of the things that I think I
know. The passenger security fee is revenue that stems from
passengers purchasing tickets originating in the United States.
Is that correct, sir?
Mr. Gould. Yes, sir.
Mr. LaLota. So it's not taxpayer dollars?
Mr. Gould. No, sir.
Mr. LaLota. The passenger security fee is roughly $5.60 per
one way and $11.20 per round trip?
Mr. Gould. Yes, sir.
Mr. LaLota. How much revenue, approximately, if you know
it, was collected from the passenger security fee or also the
9/11 security fee last year?
Mr. Gould. I believe it's well over $1 billion a year. I
think it's 1.6.
Mr. LaLota. When was the passenger security fee first
implemented?
Mr. Gould. Mario?
Mr. Wilson. I believe it went in place, I want to say,
2004. I'd have to confirm. It's been many years, sir. It's been
in place for many years. Most recently, I think it was 2013,
that was when the fee was increased from $2.50 one way to $5.60
one way.
Mr. LaLota. To the best that you understand it, anybody on
the panel, what is the proffered reason for collecting the fee?
Mr. Gould. To fund TSA security activities and technology.
Mr. LaLota. Does it do that?
Mr. Wilson. Only a portion of it does at this point in
time, unfortunately. I think it's as high as Mr. Gould pointed
out, $1.5 billion. It's something that the President has
identified and we've also identified would be ideal if it was
not diverted, as it is today. But out of $4.5 billion on an
annual basis of those fees that are collected, only roughly 29
percent to 30 percent, I think it is, is actually provided to
offset TSA's security activities.
Mr. LaLota. Would you agree that you need more resources,
more dollars to actually perform your key function of keeping
our skies safe and moving our passengers efficiently through
airports?
Mr. Wilson. Yes, sir. I believe that all of the $4.5
billion--and it's continuing to grow--should be dedicated to
its original purpose, which was security of the aviation.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. I just want to reiterate some of the
facts as we've identified them. The passenger security fee is
not taxpayer dollars. The passenger security fee stems from
revenue raised from passengers paying into those funds,
specifically for the proffered reason of security.
I want to make it clear, as a fiscal conservative, we must
do more to address our Nation's debt. We're $33 trillion in
debt and Congress and both parties need to figure out a plan
for that, but this is not the right way to do it.
To tell our constituents, to tell air travelers they're
being charged an amount that helps protect their safety and
helps them move through the airport in a more efficient manner,
because all of my constituents don't want to wait in long
lines. You do--I'm in your airports all the time. You're doing
a good job moving me through, and I appreciate that.
But the stated purpose does not actually fit where the
dollars are going. I have legislation that maybe in a future
round I may talk a little bit more about, but I appreciate you,
the witnesses, being here today and the Chairman for leading
and shining a spotlight on this issue.
Americans need to know that its Federal Government will not
perpetrate this scam on them, and we need to put a stop to
this.
I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gimenez. The gentleman from New York yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Garcia.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here as
well. TSA, of course, is absolutely critical to securing our
air travel ports, highways, railroads, transit, and pipelines.
I'm grateful to the more than 60,000 TSA workers that I know
work really, really hard, especially grateful for all the TSA
folks that I see out of my home airports, out of Long Beach,
the Long Beach Airport as well as LAX, which are the two that I
use almost exclusively back home.
We know that our workers should be treated fairly. They
should be paid appropriately, like the professionals they are,
and have all the same rights as other Federal workers, which I
know has been a challenge in the past.
I am proud that President Biden and the Democratic Congress
are taking steps to support TSA workers, especially granting
them full collective bargaining rights, which is really
important.
Now more than 2 million people pass through a TSA
checkpoint at more than 430 airports across our Nation each day
with, of course, air traffic improving up to prepandemic
levels. I'm glad that TSA officers are doing what's necessary,
they are really tough jobs to keep us safe. But I also know
that there's reforms that either have been implemented or are
on the way to make the experience even better.
I have actually--and I've said this to folks at TSA. I
think that there have been obvious improvements made in the
last few years, particularly through the screening process. But
I still think we have a little ways to go, but I do want to
recognize the improvements.
We know that no one enjoys waiting in lines and certainly
taking off their shoes or dumping out their water bottles or
getting a pat-down. We know that pat-downs are sometimes
necessary, but they're also intrusive. They slow down lines.
Delays cost us time and money, having real economic costs.
For some passengers, as has been noted, especially if you
have a disability, for instance, secondary screening and pat-
downs can be intrusive; for some, humiliating, and really
ruining their travel experience. But we also know that it's
necessary for security and that you're working toward the best
possible solutions.
To help that, I'm working on introducing the Better
Screening Act to improve the security checkpoint passenger
experience without reducing security effectiveness--it's
something that you will hear about soon--by encouraging
deployment of technology and other solutions.
Specifically, the bill would require TSA to develop a
strategy to reduce pat-downs without reducing security, with
consideration for those groups of passengers who receive pat-
downs at a disproportionately higher rate. We want TSA to think
really hard about how to speed up lines and reduce intrusive
and uncomfortable pat-downs, but not compromising security.
The bill would also require TSA to develop a strategy to
reduce the need for passengers to take items out of their bags
when going through security, which can make travel smoother and
more convenient.
Simply put, I think we all want screening to be as quick
and easy as possible while still keeping us safe and secure.
That makes common sense, I know to all of you, and certainly to
me.
Thankfully, with advances in screening technology,
algorithm procedures, equipment, we can vastly improve the
screening experience, and it's something that we're all very
interested in. The new technology, like advanced imaging
technology, algorithms for body--the algorithms for body scans
can lower false alarms by half. We know this. The new computed
tomography, or CT, carry-on bag scanners, all of these
technology implementations are making a difference and can
actually advance our security even more.
Mr. Gould, I understand that new advanced imaging
technology algorithms have been deployed to many airports
Nation-wide and that we're making progress on deploying the CT
machines as well.
How do these technologies affect the passenger experience
to you?
Mr. Gould. So I firmly believe that through technology, we
can screen people more effectively and give you a better
passenger experience. It does not have to be mutually
exclusive.
Mr. Garcia. TSA is also evaluating additional technology
that's coming on-line as well to reduce the need for pat-downs
and taking items out of your bag. Is that right?
Mr. Gould. Absolutely. Yes, sir. So our on-person
screening, I talked about high-definition AIT before. That will
cut down the need for pat-downs significantly.
Something else to discuss, sir, is right now, our
legislation requires us to use what we call an avatar, which is
almost like a stick figure that the officer looks at. It's the
same for every passenger, and it indicates where there might be
a threat item on the passenger.
If we could get permission to use a visual image of the
person as they're presented in their clothing, preserving all
privacy associated with that, we'd get a much more accurate
location of where that threat object might be, providing for a
much more targeted pat-down, which I think would also provide a
better passenger experience.
With respect to CT, the technology is fantastic. It
provides great material discrimination. It's going to
significantly reduce the amount of items that you have to
divest from your bag, which will speed things up, increase
passenger--improve the passenger experience, and again, enhance
security.
Mr. Garcia. Just really briefly, I know--Ms. Sherman, I
know GAO did a report on these discrimination concerns that I
mentioned earlier.
Just to conclude, we have a lot of concerns with certain
passengers, folks that wear religious headwear, which you
reference, have disabilities, folks that are transgender, that
obviously usually get additional screening. There's real
concerns there for discrimination from a lot of organizations.
Can you share, to conclude, your findings of your report
just very briefly and any other recommendations you might have?
Ms. Sherman. Yes. That it is the--the screening practices
we identified that contribute to certain passengers being more
frequently referred for additional screening. As a result, we
recommended that TSA, which it has not done in the past,
collect data on these referrals and evaluate that data to
determine whether or not those referrals for additional
screening and the practices that are in place, whether they
align with the agency's nondiscrimination policies.
Mr. Garcia. Great. Well, thank you all very much.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the time.
Mr. Gimenez. The gentleman from California yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Menendez.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you, Ranking
Member, for the opportunity to waive onto this hearing.
Thank you to the witnesses for appearing here today.
This hearing is of importance to my work both here on the
Homeland Security Committee and also through my position on the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee.
This summer, the Transportation and Infrastructure
Committee passed a Federal Aviation Administration
reauthorization bill, which included many key provisions that
will improve the flying experience for all Americans and invest
in the growing--sorry, invest in growing the aviation work
force.
I'm proud that pieces of my bill, the Airline Employees
Assault Prevention Act, were included in the House-passed FAA
reauthorization. These provisions would protect thousands of
additional airline employees from unruly passengers by
correcting a jurisdictional issue between TSA and the FAA.
Today, I'd like to take some time to discuss TSA's work to
protect airport employees and passengers. Over several years,
we've seen an increase in unruly passengers both on the plane
and in the airport before boarding.
Mr. Gould and Mr. Wilson, how does TSA ensure the safety of
both passengers and airport employees through technology,
particularly as it relates to unruly passengers? We'll start
with Mr. Gould.
Mr. Gould. Well, sir, at our checkpoint, you know, we
screen passengers and aviation workers and also staff, you
know, as well for any kind of prohibited items. You know, if
there's any sort of behavior at the checkpoint that would
indicate that there's some sort of a security risk, we
immediately identify that to local law enforcement and local
law enforcement will address the issue for us.
You know, from a technology standpoint, you can't really
tell necessarily who's going to be unruly when they get in the
aircraft. There's a lot of contributing factors that
associate--that associate--that contribute to it, and it's
difficult to identify that through the screening process. What
we do, if there's any sort of indication that a passenger is
going to be unruly on the plane and they manifest that at the
checkpoint, we hand that over to local law enforcement.
Mr. Menendez. Appreciate that. Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. I'll just add to what Mr. Gould said. We do
take very seriously our mission of security, which is why we do
screen all the people that he pointed out.
I will say that we do have the authority to deny boarding
in instances where an individual has presented themselves to be
crossing a line in an unruly manner. We also have a lot of
other authorities as well to include levying fines, referring
those individuals to the Department of Justice for prosecution
if they have violated any laws.
We also have the authority to revoke any of their trusted
traveler privileges, which can be Global Entry or TSA PreCheck.
So the authority, in essence, is there and we, again, do take
that very seriously to make sure that we prevent any unruly
passenger, if we can identify that person, from either entering
the stairway or boarding an aircraft.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Wilson. I want to expand on
your answer, because you mentioned the authorities you
currently possess.
Does TSA have the authorities needed to address unruly
passengers who could pose a danger to airport workers and
others?
Mr. Wilson. Yes, sir, we do. In the checkpoint area, we
have the authority to address those passengers in the
checkpoint area. As I stated, if, in fact, we need to prevent
them from boarding an aircraft, then we do have that authority
as well.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate that.
How can Congress help ensure that TSA has the technology
and resources it needs to respond to incidents on unruly
passengers, again, for both Mr. Gould and Mr. Wilson?
Mr. Wilson. I would say the TSA would appreciate the
continued investment in our technologies. As Mr. Gould pointed
out, technology is one of the many facets that we use for
identifying passengers and what maybe their intentions may be,
whether something that they're trying to bring in is a
prohibited item or potentially a weapon.
The investment in the technology that can help us identify
that is key, and also the continued investment, making sure
that all of the TSA employees are compensated fairly across the
board, because they are all a part of the entire solution when
it comes to screening.
Mr. Menendez. Absolutely.
Mr. Gould. Sir, I would just add one thing. We've talked a
lot today about the technologies that we're investing in today.
This space moves so quickly from an industry perspective.
Providing adequate resources to TSA to do research and
development. Let us work with S&T. Let us work with National
Labs. We can really advance the technology to the betterment of
the aviation ecosystem from a security perspective.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate that. I appreciate that's a
quickly evolving technology space and look forward to
partnering with you on that. Thank you.
I now look forward to working with TSA on this issue and
collaborating with my colleagues on this committee to protect
airport employees and passengers.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Gimenez. The gentleman from New Jersey yields back.
We have time for a second round, so I got a couple
questions.
The passenger fee for security, was that $1.5 billion or
$4.5 billion?
Mr. Wilson. Sir, it's my recollection that it's a total of
$4.5 billion. Of that $4.5 billion, roughly $250 million go
toward our Checked Baggage Program and $1.5 billion is what's
being deferred and sent for deficit reduction, as I understand
it.
Mr. Gimenez. One-point-five billion dollars, not $1
billion?
Mr. Wilson. I believe it's $1.5 billion. I can confirm that
to make sure that we have that correct, but I believe it's $1.5
billion that may be going to deficit reduction instead of
coming to aviation security.
Mr. Gimenez. What percentage of your budget for TSA--what
is the budget for TSA, total budget?
Mr. Wilson. Sir, I'd want to give you--make sure I give you
the correct number. It's in the billions, but I want to give
you the correct number for exactly what that is. I don't have
that at the top of my head, sir.
Mr. Gimenez. I'd like to know what that number is. Still,
diverting $1.5 billion for a purpose other than what the
passengers pay for, it is a classic bait-and-switch.
Frankly, you know, I served as mayor of Miami-Dade County.
I know, Mr. Garcia, you were a mayor too, right? If we did that
in our own municipalities or in our county, in my case the
county, I'd probably get sued and I probably would lose,
because the fees that you pay for as a citizen for a service
are supposed to go to that service. It's not supposed to be
diverted. About the only thing you can divert maybe would be
some kind of administrative cost that you can justify as
servicing that particular area that you're doing.
So if you had this $1.5 billion additional, then how fast
would that time line be accelerated?
Mr. Wilson. Sir, I appreciate that question. Right now, we
have contracts already in place for the new CT machines that
you mentioned earlier as well as the new CAT machines that we
talked about and some of the AIT enhancements that Mr. Gould
mentioned. Some of the contracts in place for CAT and CT today
are only being funded roughly about 30 percent of what we could
actually do with--right now, if we had the funding, we could
reduce the time frame for those deployments to roughly 5 years,
meaning in 5 years, we'd be done deploying the CT machines and
the CAT machines that currently is going to take us up to two
decades to deploy.
Again, that's with the contracts that we do have in place
today. We are able to deploy as many as 300, 350 of those
machines on an annual basis. Right now, that's not able to be
done.
Mr. Gimenez. I asked you for, you know, if we had to
increase the per-passenger fee in order to deploy this quicker
and also to keep the industry running so that as new
technologies come, we can go ahead and start replacing, you
know, this at a reasonable pace so that we're always there.
We're at the forefront of technology. Our systems are being
replaced on a periodic basis at all airports so that we stay on
top of that.
So I asked you to give me a new per-passenger, you know,
rate, and also kind-of skew it a little bit toward
international, and have international passengers maybe pay a
little bit more. But if you can do that, you know, I would
certainly appreciate it.
Probably have not a--first have a meeting and then maybe
have a hearing on it to see if that's something that we would
do. But it's certainly something that I'm interested in,
especially not diverting the money that we're paying for. This
could be a way for us to start thinking about user fees instead
of taxes so that the people who are actually using the service
are the ones paying for the service and not burden the
taxpayer.
I know that the taxpayer doesn't pay any of this
whatsoever, but I'm sure there's taxpayer money that goes into
your agency. So eventually, I also want to see the budget of
the agency.
Also, I'm interested in your TO, which I've asked for, you
know, when we had our meeting. So I want to see the TO, how
you're organized, et cetera. Maybe I'll pass that--I will pass
that on to the Members of the subcommittee. Some of us have
some executive experience and we will look at it and then, you
know, make recommendations or not. Maybe you guys are just
great. I don't know. I've got to see it first.
So I will now yield to the gentleman from California, Mr.
Garcia, for a second round.
Mr. Garcia. We'll yield back. We don't have any additional
questions. Thank you. We'll yield back. We don't have any
additional questions.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. Thank you very much.
I yield to the gentleman from New York, Mr. LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. Thanks, Chairman.
We've talked a lot in this hearing about the bait-and-
switch passenger security fee. It's not enough that a Member of
this committee merely points out a problem. I think it's
appropriate that we come to the table with solutions.
With respect to the bait-and-switch passenger security fee,
I actually have legislation that I've introduced that would
ensure that at least the second $250 million that is raised
through the fee goes toward technology and checkpoint security.
That is H.R. 3061, the Aviation Security Checkpoint Technology
Fund Act of 2023.
Just a few months ago when the TSA administrator himself
was before us, I asked him point-blank if he supported this
concept in this legislation that would start to correct the
problem that we've identified. Without any hesitation, he said
that this legislation would significantly improve TSA's ability
to secure our airports and keep our passengers safe.
I am hopeful, Chairman, that this committee will be able to
take concrete steps to right this wrong, to make a commitment
to Americans to keep everybody safe and to ensure agencies like
TSA have the resources they need to do their jobs effectively.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Gimenez. The gentleman from New York yields back.
I wholeheartedly agree with you, Mr. LaLota.
All right. So I thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the Members for their questions. The Members of
the subcommittee may have some additional questions for the
witnesses, and we would ask the witnesses to respond to these
in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be held open for 10 days.
Without objection, this subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:01 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Question From Honorable C.A. Dutch Ruppersberger for the Transportation
Security Administration
Question. Mr. Gould, thank you for your testimony today. I think we
agree that ending fee diversions would help TSA fulfill its mission of
securing airports and protecting air travelers. My question is to what
extent. If legislation guaranteed that at least $250 million collected
by the 9/11 Security Fee must remain with TSA and TSA only, would this
enable TSA to consistently meet weapons and explosives detection
standards?
Answer. Current statute requires the first $250 million collected
in Passenger Fees remain with TSA and be deposited into the Aviation
Security Capital Fund (ASCF) in support of checked baggage that enable
risk reduction, security effectiveness, and screening efficiency. This
level of funding has remained constant since the establishment of the
ASCF in 2004. With the funding that TSA receives from the ASCF, which
TSA can only apply to checked baggage related projects, TSA will be
unable to purchase and deploy all of the required checkpoint CT and
Credential Authentication Technology (CAT) systems until 2042 and 2049,
respectively.
Questions From Honorable Robert Garcia for the Transportation Security
Administration
Question 1. Now as we know, in 2006, the United Kingdom thwarted a
terrorist plot to detonate bombs on flights with liquid explosives that
could be used to cause an explosion, and these liquids were based on
what couldn't be screened at the time.
Ever since, we've had the 3-1-1 liquids rule for carryon bags where
you can only have small travel-sized liquids below 3.4 oz that have to
fit in a 1-quart bag.
This is a huge inconvenience to travelers who either have to bring
their liquids in a checked bag, be stuck with travel-size liquids, and
for those of us who forget dumping out shampoos, drinks, and makeup
into the trash.
With the new CT scanners, the TSA will now allow you to leave your
liquids inside your carry-on suitcase for scanning but are still
subject to the 3-1-1 size limit. I understand that other countries--
including the United Kingdom and Spain--which have deployed these new
CT scanners are moving soon to lift their liquid size requirements and
be allowed to take up to 2 liters--almost half a gallon--of liquids to
be scanned safely in their carry-on bags.
Mr. Gould, is the TSA looking at the new European security
guidance, and considering similar adjustments to the 3-1-1 rule?
Answer. TSA is aware of the shift in liquids policy by some
international partners. While TSA is not in a position to make any
changes at this time, increased deployment of CTs to the checkpoints
could enable screening larger amounts of liquids using advanced
algorithms and next-generation alarm resolution technology. Once these
advanced technologies are widely deployed, TSA will be better
positioned to evaluate potential policy changes.
Question 2. Do CT scanners give us the ability to continue the same
level of safety while bringing in a water bottle or a bottle of shampoo
in your bag?
Answer. CT technology provides superior 3D imaging capabilities,
which allows TSA to detect liquids and eliminate the need to remove
electronics and liquids, aerosols, and gels from carry-on bags in
checkpoint lanes that have CT systems. Although CT scanners provide TSA
the ability to screen water or shampoo in a bag, they need to be more
widely deployed and TSA needs better alarm resolution technology prior
to evaluating policy changes to ensure consistent passenger experience.
Question From Honorable C.A. Dutch Ruppersberger for Tina Won Sherman
Question. Ms. Sherman, thank you, as well, for your time and
willingness to testify. GAO's reporting on TSA technology and process
effectiveness is of great use to Congress. Thank you for your
contributions to that work. Do you believe that, as technology evolves,
and TSA continues to implement nuanced processes involving facial
recognition and potentially artificial intelligence, that it would
behoove TSA to have access to expanded financial resources dedicated to
modernizing and maintaining checkpoint security technology?
Answer. We believe TSA is best positioned to determine the
resources needed to modernize and maintain its checkpoint security
technologies, including fully implementing the recommendations we
discussed in our October 2023 testimony statement.\1\ We recommended
that TSA: (1) Develop and implement a process to ensure technologies
continue to meet detection requirements after deployment and (2)
collect data on passenger referrals for additional screening and assess
the extent to which its screening practices comply with agency non-
discrimination policies to identify any needed actions to improve
compliance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, Aviation Security: TSA Could Better Ensure Detection and
Assess the Potential for Discrimination in Its Screening Technologies,
GAO-24-107094 (Washington, DC: Oct. 19, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We stated in our October 2023 statement that TSA has taken steps to
implement these recommendations. With respect to our recommendation
that TSA better ensure technologies meet detection requirements, we
continue to have concerns regarding TSA's periodic reviews of deployed
screening technologies. According to TSA officials, the agency remains
committed to implementing its periodic review process of screening
technologies. However, officials stated that because funding of
periodic reviews for existing technologies were not included in the
agency's estimated program life-cycle costs, such reviews will be
planned and executed as limited resources, mission priorities, risk,
and acquisition decisions dictate. In addition, TSA has stated that
enduring resource constraints means the agency will likely require
additional time to implement a periodic review process for all types of
screening technologies currently deployed to commercial airports. With
respect to our recommendation for TSA to assess compliance with its
non-discrimination policies, TSA officials stated that the agency plans
to use the analysis it conducts on referrals for additional screening
to inform the development of advance imaging technology algorithms,
which may require additional resources.
With regard to new technologies, in our April 2023 annual
assessment of DHS's major acquisition programs, we reported that in
June 2022, TSA revised its baseline of the Credential Authentication
Technology program to add new capabilities, including facial-matching
biometrics, to address operational gaps and improve performance.\2\ We
reported that TSA plans to deploy 3,585 units by September 2049 with an
approved cost baseline of about $1.3 billion.\3\ We also reported that
the agency plans to deploy 2,263 Checkpoint Property Screening Systems
with an approved cost baseline of about $1.4 billion. As of April 2023,
the overall program schedule for deploying these systems was not yet
determined. We will provide an update on these TSA programs as part of
our next annual assessment in spring 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ GAO, DHS Annual Assessment: Major Acquisition Programs Are
Generally Meeting Goals, but Cybersecurity Policy Needs Clarification,
GAO-23-106701 (Washington, DC: Apr. 20, 2023).
\3\ Costs include: (1) Procurement, construction, and improvements,
and (2) operations and support.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[all]
