- COMBATING THE GREY ZONE: EXAMINING CHINESE THREATS TO THE MARITIME DOMAIN

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COMBATING THE GREY ZONE: EXAMINING
CHINESE THREATS TO THE MARITIME DOMAIN

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 4, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-69

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
58-918 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Eric Swalwell, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           J. Luis Correa, California
August Pfluger, Texas                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Nick LaLota, New York                Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Robert Garcia, California
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida, Chairman
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Shri Thanedar, Michigan, Ranking
Nick LaLota, New York                    Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Garcia, California
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Vacancy, Subcommittee Staff Director
Alex Marston, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Shri Thanedar, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witnesses

Captain Brent D. Sadler, USN (Ret.), Senior Research Fellow,
Naval Warfare and Advanced Technology, Allison Center for
National Security, The Heritage Foundation:
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
Captain Eric M. Cooper, USCG (Ret.), Senior Policy Researcher,
RAND Corporation:
Oral Statement.................................................    18
Prepared Statement.............................................    20
Mr. Christopher H. Sharman, Director, China Maritime Studies
Institute, United States Naval War College:
Oral Statement.................................................    29
Prepared Statement.............................................    30

Appendix

Statement of Isaac B. Kardon, Senior Fellow, Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace........................................    47

COMBATING THE GREY ZONE: EXAMINING CHINESE THREATS TO THE MARITIME
DOMAIN

----------

Tuesday, June 4, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Transportation and
Maritime Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:04 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Carlos A. Gimenez
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Gimenez, Higgins, Thanedar, and
Garcia.
Mr. Gimenez. The Homeland Security Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair may declare the subcommittee
in recess at any point.
Today's hearing will examine Chinese gray zone coercion in
the maritime domain and ways the Department of Homeland
Security can leverage its component to combat these threats.
Without objection, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Pfluger,
and the gentleman from New York, Mr. Suozzi, are permitted to
sit with the subcommittee and ask questions of the witnesses.
So ordered.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today our subcommittee will examine the Chinese Communist
Party, CCP, use of gray zone tactics in the maritime domain and
ways in which the U.S. Government, and particularly the
Department of Homeland Security, must adapt to counter this
threat. The Department of Homeland Security was stood up in the
aftermath of 9/11 to be a crosscutting, information-sharing
agency to safeguard the homeland from terrorism. Now, more than
20 years later, the threat landscape has significantly evolved
and so, too, must the Department.
Today we are facing a complex adversary who actively
employs the resources of the world's second-largest economy to
reshape the world order and undermine U.S. interests and
security. The CCP seeks to impose their totalitarian vision on
the high seas that disregards international law and undermines
national sovereignty. Their efforts to implement this vision in
the maritime domain often goes unchallenged.
The CCP has made unlawful claims to expand China's
territorial waters leveraging gray zones tactics, such as
sending Chinese maritime militias, fishing vessels, and Coast
Guard ships into contested waters to bully and coerce other
nations. No country is more familiar with this tactic than the
Philippines, where resupply missions to the Second Thomas Shoal
are met with water cannons and ramming from CCP Coast Guard
ships.
Earlier this year, several American international
journalists witnessed the CCP's hostile tactics up close during
an incident at sea that resulted in the injuries to Philippine
Coast Guard personnel and damage to Philippine vessels. The CCP
has exploited the U.S. and other nations' exclusive economic
zones, or EEZs, through illegal, unreported, and unregulated
fishing that is threatening local economies and populations who
depend on the fish as a food source. CCP's distance water
fishing fleet pillage fish stocks around the world, including
U.S. territories like American Samoa.
The maritime domain is complex, and the U.S. possesses the
second-largest exclusive economic zone in the world. The U.S.
EEZ contains and facilitates enormous wealth from offshore
energy reserves, such as oil and natural gas, to mineral
deposits and fish stocks. The Department of Homeland Security
must reposition itself to combat this threat and allocate
resources to the components best positioned to protect U.S.
sovereignty.
Throughout the 118th Congress, this subcommittee has
examined a multitude of DHS mission sets and operational
capabilities. Last month, we examined the Department's and the
Coast Guard's efforts to procure new cutters and how some of
their key programs have fallen dangerously behind.
In February, we examined port security, specifically the
threat posed by Chinese manufactured cranes, a vulnerability
the Coast Guard is working to mitigate. Additionally, our
committee has examined threats in the Arctic and the Indo-
Pacific. Each of these hearings feature a common thread: the
CCP waging a gray zone conflict against U.S. maritime domain.
The CCP poses the most significant challenge to the United
States, our way of life, and the freedoms that we enjoy. We
must work together in Congress to protect the homeland and
ensure that the agencies we oversee are prepared and equipped
to defeat the many threats that we face.
I am grateful that we are joined by a distinguished panel
of witnesses who are prepared to provide critical insights to
the subcommittee. Mr. Sadler, Mr. Cooper, and Mr. Sharman,
thank you for appearing before us this afternoon on this
important topic, and I look forward to your testimony.
[The statement of Chairman Gimenez follows:]
Statement of Chairman Carlos A. Gimenez
Today our subcommittee will examine the Chinese Communist Party's
(CCP) use of ``grey zone'' tactics in the maritime domain and ways in
which the U.S. Government, and particularly the Department of Homeland
Security, must adapt to counter this threat.
The Department of Homeland Security was stood up in the aftermath
of 9/11 to be a cross-cutting, information-sharing agency to safeguard
the homeland from terrorism.
Now more than 20 years later, the threat landscape has
significantly evolved, and so too must the Department.
Today, we are facing a complex adversary who actively employs the
resources of the world's second-largest economy to reshape the world
order and undermine U.S. interests and security.
The CCP seeks to impose their totalitarian vision on the high seas
that disregards international law and undermines national sovereignty.
Their efforts to implement this vision in the maritime domain often
goes unchallenged.
The CCP has made unlawful claims to expand China's territorial
waters, leveraging ``grey zone'' tactics such as sending Chinese
Maritime Militias, fishing vessels, and Coast Guard ships into
contested waters to bully and coerce other nations.
No country is more familiar with this tactic than the Philippines
where resupply missions to the Second Thomas Shoal are met with water
cannons and ramming from CCP Coast Guard ships.
Earlier this year, several American and international journalists
witnessed the CCP's hostile tactics up close during an incident at sea
that resulted in the injuries to Philippine Coast Guard personnel and
damage to Philippine vessels.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Feliz Solomon, How China's Aggressive Sea Tactics Look From the
Deck of an Opposing Ship, WSJ (2024), https://www.wsj.com/world/asia/
how-chinas-aggressive-sea-tactics-look-from-the-deck-of-an-opposing-
ship-a942f912 (last visited May 31, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The CCP has exploited the U.S. and other nations' Exclusive
Economic Zones or EEZs through illegal, unreported, and unregulated
fishing that is threatening local economies and populations who depend
on the fish as a food source.
The CCP's distance water fishing fleet pillages fish stocks around
the world--including in U.S. territories like American Samoa.
The maritime domain is complex, and the United States possesses the
second-largest exclusive economic zone in the world.
The U.S. EEZ contains and facilitates enormous wealth, from
offshore energy reserves such as oil and natural gas to mineral
deposits and fish stocks.
The Department of Homeland Security must reposition itself to
combat this threat and allocate resources to the components best
positioned to protect U.S. sovereignty.
Throughout the 118th Congress, this subcommittee has examined a
multitude of DHS mission sets and operational capabilities.
Last month, we examined the Department's and the Coast Guard's
efforts to procure new cutters and how some of their key programs have
fallen dangerously behind.
In February, we examined port security, specifically the threat
posed by Chinese-manufactured cranes--a vulnerability the Coast Guard
is working to mitigate.
Additionally, our committee has examined threats in the Arctic and
in the Indo-Pacific.
Each of these hearings feature a common thread: the CCP is waging a
``grey zone'' conflict against the U.S. maritime domain.
The CCP poses the most significant challenge to the United States,
our way of life and the freedoms that we enjoy.
We must work together in Congress to protect the homeland and
ensure that the agencies we oversee are prepared and equipped to defeat
the many threats we face.
I am grateful that we are joined by a distinguished panel of
witnesses who are prepared to provide critical insights to this
subcommittee.
Mr. Sadler, Mr. Cooper, and Mr. Sharman, thank you for appearing
before us this afternoon on this important topic.
I look forward to your testimony.

Mr. Gimenez. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Thanedar, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Thanedar. Good afternoon, and thank you, Chairman
Gimenez, for calling today's hearing.
Thank you to our witnesses for sharing their expertise with
us today.
The People's Republic of China has grown increasingly
aggressive within the maritime domain. The PRC has made many
illegitimate territorial claims and has directed its naval
forces to defend waters that are not China's waters to defend.
The PRC's actions have threatened the free flow of travel and
commerce throughout the Indo-Pacific, increasing tensions in an
irresponsible manner.
Most recently, the PRC issued rules allowing China's Coast
Guard to detain foreigners who cross into waters China
illegitimately claims as its own. These rules, if acted upon,
have the potential to significantly increase tension in the
region, which are already high.
In addition, many Chinese fishing vessels continue to
participate in illegal, unreported, and unregulated, or IUU,
fishing. Huge populations are reliant on the stocks of fish in
the Indo-Pacific region. IUU fishing threatens to damage the
ecosystem and deplete these stocks threatening the livelihood
of those populations.
Taken together, the PRC's actions in the maritime domain
undermine the rules-based order the global maritime community
relies on to maintain safety, security, and sovereignty at sea.
The United States and its partners face tremendous challenges
in responding to PRC's activities, especially in a way that
seeks to ease tensions rather than further inflame them.
China is a key U.S. trading partner, and according to the
United Nations, one-third of global shipping passes through the
South China Sea. The United States must be strategic in its
efforts to counter the PRC's aggression and not simply build
toward conflict. The U.S. Coast Guard is key to such strategic
efforts. The Coast Guard is uniquely able to help counter the
PRC's gray zone tactics in collaboration with international
allies and partners.
The Coast Guard's multifaceted missions allow the service
to partner with countries in the region on a range of
operations from search and rescue to disaster relief to
fisheries enforcement, all of which help to improve diplomacy.
Congress must ensure the Coast Guard has the necessary
resources to maintain a steady presence in the Indo-Pacific and
help counter PRC aggression. I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses how this committee can be helpful in advancing those
efforts.
Thank you again to all of our witnesses.
Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thanedar follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Shri Thanedar
June 4, 2024
The People's Republic of China has grown increasingly aggressive
within the maritime domain. The PRC has made many illegitimate
territorial claims and has directed its naval forces to defend waters
that are not China's waters to defend. The PRC's actions have
threatened the free flow of travel and commerce throughout the Indo-
Pacific, increasing tensions in an irresponsible manner.
Most recently, the PRC issued rules allowing China's Coast Guard to
detain foreigners who cross into waters China illegitimately claims as
its own. These rules, if acted upon, have the potential to
significantly increase tensions in the region--which are already high.
In addition, many Chinese fishing vessels continue to participate in
illegal, unreported, and unregulated, or ``I.U.U.'' fishing.
Huge populations are reliant on the stocks of fish in the Indo-
Pacific. I.U.U. fishing threatens to damage the ecosystem and deplete
those stocks, threatening the livelihood of those populations. Taken
together, the PRC's actions in the maritime domain undermine the rules-
based order the global maritime community relies on to maintain safety,
security, and sovereignty at sea.
The United States and its partners face tremendous challenges in
responding to the PRC's activities--especially in a way that seeks to
ease tensions rather than further inflame them. China is a key U.S.
trading partner, and according to the United Nations, one-third of
global shipping passes through the South China Sea. The United States
must be strategic in its efforts to counter the PRC's aggression and
not simply build toward conflict. The U.S. Coast Guard is key to such
strategic efforts.
The Coast Guard is uniquely able to help counter the PRC's ``grey
zone'' tactics, in collaboration with international allies and
partners. The Coast Guard's multi-faceted missions allow the service to
partner with countries in the region on a range of operations, from
search and rescue, to disaster relief, to fisheries enforcement, all of
which help to improve diplomacy.
Congress must ensure the Coast Guard has the necessary resources to
maintain a steady presence in the Indo-Pacific and help counter PRC
aggression. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses how this
committee can be helpful in advancing those efforts.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Ranking Member Thanedar.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
June 4, 2024
The U.S. Coast Guard and its partners are increasingly challenged
to secure the maritime domain and enforce an international rules-based
order within the Indo-Pacific region.
The region faces a variety of challenges, from rising sea levels as
a result of climate change, to massive amounts of trade over vast
expanses of sea, to aggressive territorial claims and fishing tactics
from malign state actors, including the People's Republic of China. The
PRC has used aggressive, ``grey zone'' tactics to assert territorial
claims, exploit fishing stocks, and restrict freedom of movement within
the South China Sea.
These ``grey zone'' tactics do not rise to the level of warfare,
but they defy international maritime law and agreements, posing direct
challenges to China's neighbors and the global maritime community--
including the United States.
Safe and secure maritime travel, trade, fishing, and sovereignty
depends upon the good-faith implementation and enforcement of
international laws, agreements, and customs. The PRC's activities
undermine such efforts, and countering them requires the cooperation
and collaboration of the international community to enforce a rules-
based order. The U.S. Coast Guard is well-positioned to lead such
efforts, in partnership with the State Department, the U.S. Navy, and
foreign allies and partners.
The Coast Guard's engagements with counterparts throughout the
Indo-Pacific are key to advancing U.S. interests in the region. The
Coast Guard engages in valuable exercises, training, and personnel
exchanges with partners in the region to bolster maritime law
enforcement, port security, search and rescue, disaster response
capabilities, and enforcement of illegal, unreported, and unregulated
fishing.
The Coast Guard has limited resources, however, and the vastness of
the Pacific makes it impossible for the service to deploy everywhere it
would like to. Congress must invest in the Coast Guard's cutter
programs and workforce to maximize its ability to deploy throughout the
Indo-Pacific.
I look forward to learning more about how the Coast Guard and its
partners can further advance efforts to counter the PRC's aggressive
tactics in a way that advances trade and freedom of movement, without
increasing the chance of traditional warfare.

Mr. Gimenez. Again, I am pleased to have a distinguished
panel of witnesses before us today on this critical topic. I
ask that our witnesses please rise and raise their right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Gimenez. Let the record reflect that the witnesses have
answered in the affirmative. Thank you, and please be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses:
Captain Brent Sadler, retired U.S. Navy captain, who currently
serves as a senior research fellow at the Heritage Foundation;
Captain Eric Cooper is a retired U.S. Coast Guard captain who
currently serves as a senior policy researcher at the RAND
Corporation; Mr. Christopher Sharman serves as director for
China Maritime Studies Institute at the U.S. Naval War College.
I thank each of our distinguished witnesses for being here
today.
I now recognize Captain Sadler for 5 minutes to summarize
his opening statements.

STATEMENT OF CAPTAIN BRENT D. SADLER, USN (RET.), SENIOR
RESEARCH FELLOW, NAVAL WARFARE AND ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY, ALLISON
CENTER FOR NATIONAL SECURITY, THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Sadler. Thank you, again, for the opportunity to be
with you today. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez and Ranking Member
Shri Thanedar, the chance for--to speak specifically to your
committee on a topic of very important national interest.
China poses several threats to our Nation's maritime
sovereignty, most notably in the Pacific. The most insidious
threats are termed gray zone because China's acts weaken the
United States while avoiding an effective response. Unchecked,
these acts weaken confidence in the United States and alienate
our Nation from allies. Should these gray zone acts escalate,
it further exposes a Coast Guard of limited wartime utility
expected to support a too-small Navy.
My comments this afternoon are born from 3 maritime threats
germane to our discussion today: No. 1, predatory Chinese
distant water fishing fleets; No. 2, Chinese fentanyl precursor
trade with narcotics cartels; and, No. 3, the unchecked Chinese
gray zone operations and their potential for escalation.
Weakness in responding to these threats are exposing
several vulnerabilities that invite future provocations that
include, No. 1, limited options to respond to Chinese maritime
gray zone threats or tactics. These include shouldering; that
is the pushing of one ship by another and, as mentioned
already, the well-known water cannoning of Philippine vessels
in the South China Sea.
Failing to control the gray zone better will see U.S.
maritime rights ceded to China or escalation unless more non-
lethal options are provided our cutter and warship captains.
Should conflict come, the Coast Guard would be expected to
support naval operations, but the Navy and Coast Guard have
devoted little time to training together. Moreover, today's
Coast Guard cutters are not designed for naval warfare nor
readily able to be up-armed to support, for example, escort
missions that would involve anti-submarine warfare.
Second, the lack of presence in what is today's New Great
Game for the south and central Pacific. In an arc stretching
over 1,400 miles from Wake Island to Johnston Atoll and south
1,900 miles to American Samoa are 6 U.S. exclusive economic
zones rich in fish and untapped natural resources. Too few
cutters with inadequate range for Pacific operations are
providing a vacuum for Chinese distant water fishing fleets as
well as nefarious influence campaigns.
The movement of medium-endurance cutter Harriet Lane in
January to Hawaii is good, but it is not enough. Recent poor
recruiting and cratering retention is seeing too many cutters
being idled, like medium-endurance cutter Dependable sidelined
in March, and more likely to follow.
Third, limited maritime counternarcotics capacity is
allowing Chinese criminal elements in league with narcotics
cartels a vehicle to harm Americans. Consider that in 2022 the
Coast Guard removed over 212,000 pounds of cocaine, 54,000
pounds of marijuana, worth a wholesale value of $2.9 billion--a
lot for sure, but for the cartels and increasingly Chinese
criminal syndicates amounts little more than an accounting
error in a trade that is worth--estimated to be worth well over
$652 billion.
Securing Americans from the scourge of illegal drugs will
mean putting the cartels out of business by more fully
utilizing the proven successes of organizations such as Joint
Interagency Task Force South and leveraging--better leveraging
their partners. This could begin with reactivating Navy's 2
Expeditionary Transfer Dock ships with more than 10 years of
life left.
No. 4, and last, when a port is closed due to a natural
disaster, or as we saw in Baltimore this March, an allision by
today's massive ships, there is too little capacity to reopen
these ports. In peacetime, this is inconvenient and
economically crippling at best and, during wartime,
unacceptable. More is needed to ensure prompt reopening of
strategically important ports in our Nation, such as increased
salvage capacity, heavier lift loading cranes, and firefighting
boats, to name a few.
In closing, our ports are our lifeblood for trade and vital
and sustaining wartime operations. In our Nation's expansive
and rich Pacific waters are billions of dollars of minerals and
fish stocks all vulnerable to poaching. Today on our streets
are narcotics enabled by cartels fed the chemicals to make
possible a fentanyl epidemic killing now over 70,000 Americans
yearly. A response to these threats is needed and starts at sea
with a stronger Coast Guard and an invigorated maritime sector
at home.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to the questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sadler follows:]
Prepared Statement of Brent D. Sadler
June 4, 2024

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Captain Sadler.
I now recognize Captain Cooper for 5 minutes to summarize
his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF CAPTAIN ERIC M. COOPER, USCG (RET.), SENIOR POLICY
RESEARCHER, RAND CORPORATION

Mr. Cooper. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you today. I am a senior policy researcher at
RAND, a nonprofit and nonpartisan organization.
Prior to joining RAND, I served in the Coast Guard for 30
years in multiple roles, to include the director for maritime
security for the National Security Council, commanding officer
of Maritime Security Response Team West, deputy director of
operations at Coast Guard Pacific Area, and aboard Coast Guard
cutters conducting U.N. Security Council sanction enforcement,
fisheries enforcement, security cooperation, and joint
operations with partner nations.
The opinions and recommendations in this testimony build on
my own research and experience in the Coast Guard and center
around a perspective editorial I wrote while at RAND. In this
testimony, I focus on developing the international partnership
of like-minded nations that can create a concerted effort to
establish rule of law in the Indo-Pacific in what has become an
ungoverned and sometimes misgoverned space.
The concept is built around the use of a consolidated force
of Coast Guards and law enforcement agencies to combat the use
of gray zone tactics by the Chinese. Not everyone may be
familiar with the term or tactics of gray zone activities, and
not everyone may agree on all aspects of it. So, to clarify,
when I use the term it is based around activities that occur in
an operational space where an entity is trying to challenge the
status quo, coerce other nations, or obfuscate legal
definitions by being provocative above what is considered
normal nation-state activities but below what is considered the
threshold for military response.
A typical example in the Indo-Pacific, as has been
mentioned, is how China is attempting to rewrite the law of the
sea convention through its Nine-Dash-Line enforcement. They use
the ambiguity of their people's armed forces maritime militia
to harass and coerce other vessels by ramming other fishing
vessels in these contests areas.
The Chinese Coast Guard has used the water cannons and
threats of force to expel other sailors from rightful fishing
grounds or territory. One of the reasons that this occurs, in
my opinion, is that it goes unchecked and unchallenged. Even
when other nations push back, China has more power both
economically and militarily to escalate the situation and use
the fog of the gray zone tactics to claim self-defense or use
misinformation to confuse the actual scenario.
I offer that one way to close the gray zone gap is to
reduce ambiguity by better defining the rule of law and
reinforcing the scene through a coalition of partners. Defining
the law is one step, but it only works if there's enforcement,
and to do that you need presence. The way that I propose doing
this is through the development of a combined maritime force
comprised of Coast Guards and law enforcement agencies of Indo-
Pacific nations.
The reason I focus on a combined maritime force is that
it's a known entity, and we've used joint and combined agencies
in the maritime domain extensively throughout time. Currently,
the combined maritime force that is based in Bahrain has 5 task
forces that focus on different aspects in the region. Nations
in the Indo-Pacific would likely be interested in joining this
kind of group if properly built. Primarily, it will provide an
opportunity to build partnerships, push back against the
hegemony of China, and focus on other key issues.
I offer as a start that there are 3 areas for the CMF to
focus on: Information and maritime domain awareness, training
and capacity building in illegal and unregulated, unreported
IUU fishing enforcement. Maritime domain awareness is critical
because, without this first step, it's going to be very
difficult to perform operational activities in such a vast
region. Leveraging the already-established Indo-Pacific
partnership for maritime domain awareness to work under the
coordination of the CMF would contribute to achieving this
goal.
The second step is the development of a task force that
focuses on cooperative and coordinated trading. Again, this is
something that is needed to help with the next steps of
building an operational task force since the Indo-Pacific is
massive and you want to empower and enable nations to do this
without U.S. presence.
Focusing the first operational task force on IUU fishing is
important, because it is a key concern not only for all of the
nations in the region but globally. Moreover, most nations in
the region will agree to this effort because it protects their
resources, it builds operational skills, it enhances
cooperative partnerships, it pushes back against China's
illegal fishing activity, and it's supported by international
law and agreement. It also addresses the issues of sovereignty,
which is what gray zone tactics are exploiting.
Finally, my recommendation is have the U.S. Coast Guard
lead this for several reasons: The U.S. Coast Guard is a
respected entity that already operates in the region; it is
less escalatory than the Navy; the Coast Guard authorities and
partnerships already exist; and the Coast Guard is already
doing training law enforcement in the region. It provides an
opportunity for the United States to lead without conflating
the Navy's role and current mission.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cooper follows:]
Prepared Statement of Eric M. Cooper \1\ \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The opinions and conclusions expressed in this testimony are
the author's alone and should not be interpreted as representing those
of RAND or any of the sponsors of its research.
\2\ RAND is a research organization that develops solutions to
public policy challenges to help make communities throughout the world
safer and more secure, healthier and more prosperous. RAND is
nonprofit, nonpartisan, and committed to the public interest. RAND's
mission is enabled through its core values of quality and objectivity
and its commitment to integrity and ethical behavior. RAND subjects its
research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance
process; avoids financial and other conflicts of interest through staff
training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and
pursues transparency through the open publication of research findings
and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published
research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. This
testimony is not a research publication, but witnesses affiliated with
RAND routinely draw on relevant research conducted in the organization.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
June 4, 2024
Good afternoon, and thank you for the honor of testifying today. I
am a senior policy researcher at RAND, a nonprofit and nonpartisan
research organization. Prior to joining RAND, I served in the U.S.
Coast Guard for 30 years in multiple roles, including as director for
maritime security for the National Security Council; commanding officer
of Maritime Security Response Team West, the Coast Guard's west coast
counterterrorism team; deputy director of operations at Coast Guard
Pacific Area; a crisis action planner in the Future Operations Division
at U.S. Northern Command; and aboard several Coast Guard cutters
conducting United Nations (UN) Security Council sanction enforcement,
fisheries enforcement, security cooperation, and joint operations with
partner countries. At RAND, I have been a contributing author on a
number of projects associated with U.S. Coast Guard operations,
strategy, policy, and acquisition programs, as well as projects
involving uncrewed systems and Indo-Pacific operations. The opinions
and recommendations in this testimony build on my own research and
experience in the Coast Guard.
My testimony today is focused on potential ways to improve
cooperation and effectiveness in the Indo-Pacific using a combined
maritime force that consists of coast guards and similar maritime law
enforcement agencies. This structure can be useful in improving unity
of effort and enforcing a rules-based order while simultaneously
countering Chinese hegemony and coercion against U.S. allies and
partners in the region. My comments apply to how gray zone tactics have
eroded rule of law, how a Combined Maritime Force (CMF) can achieve
U.S. objectives, and why the U.S. Coast Guard is the best-positioned
agency to lead this effort. I will discuss how a CMF of international
coast guards and maritime law enforcement agencies, under the
leadership of the U.S. Coast Guard, might institute a shared vision
focused on the enforcement of maritime law and international norms.
gray zone activities in the indo-pacific
The Indo-Pacific is a critical region of the world. More than one-
third of global shipping transits the South China Sea, it is the home
of more than half the world's population, and the region will likely
drive global growth in the next several decades.\3\ U.S. strategy in
the Indo-Pacific under the Biden, Trump, and Obama administrations has
clearly outlined a commitment to a free and open international order
upheld by partnerships and a shared vision.\4\ Despite this renewed
emphasis to defend democratic principles and protect the rules-based
paradigm, there is evidence that international norms continue to slowly
erode under China's ascending power.\5\ For example, although China is
a signatory to the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), it
has ignored decisions by the U.N. arbitral tribunal that do not match
China's preferred resolution of events.\6\ Furthermore, in violation of
UNCLOS, China passed legislation in 2021 that allows China's Coast
Guard to use lethal force against foreign military ships operating in
waters that China considers to be under its jurisdiction.\7\ Moreover,
China has empowered fishing vessels to operate as the People's Armed
Forces Maritime Militia (PAFMM) and harass and forcefully coerce other
vessels to comply with its wishes.\8\ Along with these activities,
China's enforcement efforts for its expansive 9-dash line, which claims
most of the South China Sea, are clear examples of gray zone tactics--
activities that are below armed conflict but above normal peacetime
behaviors, designed to change the status quo without the use of lethal
force.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ China Power Project, ``How Much Trade Transits the South China
Sea?'' webpage, Center for Strategic and International Studies, updated
January 25, 2021, https://chinapower.csis.org/much-trade-transits-
south-china-sea/; White House, ``Fact Sheet: In Asia, President Biden
and a Dozen Indo-Pacific Partners Launch the Indo-Pacific Economic
Framework for Prosperity,'' press release, May 23, 2022.
\4\ National Security Council, Executive Office of the President,
Indo-Pacific Strategy of the United States, White House, February 2022.
\5\ Lynn Kuok, How China's Actions in the South China Sea Undermine
the Rule of Law, Global China Project, Brookings Institution, November
2019.
\6\ Caitlin Campbell and Nargiza Salidjanova, ``South China Sea
Arbitration Ruling: What Happened and What's Next?'' issue brief, U.S.-
China Economic and Security Review Commission, July 12, 2016.
\7\ Japan Ministry of Defense, ``The Coast Guard Law of the
People's Republic of China,'' webpage, undated, https://www.mod.go.jp/
en/d_act/sec_env/ch_ocn/index.html.
\8\ Derek Grossman and Logan Ma, ``A Short History of China's
Fishing Militia and What It May Tell Us,'' RAND Blog, April 6, 2020,
https://www.rand.org/pubs/commentary/2020/04/a-short-history-of-chinas-
fishing-militia-and-what.html.
\9\ ``A gray zone is an operational space between peace and war,
involving coercive actions to change the status quo below a threshold
that, in most cases, would prompt a conventional military response,
often blurring the line between military and nonmilitary actions and
the attribution of events'' (Lyle J. Morris, Michael J. Mazarr, Jeffrey
W. Hornung, Stephanie Pezard, Anika Binnendijk, and Marta Kepe, Gaining
Competitive Advantage in the Gray Zone: Response Options for Coercive
Aggression Below the Threshold of Major War, RAND Corporation, RR-2942-
OSD, 2019, p. 8, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/
RR2942.html).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
China's stance is misaligned with international norms--
specifically, UNCLOS. In 2016, The Hague-based Permanent Court of
Arbitration unanimously declared that China's 9-dash line claim was
``contrary to the Convention and without lawful effect to the extent
that they exceed the geographic and substantive limits of China's
maritime entitlements'' under the Convention.\10\ Despite this ruling,
China ignored the court--alleging that it was not relevant--and has
continued to assert influence and defend its claim with the
multipronged maritime forces of the People's Liberation Army Navy,
China Coast Guard, and the PAFMM. Although China has officially claimed
that the PAFMM is independent of the State, the militia is a key
component of China's maritime strategy.\11\ It consists of a
conglomeration of fishing vessels staffed with crew members who are
armed, trained, and loyal to the government. The PAFMM uses
intimidation, harassment, and other unlawful actions--including
blocking and ramming other countries' vessels--to impose China's
illegal claims but with plausible deniability from the Chinese
government: ``In the view of some observers, the PAFMM--even more than
China's Navy or Coast Guard--is the leading component of China's
maritime forces for asserting its maritime claims, particularly in the
[South China Sea].'' Evidence shows that there continues to be an
increasing number of PAFMM vessels operating near disputed islands in
the South China Sea as a method to assert influence over other
nations.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Permanent Court of Arbitration, ``Arbitration Between the
Republic of the Philippines and the People's Republic of China,'' press
release, October 29, 2015, p. 3.
\11\ Micah McCartney, ``China's Maritime Militia: The `Gray Zone'
Force in the South China Sea,'' Newsweek, December 22, 2023, https://
www.newsweek.com/china-maritime-militia-gray-zone-tactics-1854766.
\12\ Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, ``The Ebb and Flow of
Beijing's South China Sea Militia,'' Center for Strategic and
International Studies, November 9, 2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Such actions by China Coast Guard and the PAFMM are not only
dangerous but are also in violation of global agreements, including
UNCLOS and the Convention on the International Regulations for
Preventing Collisions at Sea, which establishes the responsibilities of
maritime vessels and how they should safely act when operating near
other vessels. Recent examples of Chinese vessels ramming other ships
and using water cannons go against the international rules-based order
and specifically against the obligation outlined in UNCLOS to ensure
safety at sea. China's use of gray zone tactics to intimidate other
countries will continue unless checked by a unified and persuasive
international approach.
Although gray zone tactics are below the threshold of what would
constitute acts of war, they can and should be addressed through legal
avenues. UNCLOS stipulates that warships and government ships will be
immune from the jurisdiction of foreign countries while on the high
seas, but this immunity does not apply to the PAFMM, which consists of
vessels that are classified as commercial or private, including
registration by China as fishing vessels.\13\ When actions resulting in
collision and death occur in the territorial seas of another country,
Article 27 of UNCLOS stipulates that those actions fall under the
criminal jurisdiction of that country's laws ``if the consequences of
the crime extend to the coastal state; [or] if the crime is of a kind
to disturb the peace of the country or the good order of the
territorial sea.''\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Novena Clementine Manullang, Achmad Gusman Siswandi, and
Chloryne Trie Isana Dewi, ``The Status of Maritime Militia in the South
China Sea Under International Law Perspective,'' Jurnal Hukum Ius Quia
Iustum, Vol. 27, No. 1, January 2020.
\14\ United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, signed
December 10, 1982, entered into force November 16, 1994, Part II,
Section 3, Subsection B, Article 27(1).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Therefore, if PAFMM vessels are conducting criminal activities, as
defined in UNCLOS, while operating in waters already determined by the
Permanent Court of Arbitration to be territorial waters under a
country's (e.g., the Philippines) jurisdiction, PAFMM crew members are
subject to law enforcement action by that country's law enforcement
agency. A country's enforcement against these activities would likely
also be supported under the right of self-defense and customary
international law, which ``permits a state to take reasonable measures
to defend itself from aggressive threats to its political security or
territorial integrity.''\15\ Furthermore, the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation
provides another enforcement avenue against a vessel that commits
violence against a person or damages another vessel.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Robert C.F. Reuland, ``Interference with Non-National Ships on
the High Seas: Peacetime Exceptions to the Exclusivity Rule of Flag-
State Jurisdiction,'' Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law, Vol. 22,
No. 5, 1989, p. 1206.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As the United States strives for a free and open Indo-Pacific, the
foundations of international law need to be reinforced as the bedrock
of global relationships. In particular, sustained enforcement of
established maritime legal principles offer critical means for the
United States and its allies and partners to meet strategic objectives
in the Indo-Pacific, especially given China's frequent use of
nonmilitary actions to subvert international norms.\16\ The
establishment of a CMF that is focused on law enforcement and consists
of international coast guards and maritime law enforcement agencies
working together to address illegal activity is a potential solution to
the continued degradation of the rules-based order and would underpin a
free and open Indo-Pacific.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ China uses primarily nonmilitary and financial sources to
influence countries in the region. For a more in-depth discussion, see
Christopher Paul, James Dobbins, Scott W. Harold, Howard J. Shatz, Rand
Waltzman, and Lauren Skrabala, A Guide to Extreme Competition with
China, RAND Corporation, RR-A1378-1, 2021, https://www.rand.org/pubs/
research_reports/RRA1378-1.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
structure of a combined maritime force
CMFs are not a new concept. International maritime coalitions have
been in existence since the 19th century, when U.S., British, and
French forces worked to eradicate piracy off the coasts of Africa
following the 1856 Paris Declaration Respecting Maritime Law.\17\
Today, the U.S. Coast Guard and U.S. Navy routinely participate in
international maritime coalitions on critical issues, including
combating transnational criminal organizations under Joint Interagency
Task Force (JIATF) South and JIATF West. The United States also leads
the Bahrain-based CMF, which is made up of 38 member nations and exists
to uphold ``the International Rules Based Order . . . by countering
illicit non-state actors on the high seas and promoting security,
stability, and prosperity.''\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Caitlin M. Gale, ``Barbary's Slow Death: European Attempts to
Eradicate North African Piracy in the Early Nineteenth Century,''
Journal for Maritime Research, Vol. 18, No. 2, 2016.
\18\ Combined Maritime Forces, homepage, undated-b, https://
combinedmaritimeforces.com/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A significant advantage of the CMF concept is that the level of
involvement is voluntary and the participation by each country ``varies
depending on its ability to contribute assets and the availability of
those assets at any given time.''\19\ Some countries might be able to
provide only a single member to serve as a liaison officer, while
others might be able to conduct training or provide ships and aircraft
to support operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Combined Maritime Forces, ``About CMF,'' webpage, undated-a,
https://combinedmaritimeforces.com/about.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is currently no equivalent CMF operating in the Indo-Pacific,
although countries work together intermittently to address specific
issues. On-going law enforcement initiatives in the region include the
Oceania Maritime Security Initiative, the Southeast Asia Maritime Law
Enforcement Initiative, and the Southeast Asia Cooperation and Training
exercise, but each operates independently, without a common
architecture or unifying organization. These independent initiatives
and unilateral efforts are valuable, but such activities could be
improved by operating under the umbrella of a dedicated CMF construct
that aligns comprehensive objectives and incorporates more partners.
advantages of a law enforcement-led combined maritime force over a
military-led approach
International coalitions have repeatedly demonstrated the ability
to enhance multinational partnerships and develop synergies to tackle
global issues in the maritime commons. The Bahrain-based CMF has
demonstrated impressive efficacy and has basically eradicated piracy
off the Horn of Africa, enforced U.N. sanctions around the region,
stopped the flow of hundreds of thousands of pounds of narcotics, and,
in 2021 alone, seized more than 8,700 illegal weapon systems and
rocket-propelled grenades.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ NAVCENT Public Affairs, ``Record Seizures in 2021 After
NAVCENT and CMF Increase Patrols,'' U.S. Naval Forces Central Command,
U.S. 5th Fleet, January 18, 2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although the U.S. Navy has been successful in promoting U.S.
presence and developing partnerships in the Middle East through the CMF
based in Bahrain, the gray zone threats in the Indo-Pacific require a
different approach. The U.S. Navy is already fully engaged in the Indo-
Pacific by providing forward presence, theater ballistic missile
defense, and military-to-military cooperation. Adding the
responsibility of maritime law enforcement, training, and support
operations to the U.S. Navy's repertoire could divert its focus from
its other missions and would likely heighten tensions between China and
the United States, which is a key concern of regional countries. In
addition, the creation of a CMF under the purview of the 7th Fleet has
a high potential of receiving a negative response from China and could
compound tensions because of a perceived increase of militarization in
the region.
The situation in the Indo-Pacific today calls for the employment of
softer power that reduces the risk of armed conflict. An international
coalition of maritime law enforcement agencies would be poised to
demonstrate appropriate conduct by applying international standards in
the maritime domain. Moreover, the U.S. Coast Guard possesses
authorities and several unique capabilities that make it ideally suited
to support the U.S. contribution in a leadership role. The service
maintains tactical skill sets through its expert boarding parties and
training teams, conducts routine operational engagement with partners
in the region through various conventions and shiprider agreements, and
supports a strategic approach outlined in its own plans and in the
current administration's goals for the Indo-Pacific.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ National Security Council, 2022. Only one agency--the U.S.
Coast Guard--is specifically mentioned in the entire strategy document.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although several countries possess dedicated coast guards, many
have singular maritime services, which are more similar to the U.S.
Coast Guard than to the U.S. Navy. Maritime forces often have limited
regional reach and are focused more on sovereignty and coastal
protection than on global force projection. For example, India, Japan,
South Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, and Vietnam
maintain a coast guard (or a coast guard-like organization) that has
law enforcement authority. Some countries, such as Indonesia and
Thailand, have a coast guard but also provide law enforcement authority
to their navy, while others, such as Australia, Brunei, and Cambodia,
do not maintain a coast guard but provide law enforcement authority to
their navy or a similar organization. Thus, concentrating on maritime
law enforcement rather than on military competition makes sense. The
U.S. Coast Guard also brings a mix of other types of authority and
expertise that is important to Indo-Pacific partners, and the
organization can easily operate alongside foreign militaries, coast
guards, and maritime police, as evidenced in their robust cooperative
interdiction operations in the Western Hemisphere.
Several U.S. strategies already support the development of an
international maritime law enforcement coalition in the Indo-
Pacific.\22\ Moreover, the United States routinely conducts patrols in
Oceania with regional partners, including through its permanently-based
U.S. Coast Guard cutters in Guam. Eleven Pacific Island countries have
signed shiprider agreements with the United States to share resources
when conducting boardings to enforce laws and treaties.\23\ The U.S.
Coast Guard has established a strong regimen of tailored training
through its International Mobile Training Branch in support of the
Pacific Partnership Strategy.\24\ Additionally, Japan-based U.S. Coast
Guard Activities Far East provides routine maritime security assistance
across the Indo-Pacific and Oceania through the International Port
Security Program.\25\ In a show of trust and confidence in the U.S.
Coast Guard, both Palau and the Federated States of Micronesia recently
signed agreements that allow the United States to enforce maritime law
on behalf of those countries without having a representative
onboard.\26\ With the help of U.S. leadership, these types of
agreements could be expanded under a coalition of countries. Aligning
these bilateral efforts under a single multinational organization is a
sensible solution to challenges in the Indo-Pacific.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ National Security Council, 2022; U.S. Department of Defense,
The Department of Defense Indo-Pacific Strategy Report: Preparedness,
Partnerships, and Promoting a Networked Region, June 1, 2019; White
House, Pacific Partnership Strategy of the United States, September
2022.
\23\ These countries are the Cook Islands, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Samoa,
Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu (U.S. Mission China, ``Pacific Islands
Forum--U.S. Engagement in the Pacific Islands,'' U.S. Embassy and
Consulates in China, August 20, 2019, https://china.usembassy-
china.org.cn/pacific-islands-forum-u-s-engagement-in-the-pacific-
islands/).
\24\ U.S. Coast Guard Forces Micronesia, Sector Guam, ``U.S. Coast
Guard Forces Micronesia Sector/Guam's Fast Response Cutters Bolster
Pacific Partnership Strategy and Strengthen Pacific Island Country
Relations,'' press release, U.S. Coast Guard News, August 18, 2023.
\25\ U.S. Coast Guard--Pacific Area, ``International Port Security
Program,'' webpage, undated, https://www.pacificarea.uscg.mil/Our-
Organization/District-14/D14-Units/Activities-Far-East-FEACT/FEACT-
Maritime-Security/.
\26\ ``U.S. and Republic of Palau Sign Agreement to Strengthen Ties
with New Chapter in Maritime Security and Stewardship in the Pacific,''
press release, U.S. Coast Guard News, August 29, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the potential benefits of a combined maritime force of coast guards and
law enforcement agencies
The establishment of a regional CMF coalition would have 3 distinct
advantages: (1) It would create a cohesive structure for addressing
critical issues in the Indo-Pacific, (2) it would enhance partnerships
that focus on reinforcing a rules-based order, and (3) it would
counterbalance China's hegemonic approach.
The development of a CMF would build a much-needed structure to
consistently address critical issues in the Indo-Pacific. A cohesive
organization would allow a more-efficient exchange of information and a
more effective distribution of resources to address challenges. The
greatest current threat is illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU)
fishing, as evidenced by the fact that 76 countries signed the
Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter, and Eliminate
Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing, which prevents vessels
engaged in IUU fishing from using signatory ports to land their
catch.\27\ In the 1980's and 1990's, a coalition of 6 countries joined
together to enforce laws against illegal high seas driftnet fishing
under Operation North Pacific Guard. The U.S. Coast Guard reported that
``our collective efforts have been overwhelmingly successful in nearly
eliminating illegal high seas driftnet fishing in the North Pacific
Ocean.''\28\ The development of an international coalition of coast
guard and law enforcement agencies built by like-minded countries that
govern under a rules-based approach would also reinforce agreed-on
international norms in the Indo-Pacific.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter, and
Eliminate Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing, rev. ed.,
approved November 22, 2009, entered into force June 2016.
\28\ U.S. Coast Guard, Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing
Strategic Outlook, September 2020, p. 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The creation of a CMF would not be easy nor guaranteed to be
successful. There is always the challenge that countries would not want
to participate for fear of retaliation by China or that their limited
resources would strain other priorities. For example, in much of
Oceania, Pacific Island countries, such as the Federated States of
Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, Palau, Kiribati, Vanuatu, Nauru, and
the Solomon Islands, do not maintain a military or a coast guard (with
the exception of Fiji, Papua New Guinea, and Tonga, which have limited
capacity). Moreover, China has already criticized a cooperative
agreement between Taiwan and the U.S. Coast Guard, and further U.S.
international engagement could be perceived as an encroachment and a
threat to Chinese sovereignty and security.\29\ An expanded U.S.
presence could also increase the risk of miscommunication, accidents,
or unplanned escalation by competing maritime forces. Despite these
risks, investing in the region would demonstrate U.S. commitment and
increased presence, which would allow the United States to provide more
constructive operational support to partners. This would likely lead to
more-robust participation by the United States in decisions about
governance architecture rather than letting Beijing control the rules
through coercion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ ``China Denounces US-Taiwan Coast Guard Cooperation
Agreement,'' Associated Press, March 26, 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A benefit of a CMF structure is that countries are only required to
provide assets at the level that they can contribute, which opens the
door for more access to participation. For countries without a maritime
capability, this could include providing liaison officers, executing
shiprider agreements, or establishing logistics hubs for other
participating countries. Countries with more resources are already
conducting operations or activities in the region--albeit in an
uncoordinated and sometimes ad hoc manner--and this provides an
opportunity improve coordination among like-minded countries. For
example, the United Kingdom has permanently stationed 2 Royal Navy
ships in the Indo-Pacific to provide maritime security and combat
illegal fishing and has conducted joint patrols with U.S. Coast Guard
ships including signing a memorandum of agreement that allows U.S.
Coast Guard shipriders aboard the vessels.\30\ France has a vested
interest with territories in the region and has permanently stationed
Maritime Gendarmerie (French maritime law enforcement) patrol boats
there. Australia, Japan, South Korea, and the Philippines regularly
conduct operations with countries in the region. Additionally, 21
countries have signed on to the Singapore-based Regional Cooperation
Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery Against Ships in Asia
(ReCAAP) as a demonstration of ``government-to-government agreement to
promote and enhance cooperation'' of maritime law enforcement in the
region.\31\ More than 20 countries have participated in the Southeast
Asia Cooperation and Training Program, which focuses on multilateral
cooperation in support of maintaining rules and norms in the maritime
domain across the Indo-Pacific.\32\ Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, and Vietnam have participated in the Southeast Maritime
Law Enforcement Initiative alongside the U.S. Coast Guard and would
likely be contributing partners to increase coordination and training
to improve law enforcement capabilities. Organizing these disparate
activities under a single construct, such as a CMF, would greatly
enhance the coordination and unified understanding of maritime threats
and law enforcement responses in the region. Although it is not
anticipated that this approach will occur overnight or even in the next
several years, the absence of a coordinated international maritime law
enforcement approach will continue to cede influence and control to
China.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Royal Navy, ``Pacific Patrol Ships Begin Third Year Deployed
Broadening Their Mission,'' September 12, 2023, https://
www.royalnavy.mod.uk/news-and-latest-activity/news/2023/september/12/
20230912-pacific-patrol-ships-begin-third-year-deployed-broadening-
their-mission.
\31\ ReCAAP, ``About ReCAAP Information Sharing Centre,'' webpage,
undated, https://www.recaap.org/about_ReCAAP-ISC.
\32\ Rebecca Moore, ``20 Indo-Pacific Maritime Forces Commence 22d
SEACAT Exercise,'' U.S. Pacific Fleet, August 15, 2023, https://
www.cpf.navy.mil/Newsroom/News/Article/3493679/20-indo-pacific-
maritime-forces-commence-22nd-seacat-exercise/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The presence and influence of a multinational force will create a
unified front against China's hegemonic activities. As previously
noted, China has used gray zone tactics to advance its political and
strategic agendas. The PAFMM currently creates an asymmetric advantage
for China, but building capacity and coordination now and influencing
the rules-based order through a CMF would provide a bulwark against
this asymmetry: ``Introducing a robust Coast Guard [and law enforcement
force] would provide the U.S. with options for responding to Chinese
tactics while still operating below the threshold of military
conflict'' and would simultaneously establish a precedent that would
diminish China's illegal claims.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Blake Herzinger, ``Reorienting the Coast Guard: A Case for
Patrol Forces Indo-Pacific,'' War on the Rocks, November 5, 2019,
https://warontherocks.com/2019/11/reorienting-the-coast-guard-a-case-
for-patrol-forces-indo-pacific/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the foundation of a combined maritime force of coast guards and law
enforcement agencies
The CMF in Bahrain consists of 5 combined task forces (CTFs) that
are geographic or mission-driven.\34\ The creation of a CMF should
follow a similar structure of diverse CTFs, but focused on the most
pressing threats to the Indo-Pacific.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ The five task forces are combined task force (CTF) 150,
Maritime Security; CTF 151, Counter-Piracy; CTF 152, Gulf Maritime
Security; CTF 153, Red Sea Maritime Security; and CTF 154, Maritime
Security Training. CTF 154 was established in May 2023 and is based in
and focuses on the Middle East. See Combined Maritime Forces, undated-
b.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The road to success for building strong international partnerships
and an effective CMF includes establishing a solid foundation focused
on the issues that are important to the region and developing agreement
about how to address these challenges. Two key regional bodies in the
Indo-Pacific are the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). ASEAN lists its priority
maritime security areas of cooperation as follows:

``Shared Awareness and Exchange of Information and Best
Practices,

``Confidence Building Measures based on International and
Regional Legal Frameworks, Arrangements and Cooperation
including the 1982 UNCLOS, and

``Capacity Building and Enhancing Cooperation of Maritime
Law Enforcement Agencies in the Region.''\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ Association of Southeast Asian Nations, ``Priority Areas of
Cooperation,'' webpage, undated, https://asean.org/our-communities/
asean-political-security-community/peaceful-secure-and-stable-region/
maritime-security/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The APEC Ocean and Fisheries Working Group lists combating IUU
fishing as its top priority.\36\ Given the priorities of these regional
organizations, the logical foundation for a CMF would center on the
establishment of 3 dedicated CTFs focused on:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, ``Ocean and Fisheries,''
webpage, last page update September 2023, https://www.apec.org/groups/
som-steering-committee-on-economic-and-technical-cooperation/working-
groups/ocean-and-fisheries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

information and maritime domain awareness

training, exercises, and capacity building

countering IUU fishing.
Information and Maritime Domain Awareness
The development of comprehensive maritime domain awareness is
critical when establishing a law enforcement presence. Understanding
the type, location, and activities of maritime vessels is a critical
step before applying limited enforcement resources across a vast ocean.
The Indo-Pacific Partnership for Maritime Domain Awareness (IPMDA),
which is focused on ``maritime domain awareness and maritime security
in South Asia, Southeast Asia, and the Pacific Islands using advanced
commercial satellite data'' can be a starting point for the development
of this first task force.\37\ In addition to providing data to the 4
fusion centers in India, Singapore, the Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu,
IPMDA can be an opportunity to increase awareness by members that
commit to abiding by the foundational principles and participating in
the CMF. With additional intelligence provided by these international
partners, this task force could provide a better picture and
understanding of what is happening in the region to support operations
by deployed assets and regional law enforcement agencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ Joseph R. Biden, Jr., ``Combating Illegal, Unreported, and
Unregulated Fishing and Associated Labor Abuses,'' memorandum to
Cabinet-level Secretaries et al., White House, National Security
Memorandum 11, June 27, 2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Training, Exercises, and Capacity Building
The second task force would focus on building the capacity of
regional partners. Even when a country has the will, it might lack the
background, expertise, or resources to fully enforce laws within its
jurisdiction. A core tenet of maritime security is that all countries
are interested primarily in protecting their own resources and
territorial waters, which can add value to a joint regional approach.
To enable success, the CMF could establish a dedicated arm focused on
training and exercises to build capability, competency, and consistency
for the least capable countries. Structured training programs and
exercises are critical components of developing capabilities. A
systematic approach under a CMF would allow international partners to
participate in a persistent training and exercise regimen that is
coordinated, complementary, and concentrated on priority concerns.
Classroom training can be reinforced through on-the-job operational
training implemented through shiprider agreements on afloat resources
performing duties under an operational CTF.
Countering Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing
The third task force of the CMF and the first component consisting
of operational assets should focus on IUU-fishing enforcement and the
creation of sustainable fisheries. In 2020, according to statistics
from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 85
percent of the world's fishers and aquaculture workers are in Asia, and
the waters around the continent account for more than 60 percent of the
global catch.\38\ The top locations for illegal fishing were in the
western, central, and south Pacific.\39\ Dwindling fish stocks in the
Indo-Pacific are a global problem, and countries taking action
independently is not enough. Commercial fishing activity is not
expected to decrease, and fish stocks will continue to decline without
a coordinated methodology. The development of a CMF would create the
beginnings of a unified approach to address the IUU-fishing problem and
the depletion of fish stocks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, The
State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture: Toward Blue Transformation,
2022.
\39\ Derek Grossman, Chinese Strategy in the Freely Associated
States and American Territories in the Pacific: Implications for the
United States, RAND Corporation, CT-A2768-1, 2023, https://
www.rand.org/pubs/testimonies/CTA2768-1.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The establishment of a CMF would do more than just build a
coalition of countries to address IUU fishing. As highlighted in the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's strategy,
``addressing IUU fishing is not just about fish: it is a multi-faceted
problem that covers other core policy concerns, including human rights,
food security, and maritime security.''\40\ A CMF would create the
foundation for addressing the core components of combating IUU fishing,
including information sharing, joint operations, and international
prosecution. A cohesive and coordinated maritime force in the region
could also serve to quickly transition to search-and-rescue service,
environmental pollution response, or a natural disaster-relief response
force. Moreover, such a force would establish the foundation for a
robust law enforcement presence to respond to UNCLOS violations and
enforce international norms.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\40\ U.S. Interagency Working Group on Illegal, Unreported, and
Unregulated Fishing, National 5-Year Strategy for Combating Illegal,
Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing: 2022-2026, 2022, p. 7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
leadership and membership of a combined maritime force of coast guards
and law enforcement agencies
Creating a CMF offers a key opportunity for the United States to
show commitment and leadership while building partnerships that focus
on the issues that matter most in the Indo-Pacific region. As I implied
earlier, the United States should consider coordinating with regional
partners on establishing a U.S. Coast Guard admiral as the CMF
leader.\41\ The Coast Guard has already committed to supporting Indo-
Pacific operations through its routine patrols with national security
cutters, law enforcement detachment deployments, and home-porting fast
response cutters in the region. Having the U.S. Coast Guard as the lead
or as an executive agent would be a natural fit and would likely
promote unity of effort among other countries that are already engaged
in multilateral coast guard forums and multinational exercises,
including through the Southeast Asia Maritime Law Enforcement
Initiative and Southeast Asia Cooperation and Training programs. A
combined multinational force with U.S. backing provides opportunities
for countries without robust maritime law enforcement agencies to
provide other contributions while reaping the benefits of CMF
operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ Although an analysis of this issue was beyond the scope of
this testimony, this arrangement would be challenging for the U.S.
Coast Guard in its current structure. A reorganization might be
necessary, including revisiting the JIATF West organization, which is
headed by a U.S. Coast Guard admiral but operates under the umbrella of
U.S. Indo-Pacific Command.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although the CMF would be led by the United States, the task forces
would be led by a rotating leadership of member countries. The Quad
countries (Australia, India, Japan, and the United States) are already
invested in the IPMDA and are natural partners.\42\ Pacific Island
countries already place a high priority on illegal fishing and would
likely seek to become part of a coalition. Countries that are parties
to existing international conventions--of which there are many--would
also likely be interested in participating. In addition, the U.S. Coast
Guard has already transferred ownership of former high-endurance
cutters to the Philippines, Vietnam, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka. These
ships provide the opportunity to participate and cooperate with the
U.S. Coast Guard and U.S. Navy with significant capability, including
serving as on-scene leaders supporting CMF missions. Moreover, in
February 2023, the United States and the Philippines restarted joint
patrols in the South China Sea, further enabling a coordinated approach
to an operational arm of a CMF.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ ``The partnership is known formally as the `Quad,' not the
Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, noting its nature as a diplomatic, not
security, partnership'' (Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, ``The
Quad,'' webpage, Australian Government, undated, https://
www.dfat.gov.au/international-relations/regional-architecture/quad).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The eventual goal is to have Indo-Pacific countries participate in
a CMF with the purpose of a free and transparent Indo-Pacific. Some
countries might be concerned about upsetting China and hesitate to join
a coalition, but I submit that a large majority of countries would
support this approach. Moreover, focusing on a rules-based order
through law enforcement with an emphasis on maritime domain awareness,
training, and countering IUU fishing could temper that concern.
resource contributions
Similar to other international coalitions, funding for a CMF should
be spread across participating countries to the level that each country
can afford. For the United States, Congress might have already provided
an avenue for funding through the Maritime Security and Fisheries
Enforcement Act as part of the 2020 National Defense Authorization
Act.\43\ This legislation directs agencies to focus on combating IUU
fishing, including assessing opportunities to use the CMF in Bahrain
and to create partnerships in priority regions. Building on this
legislation--potentially in coordination with the Pacific Deterrence
Initiative--Congress has an opportunity to authorize and appropriate
funds for the establishment of a CMF in support of the U.S. Indo-
Pacific strategy.\44\ Recognizing that smaller countries might not be
able to marshal resources, discussion about the reinvestment of ship
seizure sales, judicial proceeds, and profits from the captured biomass
of participating countries should be considered to offset costs. This
could help incentivize the involvement of these countries, particularly
those ``at high risk for IUU fishing activity . . . [and that] lack the
capacity to fully address the illegal activity.''\45\ If Congress
decides to pursue this course of action, the U.S. Coast Guard would
need authorization and additional appropriations, along with
significant coordination with the Department of State and the
Department of Defense, to fully resource a CMF.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\ Public Law 116-92, National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2020, December 20, 2019, Division C, Title XXXV, Subtitle
C.
\44\ U.S. Department of Defense, Pacific Deterrence Initiative:
Department of Defense Budget Fiscal Year (FY) 2024, March 2023.
\45\ U.S. Interagency Working Group on Illegal, Unreported, and
Unregulated Fishing, 2022, p. 5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
conclusion
I'd like to thank the subcommittee for the opportunity to testify
today and discuss one potential way to improve cooperation and
effectiveness in the Indo-Pacific using a combined maritime force that
consists of coast guards and similar maritime law enforcement agencies.
China's continued use of gray zone tactics have eroded international
norms, and the United States should counter this coercion and illegal
activity by increasing presence, partnerships, and unity of effort
toward establishing rule of law in a free and open Indo-Pacific.

Mr. Gimenez. I thank you, Captain Cooper.
I now recognize Mr. Sharman for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER H. SHARMAN, DIRECTOR, CHINA MARITIME
STUDIES INSTITUTE, UNITED STATES NAVAL WAR COLLEGE

Mr. Sharman. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar,
distinguished Members of the subcommittee, thank you for having
me here today. It's truly an honor. It's especially poignant
that I'm here today, of all days, the 35th anniversary of
China's brutal crackdown on human rights in Tiananmen Square.
Today, it's appropriate that we're talking about China gray
zone operations, as it's an extension of what we saw 35 years
ago.
I'm here to tell you today that Beijing is waging what some
PRC sources refer to as a war without gun smoke in the gray
zone of maritime East Asia. China's Coast Guard and maritime
militia are on the front lines of a seaward expansion,
asserting China's maritime claims through nonlethal means,
operating in the gray zone that falls below the threshold of
war. They are supported in the distance by People's Liberation
Army Navy, which compels foreign states to compete on China's
terms. Together, China's 3 maritime forces enable the PRC to
leverage its national power as part of a quest for China to win
without fighting.
China has the world's largest Coast Guard by number of
ships and operates more maritime law enforcement vessels than
the Coast Guards of all its regional neighbors combined.
China's maritime militia possesses ships that resemble fishing
trawlers but are ideally suited for gray zone operations.
China's 3 sea forces are all part of China's armed forces.
They operate under a chain of command that leads up through the
PLA Central Military Commission and, ultimately, to China's
paramount leader Xi Jinping himself. As such, China's Coast
Guard and maritime militia are state-sponsored, and one should
not consider them to be civilian vessels.
The PRC empowers its maritime forces with domestic laws
that it imposes on international waters, the international
maritime commons. China's 2021 Coast Guard law includes a
provision that permits the Coast Guards to take all necessary
measures, including the use of force within the maritime areas,
under China's jurisdiction. Effective as of June 15 this year,
China's Coast Guard will possess authority under PRC law to
detain foreigners for up to 60 days without trial, namely those
who are suspected of illegally crossing into PRC's claimed
maritime boundaries.
PRC gray zone operations directed at Taiwan are escalating
rapidly. Back on February 14, a speed boat from China's Fujian
province capsized off the eastern coast of Taiwan's offshore
island of Kinmen as it was being chased by the Taiwan Coast
Guard resulting in the deaths of 2 of the 4 people on board.
The mainland vessel had crossed into Taiwan's claimed
prohibited waters and refused to be subjected to Taiwan's Coast
Guard inspections.
In response to the incident, Taiwan's Taiwan affairs
office--China's Taiwan affairs office--took direct aim at
Taiwan sovereignty and ability to police its own waters by
announcing that there was no such thing as prohibited or
restricted waters.
Several days later, the PRC followed up on its rhetoric
with actions by employing its Coast Guard to board and inspect
the Taiwan sightseeing ship Golden, which was operating in the
vicinity of Kinmen. This was the first time that the PRC Coast
Guard inspected a Taiwan sightseeing ship and diverged from the
status quo that it held since the 1990's when Taipei
established the concept of restricted waters.
China Coast Guard ships then began to regularly patrol
waters around Kinmen. PRC entered these waters 4 times in
March, 4 times in April, and 8 times in May. As recently as
last week, China turned up the rheostat one more time. China's
two small Chinese Navy vessels entered these same waters,
penetrated these same waters south of Kinmen. Although, through
these incursions the PRC has used gray zone tactics to
eviscerate Taiwan's sovereignty around its offshore islands and
to pressure Taipei.
PRC maritime coercion around Taiwan's offshore islands is
part of a larger all-domain pressure campaign to undermine
Taiwan's sovereignty and legitimacy. The PLA recently executed
a pre-planned 2-day military drill following the inauguration
of Taiwan's new president. A near-record number of PRC Navy
vessels operated around Taiwan, and it included an
unprecedented integration of China Coast Guard operations both
around Taiwan's offshore islands and also to the east of
Taiwan, a potential harbinger of PRC law enforcement operations
in the Western Pacific.
Our allies can teach us valuable lessons about how to
counter PRC gray zone tactics. Japan publicly disseminates
information about each PRC incursion in the waters around the
Senkaku Islands and releases photographs demonstrating that its
Coast Guard remains on the landward side of China's Coast Guard
vessels, thereby conveying administrative control. Japan's
maritime presence and law enforcement response to China's
incursions underscores Japan's legal claims while pushing back
against PRC gray zone tactics.
The Philippines employs a similar transparency tactic, as
you have seen. Manila's policy is to respond to PRC's bad
behavior with measured transparency by documenting and
publicizing each incident. This name-and-shame approach has
drawn the world's attention to the plight of the Philippine
vessels and has helped place the PRC on the defensive.
In my written statement, I include a few recommendations as
well. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sharman follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christopher H. Sharman
Tuesday, June 4, 2024
The personal views expressed here and in all related remarks are solely
those of the author. They do not necessarily represent the
official policies or estimates of the United States Navy, the
Department of Defense, or those of the U.S. Government.
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thenedar, Members of the
subcommittee: thank you for devoting your time and attention to the
topic of PRC gray zone threats in the maritime domain.
At the China Maritime Studies Institute (CMSI), I lead a team of
prominent academics within the Naval War College's research arm--the
Center for Naval Warfare Studies.
Broadly speaking, what we do in CMSI is to draw on original Chinese
language open-source material to offer unique insights, particularly
related to developments, capabilities, and the future trajectory of
China in its military maritime domain. In doing so, we offer a feel and
help to paint a picture where other sources and methodologies typically
don't offer enough insights. At our best, we help to answer questions
the U.S. Navy and the Department of Defense as a whole didn't know to
ask. CMSI has published 2 conference volumes on China's maritime gray
zone operations and I'd commend them as a resource to amplify my
personal comments here today.
Beijing is waging what some PRC sources refer to a ``war without
gun smoke'' in the gray zone of maritime East Asia.\1\ China's Coast
Guard and maritime militia are on the front lines of its seaward
expansion, asserting China's maritime claims through non-lethal means,
operating in the ``gray zone'' that falls below the threshold of war.
They are supported in the distance by the People's Liberation Army Navy
(PLAN), which compels foreign states to compete on China's terms.\2\
Together, China's 3 maritime forces enable the PRC to leverage its
national power, as part of a quest for China to ``win without
fighting.''\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Erickson, Andrew S., and Ryan D. Martinson, eds. China's
Maritime Gray Zone Operations. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute
Press, 2019. Pg. 291.
\2\ Erickson, Andrew S., and Ryan D. Martinson, eds. China's
Maritime Gray Zone Operations. P. 2.
\3\ Mazarr, Michael J. Mastering the Gray Zone: Understanding a
Changing Era of Conflict. Carlisle Barracks, PA: Strategic Studies
Institute and U.S. Army War College Press, 2015. P. 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The PRC's gray zone operations are designed to reshape the
international order without triggering war; they are intentionally
ambiguous, thereby complicating efforts to respond; and they pursue
their aims in a gradual manner.\4\ PRC authors and strategists refer to
these operations as efforts to ``safeguard China's maritime rights and
interests'' or in short, ``rights protection law enforcement''
missions.\5\ These operations include actions to assert not only PRC
sovereignty over waters adjacent to disputed land features, but also
jurisdiction over other parts of the Indo-Pacific region, based on
China's liberal interpretation of international law.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Erickson, Andrew S., and Ryan D. Martinson, eds. China's
Maritime Gray Zone Operations., p. 3.
\5\ Ryan Martinson, ``Early Warning Brief: Introducing the `New,
New' China Coast Guard'' Jamestown Foundation, China Brief Volume 21
Issue 2, 25 January 2021. https://jamestown.org/program/early-warning-
brief-introducing-the-new-new-china-coast-guard/.
\6\ Erickson, Andrew S., and Ryan D. Martinson, eds. China's
Maritime Gray Zone Operations., p. 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
China has the world's largest Coast Guard by number of ships and
operates more maritime law enforcement vessels than the coast guards of
all its regional neighbors combined.\7\ In recent years, PRC Coast
Guard vessels have improved qualitatively. They are larger, faster,
more maneuverable, and physically imposing. China's maritime militia
possesses ships that resemble fishing trawlers but are ideally suited
for gray zone operations.\8\ In some cases, China has relied on
layered, multi-sea force ``cabbage'' tactics to achieve its objectives
in which China deploys its Maritime Militia, Coast Guard, and Navy in
concentric rings around its target. More often, however, China employs
its Coast Guard and maritime militia forces to engage in small-scale
actions aimed at strengthening its administration of areas--
particularly within Beijing's claimed 9-dash line in the South China
Sea.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Erickson, Andrew S., and Ryan D. Martinson, eds. China's
Maritime Gray Zone Operations. P. 5.
\8\ Erickson, Andrew S., and Ryan D. Martinson, eds. China's
Maritime Gray Zone Operations. P. 6.
\9\ Erickson, Andrew S., and Ryan D. Martinson, eds. China's
Maritime Gray Zone Operations. P.7
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
China's 3 sea forces are all part of China's armed forces. They
operate under a chain of command that leads up through the PLA's
Central Military Commission (CMC), ultimately to China's paramount
leader, Xi Jinping himself.\10\ This allows the PLA to have a single
entity empowered with the authority to prioritize and mediate inter-
service competition. As such, the China Coast Guard and maritime
militia are state-sponsored, and one should not consider them to be
``civilian'' vessels.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Maritime Gray Zone Operations: Challenges and Countermeasures
in the Indo-Pacific. P. 56.
\11\ Maritime Gray Zone Operations: Challenges and Countermeasures
in the Indo-Pacific. P. 56.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The PRC empowers its maritime forces with domestic laws that it
imposes on international waters--the international maritime commons.
China's 2021 Coast Guard Law includes a provision that permits the
Coast Guard to take all necessary measures, including the use of force
within maritime areas under Chinese jurisdiction.\12\ A careful reading
of this law and Chinese commentary about it, suggests this law applies
to all 3 million square kilometers of ``blue national territory'' that
Beijing claims--much of which is contested by regional neighbors.\13\
China recently added ``Regulation No. 3'' to its 2021 Law. Effective as
of June 15 of this year, China's Coast Guard will possess authority
under PRC law to detain foreigners for up to 60 days without trial,
namely those who are suspected of ``illegally'' crossing into PRC-
claimed maritime boundaries.\14\ This is another vehicle for the PRC to
impose domestic jurisdiction on foreign flagged vessels, possibly
across the entirety of its sweeping maritime claims.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Ministry of Defense of the Government of Japan. https://
www.mod.go.jp/en/d_act/sec_env/ch_ocn/index.html.
\13\ Ryan Martinson, ``Gauging the real risks of China's new
coastguard law'' The Strategist. 23 Feb 21. https://
www.aspistrategist.org.au/gauging-the-real-risks-of-chinas-new-
coastguard-law/.
\14\ Vanessa Cai. ``Beijing clarifies coastguard's detention powers
as activists converge on Scarborough Shoal in the South China Sea''.
South China Morning Post.com. 16 May 24. https://advance.lexis.com/api/
document?collection=news&id=urn:contentItem:6C1W-NDK1-JC8V-1034-
0000000&context=1516831; See also: Li Honglei and Sun Nanxiang, ``China
Coast Guard Procedures fully legitimate'' China Daily, 31 May 24.
https://www.chinadailyhk.com/hk/article/584568.
\15\ This new regulation is the first known China Coast Guard
policy that explicitly authorizes detention of foreign vessels and
individuals for ``trespass'' in ``waters under China's jurisdiction.''
See: ``China Coast Guard Regulation No. 3'', INDOPACOM, 30 May 24.
https://www.pacom.mil/Portals/55/Documents/Legal/
J06%20TACAID%20%20CCG%20Regulation-
%203%20(FINAL)%20%20VER%202.pdf?ver=DbFQtB0oqN0l2NcJ_55HNA%3D%3D.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRC gray zone operations directed at Taiwan are escalating rapidly.
On February 14, a speedboat from China's Fujian Province capsized off
the eastern coast of Kinmen as it was being chased by the Taiwan Coast
Guard, resulting in the deaths of 2 of the 4 people on board.\16\ The
boat possessed no name, no paperwork, and no registration, but the
mainland vessel had crossed into Taiwan's claimed prohibited waters
\17\ and refused to be subjected to Taiwan's Coast Guard
inspections.\18\ In response to the incident, China's Taiwan Affairs
Office took direct aim at Taiwan's sovereignty and ability to police
its own waters by announcing that there was no such thing as
``prohibited or restricted waters.''\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ ``After incident, Chinese boats patrol waters near Taiwan-held
Kinmen'' Focus Taiwan. 19 Feb 24. https://focustaiwan.tw/cross-strait/
202402190011.
\17\ Taiwan originally declared ``prohibited and restricted''
waters in its 1992 ``Cross-Strait Act,'' and since then, these
boundaries have served as a basis for maritime law enforcement and
rescue operations by authorities on both sides of the Taiwan Strait.
See: Mainland Affairs Council Republic of China (Taiwan), ``MAC Press
Release No. 012'', 18 Feb 24. https://www.mac.gov.tw/en/
News_Content.aspx?n=A921DFB2651FF92F&sms=37838322A6DA5E79&s=343ADEA7-
F444B698#:?:-
text=The%20MAC%20explained%20that%20the,revisions%20'since%20then%-
20duly%20announced.
\18\ Kinmen, Matsu, Penghu Branch Coast Guard Administration,
``Coast Guard News'' 20 Feb 24. https://www.cga.gov.tw/GipOpen/wSite/
ct?xItem=159714&ctNode=8195&mp=9996.
\19\ ``China using `gray zone' tactics after deadly Kinmen boat
case: Experts'' Focus Taiwan. 18 Feb 24. https://focustaiwan.tw/cross-
strait/202402180013.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Several days later PRC followed up on its rhetoric with actions by
employing its Coast Guard to board and inspect the Taiwan sightseeing
ship ``Golden,'' which was operating in the vicinity of Kinmen. This
was the first time that the PRC Coast Guard inspected a Taiwan
sightseeing ship and diverged from the status quo that has held since
the 1990's, when Taipei established the concept of ``restricted
waters''.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Kinmen, Matsu, Penghu Branch Coast Guard Administration,
``Coast Guard News'' 20 Feb. 24. https://www.cga.gov.tw/GipOpen/wSite/
ct?xItem=159716&ctNode=8195&mp=9996; Thompson Chau, ``Taiwan and China
spar over capsizing inspections near Kinmen islands''. Nikkei Asia.
https://asia.nikkei.com/Politics/International-relations/Taiwan-
tensions/Taiwan-and-China-spar-over-capsizing-inspections-near-Kinmen-
islands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
China Coast Guard ships then began to regularly patrol waters
around Kinmen. On February 26, 5 China Coast Guard ships entered
Kinmen's prohibited or restricted waters.\21\ Subsequently, the PRC has
expanded its use of lawfare by ordering its Coast Guard to conduct
regular incursions into the prohibited or restricted waters of several
of Taiwan's offshore islands. The PRC entered these waters 4 times in
March, 4 times in April, and conducted at least 8 incursions in
May.\22\ Of note, on May 9, 7 PRC government vessels including Chinese
fishing vessels and those from the China Coast Guard, China Maritime
Surveillance, and China's Fishery Administration, conducted a fishery
safety exercise in Kinmen's Liaoluo Bay that simulated a collision at
sea under harsh weather conditions and involved search-and-rescue
operations. This was the first time that China Coast Guard ships and
other PRC official vessels sailed into Kinmen's prohibited or
restricted waters simultaneously.\23\ And most recently, last week, 2
small Chinese navy vessels penetrated Taiwan's restricted waters south
of Kinmen.\24\ Through these incursions, the PRC has used gray zone
tactics to eviscerate Taiwan's sovereignty around its offshore islands
and pressure Taipei. Yet, these gray zone operations receive little
attention here in the United States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Ben Blanchard and Yimou Lee, ``Taiwan says 5 China coast guard
ships entered waters near frontline islands'' Reuters, 26 Feb 24.
https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/taiwan-minister-says-5-
china-coast-guard-ships-entered-waters-around-kinmen-2024-02-27/
\22\ Li Chengyin and Cai Jiazhen, ``The fifth formation of land and
sea police ships sailed into Kinmen waters in May more frequently than
in the previous 2 months''. United Daily News. 14 May 24. https://
udn.com/news/story/10930/7963862; Kinmen, Matsu, Penghu Branch Coast
Guard Administration, ``Coast Guard News'' 24 May 24. https://
www.cga.gov.tw/GipOpen/wSite/ct?xItem=160523&ctNode=8195&mp=9996.
\23\ Kinmen, Matsu, Penghu Branch Coast Guard Administration,
``Coast Guard News'' 9 May 24. https://www.cga.gov.tw/GipOpen/wSite/
ct?xItem=160424&ctNode=8195&mp=9996.
\24\ Wu Shu-Wei, Hung Hsueh-kuang and James Lo, ``Taiwan's Coast
Guard expels two PLA vessels around Kinmen'', Focus Taiwan. 1 Jun 24.
https://focustaiwan.tw/cross-strait/202406010005.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
China's gray zone operations target critical seams. Taiwan's
offshore islands are not covered by the United States Taiwan Relations
Act. Nor does the United States recognize Taiwan's claims of
``prohibited'' and ``restricted'' waters. PRC law enforcement
operations within Taiwan's prohibited or restricted waters, therefore,
aim to apply pressure on Taipei while minimizing the potential for a
U.S. response.
PRC maritime coercion around Taiwan's offshore islands is part of a
larger all-domain pressure campaign to undermine Taiwan's sovereignty
and legitimacy. Since the visit of former Speaker of the House Nancy
Pelosi to Taipei in August 2022, the PRC has intensified diplomatic,
economic, and cognitive pressure on Taiwan. Military pressure has
included establishing a ``new normal'' of PRC Air Force flights across
the Taiwan Strait centerline and into the Taiwan Air Defense
Identification Zone as well as Naval patrols encroaching on Taiwan's
claimed 24nm contiguous zone. These military tactics have the effect of
both undermining Taiwan's sovereignty as well as Taiwanese people's
confidence in their democracy by demonstrating Taiwan's inability to
counter China's overwhelming military superiority.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Thomas Shattuck, ``One Year Later: How Has China's Military
Pressure on Taiwan Changed Since Nancy Pelosi's Visit'' Global Taiwan
Institute 20 Sep 23. https://globaltaiwan.org/2023/09/one-year-later-
how-has-chinas-military-pressure-on-taiwan-changed-since-nancy-pelosis-
visit/; ``Tracking China's April 2023 Military Exercises Around
Taiwan'', Center for Strategic and International Studies China Power.
https://chinapower.csis.org/tracking-chinas-april-2023-military-
exercises-around-taiwan/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As part of the PRC's on-going pressure campaign, the PLA executed a
pre-planned 2-day military drill following the inauguration of Taiwan's
new president. Advertised as ``punishment'' for separatist acts of
Taiwan independence forces, the exercise consisted of combat readiness
and law enforcement operations around Taiwan.\26\ The exercise included
several exercise areas surrounding Taiwan and its offshore islands,
which appeared to signal PRC willingness to inhibit commercial ship
access to Hualien, the Taiwan Strait, Taiwan's offshore islands, and
Taiwan's Kaohsiung's commercial port, for example. During this
exercise, a near-record number of PRC navy vessels operated around
Taiwan and included the unprecedented integration of China's Coast
Guard operations east of Taiwan, a potential harbinger of PRC law
enforcement operations in the western Pacific.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Kathrin Hille, ``China starts military drills around Taiwan as
`harsh punishment' '' Financial Times, 22 May 24. https://www.ft.com/
content/e64ca81b-c028-4204-a0b6-1b5182ee8bec.
\27\ ``How is China Responding to the Inauguration of Taiwan's
President William Lai?'' Center for Strategic and International Studies
China Power. https://chinapower.csis.org/china-respond-inauguration-
taiwan-william-lai-joint-sword-2024a-military-exercise/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our allies can teach us valuable lessons of how to counter PRC gray
zone activity. Japan routinely responds to China Coast Guard incursions
into the contiguous zone and territorial waters of the Senkaku Islands,
which Tokyo administers. As of late May, China's Coast Guard set a
record of 158 consecutive days of Coast Guard operations in these
waters.\28\ China's goal is to force Japan to concede these islands are
in dispute.\29\ For each incursion, Japan's Coast Guard is present.
Japan publicly disseminates information about each incursion and
releases photographs demonstrating that its Coast Guard remains on the
landward side of China Coast Guard vessels; thereby conveying
administrative control.\30\ Japan's maritime presence and law
enforcement response to China's incursions underscore Japan's legal
claims while pushing back against PRC gray zone tactics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ ``Japan spots China ships near Senkaku Islands for record
158th day'' Kyodo News, 27 May 24. https://english.kyodonews.net/news/
2024/05/a74760a3229a-urgent-japan-spots-china-ships-near-senkaku-
islands-for-record-158th-day.html.
\29\ Japan Coast Guard, ``Movements of China's Coast Guard vessels
in the waters around the Senkaku Islands and Japan's Response.''
https://www.kaiho.mlit.go.jp/mission/senkaku/senkaku.html.
\30\ Japan Coast Guard, ``Movements of China's Coast Guard vessels
in the waters around the Senkaku Islands and Japan's Response.''
https://www.kaiho.mlit.go.jp/mission/senkaku/senkaku.html; Japan Coast
Guard, ``Guarding TWs and EEZ'' https://www.kaiho.mlit.go.jp/e/mission/
guarding_tws_and_eez.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Philippines employs a similar transparency tactic. China's
Maritime Militia and Coast Guard vessels routinely interfere with
Philippine attempts to resupply the grounded Sierra Madre vessel at
Second Thomas Shoal in the Spratly Islands, which is located within the
Philippine Exclusive Economic Zone--less than 200nm from the island of
Palawan.\31\ Nevertheless, China claims ``indisputable sovereignty over
the feature.\32\ Manila's policy is to respond to PRC bad behavior with
``measured transparency'' by documenting and publicizing each
incident.\33\ This name and shame approach has drawn the world's
attention to the plight of Philippine vessels and helped place the PRC
on the defensive.\34\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Pham Ngoc Minh Trang, ``Second Thomas Shoal: A Legal
Perspective.'' Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative 23 Jan 24. https:/
/amti.csis.org/second-thomas-shoal-a-legal-perspective/.
\32\ https://www.pbs.org/newshour/world/u-s-and-philippines-step-
up-strategic-partnership-as-china-threats-loom-in-south-china-sea.
\33\ Matthew Lee, ``U.S. and Philippines step up strategic
partnership as China threats loom in South China Sea'', Associated
Press, 12 Apr 24. https://tribune.net.ph/2024/02/02/no-changes-in-
approach-to-china-nsc-says [sic].
\34\ Jim Gomez, ``Philippines says it will forge security alliances
and stage combat drills despite China's opposition'' Associated Press,
24 May 24. https://apnews.com/article/philippines-defense-teodoro-
south-china-sea-0bbf4abc858484395365c3ee217ab2c2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ensuring freedom of the seas requires Washington to take further
steps.

Recognize the PRC's triple maritime threat.--China's Navy,
Coast Guard, and Maritime Militia all report to the CMC. The
United States must deal with them holistically. As such,
Washington should communicate both publicly and privately to
Beijing that the United States expects all three PRC sea forces
to abide at all times by the same internationally recognized
standards of law, seamanship, and communication to which U.S.
maritime forces adhere.

Name and shame.--Washington must develop a public relations
narrative about PRC gray zone forces in partnership with our
Indo-Pacific friends to ensure Washington and our partners are
ahead of any PRC narrative at the time of a crisis. Washington
can do this by publicly exposing dangerous actions of PRC gray
zone forces--especially China's Coast Guard and maritime
militia and providing information and imagery to our regional
partners to enable them to do the same.

Sail wherever international law allows.--The United States
must maintain a clear ability and resolve to deny China's gray
zone forces the ability to impede U.S. operations that are of
consistent with international law. American officials must
clearly communicate the consequences of unacceptable Chinese
behavior in the maritime domain.

Empower Friends and Allies.--U.S. forces must play a much
more direct role in helping allies defend their own maritime
rights and ensure that any settlement of disputes is by
peaceful, legal means rather than through PRC coercion. This
may take the form of training to counter PRC gray zone
operations or sharing intelligence about the disposition of PRC
military maritime forces in the region.

Leverage the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG).--The U.S. Government
must establish a funding mechanism to provide the Coast Guard a
reliable budget stream to fully support the increasing
operational demands in distant waters. Deployments of the
white-hulled USCG to the Indo-Pacific region are a force
multiplier. The Coast Guard is a useful sentinel in theater
engagement and freedom of navigation operations (FONOPS), that
offers the INDOPACOM Commander with a less-escalatory asset
than a warship. Coast Guard efforts enhance theater security
cooperation with island nations and hard-to-access places where
a larger navy just cannot go or might not be welcomed. USCG
presence also arms the INDOPACOM Commander with an additional
tool to help shape optics of interactions by employing a
``white hulled'' USCG ship to counter PRC ``white hulled''
Coast Guard gray zone tactics.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Sharman.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. I now recognize myself for the 5
minutes of questioning.
There's so much to talk about, and I don't know where to
begin, but let's start with capability. About 6 months ago, 9
months ago, I actually was in the South China Sea and saw
first-hand Chinese naval vessels and Chinese Coast Guard
vessels. What struck me was that there's very little difference
between the two.
So, Captain Sadler, can you tell me about what the
difference is between a Chinese naval vessel and a Chinese
Coast Guard vessel, because they sure as heck look real similar
to me.
Mr. Sadler. Maybe the paint scheme. It's no secret when
they first started standing up a Chinese Coast Guard they
repurposed Navy frigates and older vessels. So they were, by
all intents and purposes, other than the paint scheme, Navy
vessels. They remain larger than even Japanese Coast Guard,
which is a very capable Coast Guard, and they have a--they
certainly outclass in tonnage and the ability to carry weapon
systems that any one of their neighbor countries in the South
China Sea.
Mr. Gimenez. So how do our Coast Guard vessels stack up
against their Coast Guard vessels, or don't they stack up?
Mr. Sadler. It's--again, they are--they're the most largest
or the larger of the Chinese Coast Guard vessels are larger
than our Coast Guard vessels. The NSC might be comparable. I
would defer to my fellow shipmates here that have been--served
in the Coast Guard. But the size of the Coast Guard ships that
the Chinese are putting to sea are meant for distance sea
operations, which really puts at risk, and we should be looking
at where they plan to operate from the Aleutian Islands to the
central Pacific and as far away as the Gulf of Guinea
potentially.
Mr. Gimenez. Captain Cooper.
Mr. Cooper. I would echo my colleague's compartments--
remarks here. The Chinese vessels are extremely large. They're
incomparable to the Coast Guard vessels, particularly if you
look at the Fast Response Cutters which we're looking out
there, which we are placing out there, which are significantly
smaller. But I would say the biggest component is the number of
Chinese vessels out there. We're talking roughly 700 vessels
that they have in the region as opposed to the handful, the
dozen that are out there by the U.S. Coast Guard when they're
not performing other missions.
Mr. Gimenez. Seven hundred Coast Guard vessels or 700 in
total vessels?
Mr. Cooper. There's 700 Chinese Coast Guard vessels of
varying sizes.
Mr. Gimenez. In the region?
Mr. Cooper. In the Indo-Pacific, yes.
Mr. Gimenez. How many Coast Guard vessels do we have in our
region, let's say, in the United States? I mean, that's their
neighborhood, so how about us? What do we have running around
here?
Mr. Cooper. So currently we have 3 Fast Response Cutters in
Guam, we have 3 Fast Response Cutters in Hawaii. There's 2
National Security Cutters in Hawaii and a buoy tender in Guam.
Mr. Gimenez. I'm talking about the United States, around
the United States.
Mr. Cooper. Oh.
Mr. Gimenez. So we can have--let's do apples to apples.
Their Coast Guard--that Coast Guard is--that's next to China,
OK. That's their neighborhood. What about in our neighborhood?
How many Coast Guard vessels do we have running around here?
Mr. Cooper. Around the United States?
Mr. Gimenez. Yes.
Mr. Cooper. Oh, I mean, I don't know the exact numbers that
we currently have around, but it's not 700. Maybe----
Mr. Sadler. Yes, I happen to have those numbers in front of
me. Coast Guard at their website, they have their overall fleet
size is about 259. But if you really want to get at what the
Coast Guard, our Coast Guard has in its arsenal, its fleet to
go into distant, deep, blue water kind of patrols, you've got 8
National Security Cutters. You've got 2 High Endurance Cutters.
These are older vessels, 28 medium endurance. Then you've got
41 Fast Response Cutters, which are kind-of, I would say, in
the Pacific you're really pushing it, but that's the total.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. One of you just said you defined--we need
to better define laws, OK. What laws? I think that was Captain
Cooper. Is that you?
Mr. Cooper. Yes. Yes, sir. So I think that the biggest
issue is the gray zone itself is--encompasses those activities,
which may or may not be illegal. With the way China looks at it
is what they're doing is enforcing what they believe is legal,
but is in disagreement with what the rest of the international
community agrees.
So doing the gray zone tactics that they're performing in
the Indo-Pacific is clearly in violation of the Law of the Sea
Convention. So by not establishing what our responses are makes
it very challenging for the Coast Guard and for the Navy and
for other nations to be able to respond, because we don't have
a planned response and we haven't identified what that looks
like.
Mr. Gimenez. Well, I would assume that they would say that
this is totally legal because these are our waters, right? So
our disagreement is what are their waters and what are not
their waters. Is that the disagreement?
Mr. Cooper. That's correct. So, going back to my combined
maritime force, I think that by building a coalition we can
build some international consensus over what those rules should
look like and how to respond to them.
Mr. Gimenez. Well, how do--OK. My time is up, so--I'll
probably have a second round coming around.
So now I recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Thanedar.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez.
Thank you, all, for testifying this afternoon. The threat
that People's Republic of China possesses to the international
maritime domain has evolved through the years. China's
continued aggressive behavior and use of gray zone tactics
toward Taiwan, the Philippines, and other countries in the
region has led to periodic standoffs and clashes.
Captain Sharman, what are examples of model responses to
the PRC's gray zone tactics in the Indo-Pacific?
Mr. Sharman. Ranking Member Thanedar, thank you for the
question. The countries in the region have demonstrated
different tactics in response to gray zone. Each--the various
tactics that they have demonstrated, in various ways, there has
been some success. There is some lessons that we perhaps can
take from our partners in the region. Let me just run through a
couple examples as I think about it.
I mentioned in my written testimony about Japan. I call
Japan's tactics persistence; that is, they never cede anything.
Japan's actions around the Senkaku Islands never cede that the
islands themselves are in dispute, which is what China's goal
is. Japan's Coast Guard is always there.
Vietnam uses a tactic called--I would call more
brinkmanship. Back, in 2014, the Chinese deployed an oil rig
into disputed waters. Vietnam responded very aggressively and
didn't fare well at sea, but this started causing problems in
Vietnam. The whole-of-nation pressure from Vietnam onto China
caused China to back off of where they were.
Philippines, we've seen their aggressive transparency.
Malaysia, I call that partnership. Malaysia, back in 2020, the
CTF 76 stood up, and they did--demonstrated--that was with
Australia and the United States Navy, and there was--they
demonstrated persistent presence in the area so that--and that
was enough to push China back.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
How might the United States strengthen communication and
coordination with its allies and partners to counter the PRC's
tactics more effectively?
Mr. Sharman. Thank you, sir. From a strategic perspective,
our partners are looking to see if the United States is going
to be there for them, so we need to demonstrate that we are
going to be there now and in the future. The more confident
they are in our support, the more willing they will be to push
back on PRC coercive actions. So we build trust through
exercises, education, and routine interaction.
We can't just have this as a check in the box; we have to
be there regularly. But a goal should be to develop shared
awareness in the maritime domain, and the Secretary of Defense
recently highlighted the Indo-Pacific partnership for maritime
domain, which is--enhances partnership and the ability for
nations to police their own waters. So there is opportunities
to build common operational pressure.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. Another question for Captain
Cooper: You testified about the potential benefits of a
combined maritime force that could be created by the United
States and its partners in the region. What impact do you
believe such a force would have on the PRC's ability to
continue to threaten Taiwan's sovereignty?
Mr. Cooper. Yes, thank you for the question, Mr. Thanedar.
The CMF, what that will do is create this coalition of like-
minded nations, and so by training those nations in some of
those tactics and increasing their capability and their
capacity, I think what we'll have is an increased presence in
the region, and presence can lead to deterrence in some cases.
So, by having a force that the--that is consolidated under one
organization, of which the United States has influence, I think
would be very beneficial in pushing back against some of
China's tactics.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. My last question, Captain Sharman,
what are some of the actions the United States should consider
taking immediately to counter the PRC's threat toward Taiwan?
How about longer-term solutions that should be considered?
Mr. Sharman. OK. Real quickly, regarding Taiwan, I think
there's some near-term and some long-term options. From a near-
term perspective, I think delivery of already---Congressionally
already-approved munitions and equipment to Taiwan and making
good on our promises would be an effective first step. The goal
really should be for Xi Jinping to wake up every morning and
say, ``Today is not the day.'' The more powerful, the more that
we can enhance Taiwan's capabilities, the more we can make that
happen.
We also should seek to expand Coast Guard cooperation. We
have a good working relationship with the Taiwan Coast Guard,
with a memo signed back in 2021. I think there's opportunities
to expand that.
Real quickly, a longer-term perspective, I think we need
to--echoing SecNav Del Toro, who called for revitalizing our
maritime industry, I think there's an opportunity here for ship
building, coalition building, and maritime statecraft. I think
he has it right.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you so much, and my time is up. I yield
back.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you to the Ranking Member.
I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Captain Sharman, or do you prefer professor?
Mr. Sharman. Sir, I've learned not to specify what I'm
called here at today's committee. Mister works great.
Mr. Higgins. Smart fella. So I'm going to refer to you as
captain. Captain, for the benefit of Americans watching today,
would you just summarize briefly what exactly is gray zone
coercion by China, specifically in the Indo-Pacific region?
Mr. Sharman. Gray zone actions--and there are many
definitions of gray zone actions. Gray zone actions are actions
below the threshold of war. It's a tactic that is used to
achieve a strategic objective. In this case, the PRC is
attempting to advance its strategic goals, so they use this
tactic to execute operations to--that are not going to perhaps
prompt a response by other countries in the region, United
States, et cetera, so they keep those gray zone operations just
ambiguous enough that there is plausible deniability.
Mr. Higgins. OK. I would concur, that's a--it's a pretty
good assessment. Essentially, again, for Americans paying
attention here, we certainly recognize, as a people, we
recognize that the Communist Chinese leadership poses a
potential threat to world peace and particularly their threat
to seize essentially control and possession of Taiwan as an
important ally for the United States and the free world.
These are--this is what regular Americans discuss when we
talk about, you know, what is the potential for war with China.
So the gray--the gray zone coercion and their tactics to
advance their own causes in that region while staying below the
threshold of what would internationally be recognized as an act
of war, they're still being very aggressive using war cannons
and water cannons rather and quite aggressive maneuvers with
their ships.
Just recently, they conducted a very threatening naval
blockade around Taiwan, and there was American presence there,
which is normally the case in Taiwan. So I ask you, Captain, do
you--did you serve with Admiral Philip Davidson? Are you
familiar with Admiral Davidson? Are you familiar with the
Davidson window?
Mr. Sharman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Higgins. His anticipated potential manifestation of
conflict, he called it, within 6 years. That was 2021. So we've
reached the edge of the Davidson window here. How likely are we
to face significant conflict with China, specifically regarding
Taiwan, in the coming year or two? You teach at the war
college, right?
Mr. Sharman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Higgins. The Naval War College. You're a gentleman of
distinguished accomplishment. I've read your bio, and thank you
for your service. So just tell America, how likely are we to
face conflict with China in the Pacific?
Mr. Sharman. Congressman Higgins, thank you so much for
your question, and it is a really good one. I think putting
time lines on is very dangerous, but because--the PRC has put
very specific dates that they are looking at. Twenty-twenty-
seven is a modernization goal to have capabilities that they
need for Taiwan. Twenty-thirty-five is a modernization goal
where they want to be fully modernized.
Mr. Higgins. You're talking about China.
Mr. Sharman. China.
Mr. Higgins. China has a 2027 goal?
Mr. Sharman. China has a 2027 goal----
Mr. Higgins. OK. In my remaining 30 seconds, I would like
to intersect and associate a question here for you, because you
also have training in language, Japanese, Chinese, and
Vietnamese, my understanding is. I recall in the 1980's you
used to advise us, ``Don't pay attention to what Yasser Arafat
was saying in English; pay attention to what he's saying in
Arabic.'' So I'm asking you, what is the president of China
saying in Chinese about Taiwan?
Mr. Sharman. He is directing his military to absolutely
prepare him options for Taiwan. He is on a determined--we call
this the decade of maximum danger, is what we call it in my
office. Xi Jinping is not getting any younger, and he wants to
resolve the Taiwan question and not pass it onto another
generation. It's his birthday in 2 weeks; he turns 71. So the
next decade is going to be particularly difficult as new
capabilities continue to come along--come on-line and their
capacity increases overall.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, gentlemen. I have questions in
writing I'll submit to you each. Thank you for appearing here
today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Gimenez. Mr. Higgins, I plan on having a second round,
so if you have some additional questions, please stick around.
I now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Garcia.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here today. Appreciate that.
You know, our country obviously faces unprecedented
challenges and threats on both the domestic and international
stage. We're just discussing one of our major threats, of
course, globally. We also know that climate catastrophes like
the Maui fires to repelling Russian expansion in the Arctic to
supporting our allies in the Indo-Pacific in the face of
Chinese aggression, all of these are absolutely critical to the
Coast Guard, to Coast Guard readiness, to the ability for the
Coast Guard to do its job.
In a world that's becoming more and more dangerous, our
partnerships and alliances keep us strong. Our Coast Guard's
presence and operations across the globe are vital to
maintaining those friendships. I was mayor of Long Beach,
California, prior to this. I think we've--I've met some of you
before and obviously worked with our Coast Guard very closely.
We have one of America's largest ports, and so the work the
Coast Guard does there is incredibly important. The
professionalism of the Coast Guard is incredible, so thank you.
Obviously, this work is bipartisan, which is really
important. We also know in talking about China that China is
clearly a competitor and someone that our relationship is
increasingly complicated, and we also need to recognize at the
same time that China is our largest trading partner. It's
America's No. 1 trading partner by far, and our economies are
also linked together by trade, particularly coming in through
our West Coast ports.
We also want to make sure that the Coast Guard has an
important relationship to play in that relationship.
Mr. Cooper, I want to thank you for being here and your
many years of service to the Coast Guard. I wanted to ask, you
know, we've recently seen escalations of China's behavior both
on the economic side and on the military side. These actions
have endangered the economies and livelihoods of the island
nations and, of course, threatened our U.S. interests. What can
the Coast Guard do perhaps separately than DOD, that's
different than DOD, that maybe DOD can't do to further our U.S.
interests in the region?
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, sir. Appreciate the question. The
Coast Guard obviously does a lot more than just security,
right. There--they do the environmental response. They also
have the ability to project defense operations. They do port
waterway coastal security. They aid navigation. So working with
the partners in the Indo-Pacific, it allows--their presence
there allows them to not only provide training for security but
also search and rescue, if needed, as well as environmental
response or humanitarian assistance. So it's a multipronged
capability that the Coast Guard brings to the table.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. To expand on some of the challenges
particularly with China, according to the illegal, unreported,
and unregulated fishing index, China ranks as the worst
offender of all 152 countries world-wide that are tracked. A
recent strategic report from the U.S. Coast Guard assessed that
illegal fishing has replaced piracy as a leading global
maritime security threat. Clearly, we're destroying ocean
ecosystems, crippling food chains, threatening sustainable
fisheries. Of the 36 nations within the Indo-Pacific region,
nearly all are maritime nations with over one-third being
smaller island nations.
Mr. Cooper, can you walk us through the role the Coast
Guard is playing in supporting these nations and addressing the
issue of China's illegal fishing?
Mr. Cooper. Yes. Thank you, again, for the question,
Congressman. So the Coast Guard has been very innovative and
leaning forward in some of their support to the Indo-Pacific
nations, not only with the training. When I was Active Duty, we
would train a lot of those forces on securing their own
sovereignty, providing them the capabilities and the capacity
to do that.
So, in addition, they--we work closely with the Navy
through the Oceania Maritime Security Initiative, which focuses
on IUU fishing. They've put the additional Fast Response
Cutters in region. Then they also have the Indo-Pacific support
tender, which is out there doing IUU fishing. They've signed
some pretty substantial shiprider agreements with 12 of the
countries or 12 of the nations in the region, particularly
allowing the Coast Guard to do boardings and enforce IUU
fishing infractions in those nations' waters without a
shiprider presence, which is a tremendous capability that
they've provided to those countries.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. We know, you know, that China has a
massive fishing fleet, much larger than any other nation in the
world. Illegal behavior around fishing from the Chinese is very
common. Our partners like Vietnam and Philippines and the
Pacific and smaller island nations, of course, don't have
anywhere near the resources or capabilities to secure their own
waters.
Now, I understand and we've discussed this here actually at
this subcommittee before, that the Coast Guard only has about 5
cutters that are currently operating in the Indo-Pacific
region, which spans, of course, 40 million square miles. Mr.
Sadler, can you give us insight on to how an expanded fleet of
cutters would actually enable the Coast Guard to both
effectively enforce the maritime law but also safety for
mariners and coasties?
Mr. Sadler. Absolutely. Thank you. The question is having--
how can you maintain the right presence at the right place in
an immense Pacific Ocean, and it comes down to numbers. Coast
Guard is long overdue in providing publicly what that force
would require, fixed-wing aircraft at places like Canton Island
in Kiribati. So you have to also have places as well as ships
to do repairs, having repair facilities in, say, American
Samoa, and then having those cutters out patrolling our EEZs
first and then working and playing--to use a football term--
playing man, using collective intelligence gathering and
following these dark fleets and then vectoring in with our
allies and partners in the region to watch and to ensure and
regulate these largely unregulated distant fishing fleets,
Chinese fishing fleets.
Things like the Pacific QUAD, with France, New Zealand, and
Australia, long-standing is a venue for doing that. Then, also,
as already mentioned by Captain Cooper, using shipriders and
actually having virtual call-in to the Justice--the equivalent
of the Justice Departments in these island nations to effect
arrests and then to transfer those people to their own
shoreside justice system. So there's a lot that we can do.
There's little examples of it. But to really get it to the
scale that's meaningful against the threat, we have to get more
cutters into the theater.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you.
I'm now going to have a second round of questioning. So,
Mr. Sharman, do you agree with the statement that every dollar
that an American spends on Chinese goods will eventually be
used for, (A) the Chinese Communist Party oppressing and
suppressing its own people, and, (B) be used against--counter
to American interests?
Mr. Sharman. Mr. Chairman, I think there's certainly a heck
of a lot of repression that's going on in the PRC. I don't know
if I could say every single dollar, but I will chalk it up to
folks who say that, and there are folks who do a lot more
research than I do on that part.
Mr. Gimenez. But would you agree that we are funding--we
could be funding our greatest strategic threat globally right
now, that the--America is partially funding that threat?
Mr. Sharman. There's no question that we have relationships
with China and Chinese companies that are state-owned
enterprises that are filtering money directly back to the
Chinese Communist Party. There is no question that there is a
challenge we face because our trade is so interconnected and
intertwined, and it's difficult to disentangle ourselves. So I
do agree, yes, sir, that there is a--some funding that is going
back.
Mr. Gimenez. I may be more to the right on this and more
hawkish on this, but I do believe that we need to start
decoupling ourselves from the CCP, because I believe we are
funding the instruments of our demise, and we're also funding
the instruments that are suppressing and suppressing the
Chinese people today on the 35th anniversary of Tiananmen
Square.
I also believe that our policy of, you know, done some 30,
35 years ago of trying to bring China into, you know, the world
of nations and the World Trade Organization will go down as one
of the biggest miscalculations of policy in American history,
and we're going to be paying for it. So, while it will be
painful to decouple ourselves, we need to decouple. We need to
decouple yesterday, because the only way that we may not
avoid--the way that we may avoid a kinetic conflict is by
weakening them economically, because that's the only way that
they fund the PLA and all the other activities that they're
doing.
One question that I have for you, again, is you said that
this gray zone activity was part of a strategic plan by China,
and, frankly, I'm not understanding the strategic plan. I could
understand them doing gray zone activities against Taiwan and
probing that and probing that and probe--I don't understand why
they're also poking Japan and the Philippines and Vietnam and
other people or nations in their region, because those folks
are starting to wake up and, ``Hey, we need to do something
about this,'' and actually bringing them together, coalescing
them against China.
So what is the strategic vision or plan or outcome that
China is looking with these gray zone activities?
Mr. Sharman. So, Mr. Chairman, I think what--where China is
going is in what they would refer to as the near seas, that
being the Yellow Sea, the East China Sea, South China Sea. They
want to make that essentially a law enforcement area. They want
to demonstrate authority and the ability for their, say, their
Coast Guard to be able to enforce their laws and basically
subjugate the entire areas to Chinese law and their
institutions and their way of how they look at the world.
That frees up then the Navy, the People's Liberation Army
Navy to expand, to go increasingly going global. So, from a
strategic perspective, you have kind-of a near seas, you have a
far seas, and frankly you have an Arctic that I think is coming
down the road. So this is what is ahead. China seeks to have a
world-class military by 2049, and that world-class, their
concept of world-class is the gold standard, the United States
military. They want to have those--some of the same
capabilities to be able to go around the world and conduct
operations around the world.
Mr. Gimenez. Now, let's turn our attention--OK. Yes, I
agree with that.
Now, one final thing, and I want for Captain Sadler, maybe,
during my time, fentanyl. Fentanyl is killing 70,000, 80,000
Americans every single year. We know that the precursors
chemicals are actually being manufactured in China. Not only
are they being manufactured in China, they're being subsidized
by the CCP. Even though those precursor chemicals are actually
illegal to sell in China, they subsidize those companies so
they can export this poison into the United States. How does
that poison make its way into the United States? I know it goes
to the Mexican cartels, but how does it get to them?
Mr. Sadler. So there's two main avenues: One is, they come
through the partial coast system. They come right into our
ports of entry. At LAX right now, there's stories that we're
starting to find because we're actually inspecting more
rigorously there. More needs to be shown on that.
But at the other end of this, with the heavier--because
there's a number of precursor chemicals, some of which wouldn't
fit into a partial of which you could easily cover up with
false statements. So you need barrels of this stuff. That's
coming in by ships mostly, some by aircraft, coming into, say,
Mexico or other countries in the region and then ferried out to
the border and then manufactured on either the north or the
south side of the border.
It's wherever they can get away with it. It's constantly
moving and changing. But you have to put the cartels out of
business, and the way you hurt their bottom line and take away
that vehicle for Chinese crimes and also the Chinese Communist
Party to get that poison into the United States is you have to
sever off the sea routes that the cartels rely on.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. My time is up.
I now recognize the Ranking Member.
OK. I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Captain Sadler, could you give us your assessment of how
you feel about the Navy's current shipbuilding evolution with
embracing emerging technologies of smaller, relatively less
expensive, perhaps expendable, autonomous vessels, and what
role they should play in the Navy's future, including our
engagements on-going with China below the threshold of war? Or
should that threshold be crossed and we're in open conflict
with China, what role would smaller, less expensive,
expandible, autonomous vessels play, and should the Navy
embrace that emerging technology?
Mr. Sadler. I will try to be as short as I possibly can and
narrowly focused. First is an example of success. Task force
59, the Fifth Fleet in the Persian Gulf, where they used
unmanned vessels very rapidly by using some very unconventional
approaches in procurement and also partnering with other
countries. That's being--in the process of being replicated in
Fourth Fleet, which is southern command, which is, a lot of
these illicit trades routes that I'm talking about, that's
inside their area of responsibility. That needs to happen now,
and it should be supported. It's going to rely on small,
unmanned vessels as sensors, like sail drone, but also even
aircraft drones as well. They need something to operate
sustained way off out at sea, like a mothership.
In the Pacific, now you've got Pacific Fleet that also
stood up in the last couple of years a development squadron of
pairing a manned ship Zumwalt-class destroyer with large and
medium unmanned vessels. That has a very high-end operational.
But, again, if you don't have that upper-level control, the
Chinese are going to be able to push that red line further and
further north and get away with more and more. So you have to
get those unmanned vessels out into the Pacific. You need to
use them as sensors and also as a backstop as a weapons
platform should things go higher.
Mr. Higgins. I generally agree with your assessment. It's
become very clear that the expense of large traditional, sort-
of, 20th-Century envisioned massive vessels of war that are
incredibly expensive to build and remarkably easy to sink
apparently with small, inexpensive, expendable, properly armed,
autonomous craft. This is a reality that we are hopeful that
our Navy can embrace, and we think that it would be quite
effective in pushing against the momentum that China has
established with its shipbuilding, which is important to note
greatly outpaces American shipbuilding. We believe that--I
believe that we can build a force that is so overwhelmingly
daunting to the vessels that China has constructed, we think we
can further secure the world including Indo-Pacific region.
Captain Cooper, same question for the Coast Guard: What
role would smaller, less expensive, autonomous vessels play for
the Coast Guard?
Mr. Cooper. Yes. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
So the Coast Guard has written unmanned systems strategy. In my
opinion, it needs to be implemented much more quickly. If you
look at the Indo-Pacific, similar to what Captain Sadler is
saying, I think there's a lot of potential to include unmanned
systems to help with the maritime domain awareness
specifically.
Also, a lot of those partner nations are fairly weak in
their maritime capability and not as--don't have as much
funding as the United States, and so these cheaper systems
would be useful in allowing those countries to actually use
them for maritime domain awareness and to be able to control
their own sovereign waters.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Chairman, those were my additional questions. I yield.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you.
I thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the
Members for their questions.
The Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we would ask the witnesses to
respond to those in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be open for 10 days.
Without objection, this subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:04 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Statement of Isaac B. Kardon, Senior Fellow, Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace
June 4, 2024
Thank you, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thenedar, and other
Members of the subcommittee, for granting me the honor of submitting
testimony for the record. The primary question posed in this hearing
concerns how best to ``combat Chinese threats'' in the gray zone, so
this brief is addressed toward better comprehending the nature and
scope of those threats.
So-called ``gray zone'' activities or tactics are recognizable and
controversial elements of the People's Republic of China's (PRC)
strategy in maritime East Asia. Chinese leaders' primary aims are to
assert sovereignty over disputed island territories, effectively
control strategic maritime and air space, and gradually erode U.S.
power and alliance commitments in the region.
Most definitions of the gray zone key on the uncertain political
and operational space between war and peace; they describe calibrated
coercion that does not breach certain escalatory thresholds while
achieving certain coercive effects. PRC practices fit this general
pattern, the archetypal cases of which are in fact PRC maritime
campaigns beginning in the South China Sea (SCS) in the late 2000's,
extending into the East China Sea (ECS) in the 2010's, and creeping
into the Taiwan Strait in the 2020's.\1\ These campaigns involve
diverse PRC state and non-state actors operating across the East Asian
littoral, in furtherance of one or more of the following strategic
objectives:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Andrew Chubb, ``PRC Assertiveness in the South China Sea:
Measuring Continuity and Change, 1970-2015,'' International Security
45.3 (2021): 79-121; Ketian Zhang. China's Gambit: The Calculus of
Coercion (Cambridge 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Gradual encirclement and establishment of effective control
over disputed island territories (viz., Taiwan, Senkaku/Diaoyu
Islands, Spratly Islands, Macclesfield Bank features)
(2) Imposition of PRC (enforcement) jurisdiction over water and air
space surrounding disputed territories (e.g., Kinmen Island,
Paracel Islands)
(3) Interference with legitimate commercial activity by coastal
States (e.g., harassment of Indonesian oil and gas activities
near Natuna, exclusion of Philippines fishing from Scarborough
Shoal)
(4) Challenges to lawful freedoms of navigation and overflight by
the United States and its allies (e.g., dangerous intercepts of
vessels and aircraft of the United States and Australia
exercising high seas freedoms in and around the South China Sea
and Taiwan Strait)
(5) Undermining the credibility of U.S. alliances (e.g., exploiting
divergent threat perceptions between United States and
Philippines re: Second Thomas Shoal, U.S. and Japan re: Senkaku
Islands).
China's maritime gray zone actions are multifaceted, and typically
include some combination of the following: (a) PRC maritime law
enforcement (MLE) vessels, (b) enforcing PRC maritime law and
regulations, and (c) implementing maritime and boundary policies issued
by the state bureaucracy, (d) under the political direction of central
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) leadership. These tactics are often
observed (e) in coordination with maritime militia forces, as well as
(f) in concert with the PRC civilian fishing fleet, marine scientific
vessels, and offshore oil and gas industry assets, with (g) People's
Liberation Army (PLA) forces available, but just over the horizon and
typically not employed as the direct instruments of coercion.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See Isaac Kardon, China's Law of the Sea: The New Rules of
Maritime Order (Yale 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Leaders in Beijing have found this tactical package to work
reasonably well against each of China's maritime neighbors: Japan,
North and South Korea, Taiwan, the Philippines, Brunei, Malaysia,
Indonesia, and Vietnam. Not one of these rival claimants has managed to
settle its maritime boundaries with the PRC, which is unique among
claimants in having no (0) settled maritime boundaries. Nor do any
claimants have any meaningful bilateral negotiations under way with
Beijing concerning disputed territorial sovereignty and maritime
jurisdiction. In multilateral settings, only a protracted and dilute
``Code of Conduct'' process is in effect, which does not even aim to
resolve but rather to palliate conflicts over some but not all of the
disputed SCS islands.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Vietnam is the sole disputant over the Paracel Islands, which
have been excluded from the COC process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These are the unusual geopolitical conditions under which China has
built up its capacity to operate in the gray zone, and thus far
successfully make incremental gains at its neighbors' expense without
any effective American counter across 4 administrations. Washington's
fixation with upholding freedom of military navigation has persisted,
and still does not meet the central concerns of regional claimants. For
these coastal countries, their maritime resource entitlements and
jurisdictional space are slowly being subsumed by the PRC. The United
States, meanwhile, has no jurisdiction to defend, only a bedrock
interest in military and economic access. That orientation makes each
Chinese gray zone provocation appear marginal and not worth the risk of
further escalation; yet each such action is cumulative. Over the last
20 years, China has normalized ever-greater effective control over
disputed waters that should, by rights, be foreign exclusive economic
zones.
Basic uncertainty about exactly what is at stake in the gray zone
is a part of the appeal of this concept of operations. Rather than make
explicit, legally cognizable claims and bargaining on that basis,
Chinese officials have for decades declined to define the scope and
substance of their territorial and jurisdictional claims. This
strategic ambiguity is most infamous in the case of the unaccountable
``9-dash line'' in the SCS, but it is characteristic of the whole
program. China's varied coercion tactics are non-uniform in different
sectors, creating just enough friction and doubt to deny the activities
of other states, and to promise sustained higher levels of coercion if
targets do not back down.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See Kardon, China's Law of the Sea, Chapters 3-6; see also
Zhang, China's Gambit, Chapters 3-4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While specific PRC gray zone activities vary in each case and over
time in long-running campaigns (see, for example the patterns of
Chinese law enforcement activity in the territorial seas and contiguous
zones around the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands, or episodic enforcement of
hydrocarbon rights in southern tier of SCS against Malaysia and
Indonesia but not Brunei),\5\ there is an overall unity to the approach
across the whole region. Generally, Chinese gray zone campaigns
establish localized PRC advantages that can be sustained over time
without precipitating acute crisis. When these actions target American
allies, Beijing has also used its campaigns to degrade alliance
cohesion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ ``Trends in China Coast Guard and Other Vessels in the Waters
Surrounding the Senkaku Islands, and Japan's Response,'' Japan Ministry
of Foreign Affairs (April 2024), https://www.mofa.go.jp/region/
page23e000021.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, the intensity and efficacy of PRC gray zone activity has
increased over the past decade. Access to well-positioned operating
bases at Mischief Reef, Fiery Cross Reef, and Subi Reef allows China to
employ the superior mass of their constabulary and fishing fleets and
remain permanently on station in remote waters. Meanwhile,
modernization and expansion of China's Coast Guard enables PRC law
enforcement across the East Asian littoral, creating the permissive
conditions for regularized PRC presence in the disputed territorial
waters of the Senkaku Islands as well as the far reaches of the SCS.
Recommendation 1.--The U.S. Government should launch a bottom-up
comparative review of how regional states have both failed and
succeeded in disrupting or rolling back PRC gray zone operations.
Existing State and Defense Department efforts have improved maritime
domain awareness and interoperability with allies and partners, but
more systematic attention is warranted from the administration.
Comparative insights are urgently needed because the Taiwan Strait is
now the site of the most conspicuous new cases of PRC gray zone
activity, particularly notable around the now-defunct median line and
mainland-adjacent offshore islands.\6\ Fortunately, much hard-won
experience, knowledge, and capacity is already resident in the region.
Japan, for example, has dealt with Chinese patrols in disputed
territorial seas for 15 years; their close observation of Chinese
behavioral patterns and Coast Guard tactics in particular can yield
practical lessons for countering the on-going encirclement campaign
around Kinmen Island. The Philippines is currently contending
effectively with certain PRC gray zone tactics employed around Second
Thomas Shoal; any lessons from this campaign can be applied to check
creeping mainland encroachment into the Taiwan Strait.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Isaac Kardon and Jennifer Kavanagh, ``How China Will Squeeze,
Not Seize, Taiwan,'' Foreign Affairs (May 21, 2024), https://
www.foreignaffairs.com/china/how-china-will-squeeze-not-seize-taiwan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recommendation 2.--The primary targets of these gray zone actions
are regional states, whose interests must figure more prominently in
U.S. policy objectives in East Asia. Reframing U.S. policy objectives
in terms that will resonate with allies and partners in the region will
also require bottom-up review of the maritime rights and interests of
Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, the Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei,
Indonesia, and Vietnam. While the United States is directly affected to
some degree by PRC gray zone activities, it is rival claimants in the
region that are most persistently harmed. Despite that, American policy
in the South and East China Seas has become one-dimensional and ill-
suited to our broader national interests in maritime East Asia. Freedom
of navigation operations (FONOPs) are the poster-child for an
ineffective policy that prioritizes a narrow self-interest in military
navigation over a strategic interest in maintaining good order and
access to the region, in part by upholding the specific sovereign
rights--especially to fisheries and offshore oil and gas--that the
United Nations (UN) Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) entitles
them to enjoy.
Recommendation 3.--China's efforts to gradually change the
international law of the sea can be disrupted by prompt U.S.
ratification of the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea. China's gray
zone approach exploits the basic indeterminacy of international law.
Beijing benefits from the United States failing to pursue declarative
policies that shore up UNCLOS, restore U.S. standing, and cost little
to implement. By professing to be acting in line with their
interpretation of the international law of the sea, Chinese officials
``use the weapon of international law'' to gradually change regional
norms--and perhaps even general customary international law.\7\ If the
United States is to succeed in maintaining a stable maritime order, we
will have to invest over the long term in the law of the sea. The
current policy of nominal adherence to customary international law does
not meet the pointed challenge posed by China in the contemporary
international environment. An American self-exemption from certain
binding rules (like those governing dispute resolution) is too
legalistic to provide meaningful leadership to the international
community. Senate advice and consent on UNCLOS--as well as the new High
Seas Treaty--would signal renewed American capability to bolster and
rejuvenate ``rules-based international order'' against cynical appeals
to sovereign self-interest from China (and Russia).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ For discussion of scope of challenge to ``the rules,'' see
Kardon, China's Law of the Sea, Chapter 7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[all]
