- PORT CYBERSECURITY: THE INSIDIOUS THREAT TO U.S. MARITIME PORTS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PORT CYBERSECURITY: THE INSIDIOUS THREAT
TO U.S. MARITIME PORTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 29, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-53

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-402 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida, Chairman
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Shri Thanedar, Michigan, Ranking
Nick LaLota, New York                    Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Robert Garcia, California
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Vacancy, Subcommittee Staff Director
Alex Marston, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Shri Thanedar, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

Witnesses

Rear Admiral Derek Trinque, Director of Strategic Plans, Policy,
and Logistics (J5/J4), United States Transportation Command
(TRANSCOM):
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
Rear Admiral Wayne R. Arguin Jr., Assistant Commandant for
Prevention Policy, United States Coast Guard:
Oral Statement.................................................    13
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................    15
Rear Admiral John Vann, Coast Guard Cyber Command, United States
Coast Guard:
Oral Statement.................................................    18
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................    15
Ms. Christa Brzozowski, Assistant Secretary for Trade and
Economic Security, Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    21

PORT CYBERSECURITY: THE INSIDIOUS THREAT TO U.S. MARITIME PORTS

----------

Thursday, February 29, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Transportation and
Maritime Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., at
Room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Carlos A. Gimenez
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Gimenez, Higgins, Lee, Thanedar,
Payne, and Garcia.
Also present: Representatives D'Esposito, Pfluger, and
Menendez.
Chairman Gimenez. The Homeland Security Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security will come to order.
Without objection the Chair may declare the subcommittee in
recess at any point. Today's hearing will examine threats to
U.S. ports infrastructure, particularly concerning ship-to-
shore cranes. Without objection, the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Pluger, the gentleman from New York, Mr. D'Esposito, the
gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Ezell, and the gentleman from
New Jersey, Mr. Menendez, are permitted to sit with the
subcommittee and ask questions of the witnesses.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement. Today we
are here to discuss a matter of national urgency that strikes
at the very heart of our Nation's economic vitality and
security, the integrity of our maritime infrastructure. This
includes port equipment, such as ship-to-shore cranes and other
operational technology in wide-spread use at American ports,
and that it is manufactured or installed in the People's
Republic of China. The proliferation of port equipment and
operational technology manufactured or installed by PRC
engineers at our Nation's ports introduces significant supply
chain vulnerabilities into our maritime transportation system.
As a country, we must acknowledge and assess these risks,
threats, and vulnerabilities, and decide how to effectively
respond.
When I was mayor of Miami Dade County, I witnessed first-
hand the critical role that ports lay in our local, national,
and global economy. Our ports are not just hubs of commerce,
they are gateways to the world. However, our ports are
increasingly vulnerable given the evolving threat landscape. We
must address this issue with the utmost seriousness. Last week,
the Biden administration signed an Executive Order providing
the U.S. Coast Guard with new authorities to respond to
potential malicious actors targeting our maritime sector, and
particularly those from the PRC. I commend the administration
in this initial action, but I know that more must be done.
The ship-to-shore cranes towering over our docks, while
instrumental to our port operations, have become a focal point
of concern. Most of these cranes are made by CPMC, a PRC state-
owned enterprise under the direct control of the CCP. I have
witnessed first-hand the destructive power of communist regimes
and have no interest in allowing the CCP to conduct industrial
and economic espionage in our ports through their cranes.
Last March, Chairman Gallagher of the Select Committee on
the CCP and I visited Port Miami to speak directly with port
operators and to highlight the legislative efforts we are
undertaking to safeguard our ports. This Congress, I introduced
the Port Crane Security and Inspection Act. This piece of
legislation is a testament to our commitment to ensuring that
the backbone of our maritime infrastructure is not compromised.
In addition, I have led an on-going joint investigation with
the Select Committee on the CCP to deepen our understanding of
the risks at hand. We have learned that these ship-to-shore
cranes, which are essential to our maritime operations, could
potentially be used as conduits for espionage or as a CCP
Trojan horse that threatened to undermine our national
security.
The findings are clear. Nearly 80 percent, and I will
repeat that, nearly 80 percent of the ship-to-shore cranes in
our ports in the United States come from CPMC. This near-
monopoly not only presents cybersecurity threats, but also
supply chain vulnerabilities that could be exploited by those
who wish to inflict damage to our Nation. Monopoly allows for
CPMC to compromise U.S.-bound cranes that would cause
malfunction or facilitate cyber espionage.
Fortunately, communist China's influence in supply chain
extends beyond the state-owned enterprises like CPMC. Third-
party companies often create the internal operational
components for these ship-to-shore cranes. These include
programmable logic controllers, which control many of the ship-
to-shore crane systems, as well as crane drives and motors. In
most cases, CPMC requires that these companies ship their
components to the PRC, where they can be installed by CPMC
engineers or technicians.
In the context of our on-going investigation, our committee
has explored the role of ABB, a Swiss engineering firm. ABB
provides its components directly to CPMC engineers to install
on cranes in communist China. I have requested information from
ABB's U.S. Country Holding officer about the company's supply
chain security practices, as well as other companies with ties
to the CCP. Better understanding their practices gives us a
broader picture of how their components may be compromised. I
was discouraged that ABB had not been as forthcoming as they
should have been, particularly when it involves U.S. national
security.
Resolving these concerns is crucial for ensuring the
security and integrity of the United States maritime
infrastructure and protecting against the risks associated with
foreign influence and control over critical supply chains. We
cannot stand idly by while components of American maritime
infrastructure could be weaponized against us. It is not just
about commerce. It is also about national security, about
protecting the very fabric of our society from those who seek
to unravel it. Going forward, we must take decisive action to
secure our ports, to invest in domestic manufacturing of port
infrastructure, and to ensure that every ship-to-shore crane,
every bolt, every piece of equipment that operates within our
borders is safe, secure, and serves the interests of the United
States.
[The statement of Chairman Gimenez follows:]
Statement of Chairman Carlos A. Gimenez
Today, we are here to discuss a matter of national urgency that
strikes at the very heart of our Nation's economic vitality and
security: the integrity of our maritime infrastructure. This includes
port equipment, such as ship-to-shore cranes and other operational
technology, in wide-spread use at American ports, and that is
manufactured or installed in the People's Republic of China.
The proliferation of port equipment and operational technology
manufactured or installed by PRC engineers at our Nation's ports
introduces significant supply chain vulnerabilities into our Maritime
Transportation System. As a country, we must acknowledge and assess
these risks, threats, and vulnerabilities and decide how to effectively
respond.
When I was mayor of Miami-Dade County, I witnessed first-hand the
critical role that ports play in our local, national, and global
economy. Our ports are not just hubs of commerce, they are gateways to
the world.
However, our ports are increasingly vulnerable given the evolving
threat landscape. We must address this issue with the utmost
seriousness. Last week, the Biden administration signed an Executive
Order providing the U.S. Coast Guard with new authorities to respond to
potential malicious actors targeting our maritime sector--and
particularly those from the PRC. While I commend the administration on
this initial action, more must be done.
The ship-to-shore cranes towering over our docks--while
instrumental to our port operations--have become a focal point of
concern. Most of these cranes are made by ZPMC, a PRC state-owned
enterprise under the direct control of the CCP. I have witnessed first-
hand the destructive power of communist regimes, and I have no interest
in allowing the CCP to conduct industrial and economic espionage in our
ports through their cranes.
Last March, Chairman Gallagher of the Select Committee on the CCP
and I visited Port Miami to speak directly with port operators and to
highlight the legislative efforts we are undertaking to safeguard our
ports.
This Congress, I introduced the Port Crane Security and Inspection
Act. This piece of legislation is a testament to our commitment to
ensuring that the backbone of our maritime infrastructure is not
compromised.
In addition, I have led an on-going joint investigation with the
Select Committee on the CCP to deepen our understanding of the risks at
hand. We have learned that these ship-to-shore cranes, which are
essential to our maritime operations, could potentially be used as
conduits for espionage, or as a CCP Trojan horse, that threaten to
undermine our national security.
The findings are clear: nearly 80 percent of the ship-to-shore
cranes in our ports come from ZPMC, and this near-monopoly not only
presents cybersecurity threats but also supply chain vulnerabilities
that could be exploited by those who wish to inflict damage on our
Nation. The monopoly allows for ZPMC to compromise U.S.-bound cranes
that could cause malfunction or facilitate cyber espionage.
Unfortunately, Communist China's influence in the supply chain
extends beyond state-owned enterprises like ZPMC. Third-party companies
often create the internal operational components for these ship-to-
shore cranes. These include programmable logic controllers which
control many ship-to-shore crane systems, as well as crane drives and
motors. In most cases, ZPMC requires that these companies ship their
components to the PRC where they can be installed by ZPMC engineers or
technicians.
In the context of our on-going investigation, our committees have
explored the role of ABB, a Swiss engineering firm. ABB provides its
components directly to ZPMC engineers to install on cranes in Communist
China.
I have requested information from ABB's U.S. Country Holding
Officer about the company's supply chain security practices, as well as
other companies with ties to the CCP. Better understanding their
practices gives us a broader picture of how their components may be
compromised. I am discouraged that ABB has not been as forthcoming as
they should be, particularly when it involves U.S. national security.
Resolving these concerns is crucial for ensuring the security and
integrity of the United States' maritime infrastructure and protecting
against the risks associated with foreign influence and control over
critical supply chains.
We cannot stand idly by while components of American maritime
infrastructure could be weaponized against us. It is not just about
commerce; it is about national security, about protecting the very
fabric of our society from those who seek to unravel it.
Going forward, we must take decisive action to secure our ports, to
invest in domestic manufacturing of port infrastructure, and to ensure
that every ship-to-shore crane, every bolt, and every piece of
equipment that operates within our borders is safe, secure, and serves
the interests of the United States.

Chairman Gimenez. With that, I will yield back. Now I
recognize a Ranking Member, Mr. Thanedar, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Thanedar. Good morning, everybody, and thank you,
Chairman Gimenez, for your kindness in accommodating my
lateness here. I also thank you for calling today's important
and timely hearing. Thank you also to our panel of witnesses
for sharing your expertise today.
The security of our Nation's seaports is vital to the
success of our economy. Seaports move more than 99 percent of
the cargo coming to the United States from overseas. They
support more than 31 million American jobs and generate $5.4
trillion in total economic value, representing more than a
quarter of Nation's economy. The daily life of Americans
everywhere depends upon the ability of government experts, port
owners, operators, and their partners in stakeholders to
protect ports and rest of the marine transportation system from
both physical and cyber attacks.
As ports have become increasingly networked and reliant on
computer systems, the importance of instituting strong
cybersecurity protections has arisen dramatically. We have
already seen the devastating impacts of attacks on ports can
have cyber attacks on ports in the United States and overseas
have brought the transport of cargo to a standstill and cost
hundreds of millions of dollars in economic damage. Thankfully,
the Biden administration is taking decisive actions. Just last
week, the administration announced a series of actions that
will greatly enhance the cybersecurity of our Nation's ports.
Last Wednesday, President Biden signed an Executive Order to
provide the Coast Guard the express authority to address
threats to cybersecurity and mitigate vulnerabilities. The
Executive Order also requires maritime industry partners to
report cyber incidents and threats to Government agencies.
In addition, the Coast Guard issued proposed regulations to
establish minimum cybersecurity requirements at USC ports,
covering a wide range of proven security measures to strengthen
our cyber defenses.
Finally, the Coast Guard has issued a security directive to
address vulnerabilities posed by Chinese manufactured cranes,
and President Biden announced an investment of more than $20
billion to improve port infrastructure and initiate domestic
manufacturing of cranes. Taken together, these actions
represent the single largest advancement in port cybersecurity
in history. These actions are just the latest in Biden
administration's comprehensive approach to addressing long-
standing cybersecurity threats to critical infrastructure.
Following Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack, the
administration committed to raising the cybersecurity baseline
and across all critical infrastructure sectors, including by
using existing authorities to set baseline cybersecurity
standards. At President Biden's direction, the Department of
Homeland Security initiated a series of cybersecurity sprints,
which encouraged key owners of operators in certain sectors to
make security investments in partnership with the Federal
Government. These sprints leverage DHS resources and enhance
cybersecurity across a wide range of critical areas. To date,
these sprints have covered ransomware, the cybersecurity work
force, industrial control systems, transportation, and election
security.
In addition, the Transportation Security Administration has
issued a series of important new security requirements
addressing cybersecurity across a range of transportation
modes, from pipelines to mass transit rail to aviation. Last
November, the Biden administration announced the creation of
Supply Chain Resilience Centers within DHS, which will help
coordinate and advance efforts to secure chains from
disruptions. In addition to its sector-by-sector assessment of
cybersecurity risks, the Biden administration has taken
seriously the growing threat posed by our most sophisticated
adversaries. Notably, in April 2023, Secretary Mayorkas
directed DHS to undertake a 90-day People's Republic of China
threat, Sprint, which evaluated, among other things, security
threats the People's Republic of China poses to U.S. supply
chains. The administration is taking bold actions to address
cybersecurity threats and vulnerabilities. Not just for cranes
and ports, but across all sectors of critical infrastructure.
Now it is time for Congress to do our part. We sit here
today on the verge of a potential Government shutdown, yet
again, because House Republicans have placed extreme political
demands above their responsibility to govern. I'm hopeful the
plan announced by Congressional leaders yesterday will help
keep the Government open. A Government shutdown would be
devastating to the Coast Guard's operation, including its
efforts to implement cybersecurity enhancement. I look forward
to hearing more about these critical efforts from our witnesses
and, Chairman. I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thanedar follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Shri Thanedar
February 29, 2024
The security of our Nation's seaports is vital to the success of
our economy. Seaports move more than 99 percent of the cargo coming to
the United States from overseas. They support more than 31 million
American jobs and generate $5.4 trillion in total economic value,
representing more than a quarter of the Nation's economy.
The daily life of Americans everywhere depends upon the ability of
government experts, port owners and operators, and their partners and
stakeholders to protect ports and the rest of the marine transportation
system from both physical and cyber attacks. As ports have become
increasingly networked and reliant on computer systems, the importance
of instituting strong cybersecurity protections has risen dramatically.
We have already seen the devastating impacts cyber attacks on ports
can have. Cyber attacks on ports in the United States and overseas have
brought the transport of cargo to a standstill and cost hundreds of
millions of dollars in economic damages. Thankfully, the Biden
administration is taking decisive action.
Just last week, the administration announced a series of actions
that will greatly enhance the cybersecurity of our Nation's ports. Last
Wednesday, President Biden signed an Executive Order to provide the
Coast Guard the express authority to address threats to cybersecurity
and mitigate vulnerabilities. The Executive Order also requires
maritime industry partners to report cyber incidents and threats to
Government agencies.
In addition, the Coast Guard issued proposed regulations to
establish minimum cybersecurity requirements at U.S. seaports, covering
a wide range of proven security measures to strengthen our cyber
defenses. Finally, the Coast Guard issued a security directive to
address vulnerabilities posed by Chinese-manufactured cranes, and
President Biden announced an investment of more than $20 billion to
improve port infrastructure and initiate domestic manufacturing of
cranes.
Taken together, these actions represent the single largest
advancement in port cybersecurity in history. These actions are just
the latest in the Biden administration's comprehensive approach to
addressing long-standing cybersecurity threats to critical
infrastructure. Following the Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack, the
administration committed to raising the cybersecurity baseline across
all critical infrastructure sectors, including by using existing
authorities to set baseline cybersecurity standards.
At President Biden's direction, the Department of Homeland Security
initiated a series of ``cybersecurity sprints,'' which encouraged key
owners and operators in certain sectors to make security investments in
partnership with the Federal Government. These sprints leveraged DHS's
resources and enhanced cybersecurity across a wide range of critical
areas. To date, these sprints have covered ransomware, the
cybersecurity workforce, Industrial Control Systems, transportation,
and election security.
In addition, the Transportation Security Administration has issued
a series of important new security requirements addressing
cybersecurity across a range of transportation modes, from pipelines,
to mass transit and rail, to aviation. Last November, the Biden
administration announced the creation of the Supply Chain Resilience
Center within DHS, which will help coordinate and advance efforts to
secure chains from disruptions.
In addition to its sector-by-sector assessment of cybersecurity
risks, the Biden administration has taken seriously the growing threat
posed by our most sophisticated adversaries. Notably, in April 2023,
Secretary Mayorkas directed DHS to undertake a 90-day People's Republic
of China Threats Sprint, which evaluated, among other things, security
threats the People's Republic of China poses to U.S. supply chains. The
administration is taking bold action to address cybersecurity threats
and vulnerabilities--not just for cranes and ports, but across all
sectors of critical infrastructure. Now, it is time for Congress to do
our part.
We sit here today on the verge of a potential Government shutdown--
yet again--because House Republicans have placed extreme political
demands above their responsibility to govern. A Government shutdown
would be devastating to the Coast Guard's operations, including its
efforts to implement cybersecurity enhancements.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, to the Ranking Member. Now
other Members of the Committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
February 29, 2024
The Committee on Homeland Security has a long history of conducting
oversight of the Department of Homeland Security's efforts to secure
critical infrastructure, including maritime ports. As threats have
evolved and adversaries have targeted our supply chains and cyber
defenses, the Department's mission has grown increasingly complex.
We have seen the impacts of ransomware and other cyber attacks
across a range of critical infrastructure sectors, including the
maritime sector, both within the United States and internationally. In
2017, for example, a ransomware attack against Danish shipping company
A.P. Moller-Maersk led to a shut-down of the Port of Los Angeles'
largest cargo terminal along with several others around the world. The
attack slowed shipping across the globe for weeks and cost Maersk as
much as $300 million.
Just last summer, a ransomware attack caused Japan's busiest
shipping port to shut down operations for 2 days. And though ransomware
attacks have caused the most harm to date, we are also aware of the
vulnerabilities posed by the decline in U.S. manufacturing over the
past several decades and the increased reliance on pieces of critical
infrastructure manufactured overseas.
The United States has become heavily reliant on Chinese
manufacturing in particular, and China hit an all-time high for its
share of total U.S. manufacturing trade under the previous Presidential
administration in 2020.
This committee has long studied the vulnerabilities caused by U.S.
reliance on Chinese manufacturing across a range of products, including
semiconductors, drones, subway cars, and--as we are discussing today--
ship-to-shore container cranes used at many U.S. seaports. Addressing
these challenges will require steady and consistent dedication and
investment over the coming decades, and I am glad to see there is
bipartisan commitment to doing so.
Thankfully, the Biden administration has taken unprecedented action
to set our Nation on the right path to securing our critical
infrastructure and supply chains. Last Congress, President Biden signed
into law the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the CHIPS and Science Act,
and the Inflation Reduction Act, among other legislation. Collectively,
these laws represent the most significant investments in American
manufacturing and infrastructure in generations.
Under the Biden administration, DHS has also taken action to secure
critical infrastructure and supply chains against cyber threats. In
March 2021, Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro Mayorkas outlined
a bold vision for raising the cybersecurity baseline across all
sectors. At Secretary Mayorkas' direction, DHS carried out a series of
60-day ``cybersecurity sprints'' on a wide range of topics, leveraging
DHS resources and encouraging owners and operators of critical
infrastructure to invest in cybersecurity enhancements in partnership
with the Government.
Following the ransomware attack against Colonial Pipeline in May
2021, the Transportation Security Administration issued new
cybersecurity mandates for pipelines, freight and passenger rail, mass
transit, and aviation. Last November, DHS announced the creation of the
Supply Chain Resilience Center, which is studying ways to enhance the
resiliency of maritime ports as a top priority. And just last week, the
Biden administration announced a series of aggressive actions to secure
the maritime sector.
President Biden signed an Executive Order to require cyber incident
reporting and provide the Coast Guard express authority to act in
response to cyber threats. The Coast Guard issued a notice of proposed
rulemaking to build on the mandates TSA has issued across
transportation modes and require maritime partners to institute similar
cybersecurity measures. The Coast Guard also issued a directive to
protect ports from the vulnerabilities posed by foreign-manufactured
cranes.
Finally, the Biden administration announced a $20 million
investment in port infrastructure, using funding from the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act. This investment
includes an agreement with the PACECO Corporation to manufacture port
cranes within the United States for the first time in more than 30
years. I look forward to learning more about these recently-announced
efforts from our witnesses today.
I also look forward to working with my colleagues on both sides of
the aisle to secure the funding needed to ensure these actions can be
implemented as effectively as possible. The security of U.S. ports is
paramount, and I am glad our committee has maintained its focus on
these issues.

Chairman Gimenez. Again, I am pleased to have a
distinguished panel of witnesses before us today on this
critical topic. I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise
their right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Gimenez. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative. Thank you, and please be
seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses. Rear
Admiral Derek Trinque serves as director for strategic plans,
policy, and logistics for U.S. Transportation Command. Rear
Admiral Wayne Arguin serves as the assistant commandant for
prevention policy for the U.S. Coast Guard. Rear Admiral John
Vann serves as the commander for the U.S. Coast Guard Cyber
Command. Ms. Christina Brzozowski serves as the acting
assistant secretary for the Trade Economic Security Office of
Strategic Policy and Plans for the Department of Homeland
Security. I challenge you to do that in one breath.
I thank each of our distinguished witnesses for being here
today. I recognize Rear Admiral Trinque for 5 minutes to
summarize his opening statements.

STATEMENT OF REAR ADMIRAL DEREK TRINQUE, DIRECTOR OF STRATEGIC
PLANS, POLICY, AND LOGISTICS (J5/J4), UNITED STATES
TRANSPORTATION COMMAND (TRANSCOM)

Admiral Trinque. Thank you, sir. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking
Member Thanedar, and distinguished Members of the committee.
I'm honored to be here with my colleagues from the United
States Coast Guard and Department of Homeland Security to
discuss U.S. Transportation Command's key role with strategic
seaports. USTRANSCOM is a functional warfighting combatant
command, including three component commands, the Air Force's
Air Mobility Command, the Navy's Military Sealift Command, and
the Army's Surface Deployment and Distribution Command.
Together, we provide support to the 10 other U.S. combatant
commands, the military services, defense agencies, and other
Government organizations. We are an agile and resilient
logistics enterprise, which conducts globally integrated
mobility operations, leads the broader joint deployment and
distribution enterprise, and provides enabling capabilities to
project and sustain the joint force in support of national
objectives.
With a changing strategic and operational landscape, our
logistics and mobility enterprise will play an increasingly
critical role in achieving our National defense objectives. On
any given day, USTRANSCOM is conducting more than 400 airlift
missions, more than 40 air refueling missions, and transporting
10 patients through air evacuation. We have an aircraft taking
off and landing every 2 to 3 minutes, over 200 rail cars en
route, 30 ships under way, 1,500 freight shipments en route, 20
defense couriers en route, and 1,200 personal vehicle and
property shipments en route. To remain successful, USTRANSCOM
must be ready to project power today and tomorrow, and we will
only achieve this through our partnerships with commercial
industry.
Our competitors watch our every move and quickly digest
lessons to improve their ability to disrupt, degrade, or deny
our capabilities. We synchronize our operations, activities,
and investments to balance the enterprise's attention on
today's requirements while preparing to meet those of tomorrow.
To maximize our role across the spectrum of competition and
conflict, we align our campaigning objectives across the
primary elements of our warfighting strategy.
Strategic seaports are vital nodes in the Nation's
transportation network and play a critical role in the
Department of Defense's ability to deploy forces and equipment
world-wide. Only 18 of all U.S. commercial seaports are
officially designated DoD strategic seaports. These strategic
seaports are particularly critical to USTRANSCOM ability to
project military power. USTRANSCOM oversees and directs
strategic transportation operations executed by Military
Sealift Command and Military Surface Deployment and
Distribution Command. In this role and under DoD guidance,
USTRANSCOM, in coordination with port security stakeholders,
will conduct, arrange, and/or augment other agencies' port
assessment activities to identify and remediate vulnerabilities
to infrastructure critical to strategic deployment and
sustainment missions. In direct coordination with applicable
U.S. Coast Guard captains of the port, the results of these
assessments are shared with appropriate port security
stakeholders while protecting controlled, unclassified
information.
The Ports for National Defense program provides the
engineering and analytic foundation for the DoD Strategic
Seaport program. We work with our partners in the National
Ports Readiness Network, including Surface Deployment and
Distribution Command, Military Sealift Command, U.S. Northern
Command, U.S. Army Forces Command, the U.S. Coast Guard, U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, the Transportation Security Agency,
and the Department of Transportation's maritime administration,
who also serves as the chair for the NPRN to establish formal
coordination and cooperation with the commercial seaports, most
important to DoD.
USTRANSCOM is the Department of Defense's single port
manager and maintains agreements with each of these commercial
ports to support timely access to the facilities needed to
conduct a large-scale rapid deployment. Each port, alongside
the maritime administration, generates and maintains a port
readiness plan. This plan identifies the specific port
facilities that would be made available to DoD at time of need.
Strategic seaports voluntarily participate in the program. We
are grateful for seaport participation as a vital aspect of
USTRANSCOM's ability to project power in support of our Nation.
Again, I thank you for the invitation to be a witness at
this hearing, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Trinque follows:]
Prepared Statement of Rear Admiral Derek Trinque
29 February 2024
who we are--our mission
U.S. Transportation Command's (USTRANSCOM) enduring purpose is to
project and sustain combat power whenever and wherever our Nation
chooses. As 1 of 11 combatant commands, our warfighting team is a
diverse force, comprised of 3 component commands, 1 subordinate
command, our allies, and our interagency and commercial partners--all
of which constitutes the broader Joint Deployment and Distribution
Enterprise (JDDE). Within the ever-changing strategic and operational
landscape, our logistics and mobility enterprise continue to play an
integral role in assuring our Nation's defense as well as to provide
our national leadership strategic advantage. We must ensure the Joint
Force can defend the Nation, take care of our people, and succeed
through teamwork. To deter and win, the 2022 National Defense Strategy
(NDS) directs the Future Joint Force to be lethal, resilient,
sustainable, survivable, agile, and responsive.
The entire JDDE works together to move the right capabilities to
the right place, at the right time. Our assigned Unified Command Plan
(UCP) responsibilities are executed through three component commands
(U.S. Army's Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command, U.S.
Navy's Military Sealift Command, and U.S. Air Force's Air Mobility
Command), and one major subordinate command (Joint Enabling
Capabilities Command [JECC]). Our key mobility mission areas include
sealift, strategic seaports, air refueling, airlift, aeromedical
evacuation, domestic rail, and motor and barge freight. The JDDE
operates as a Total Force, harnessing the unique skills of Active Duty,
Reserve, National Guard, Merchant Marine, and Civilian teammates who
are vital to our ability to bolster warfighting readiness.
The Department of Defense's (DoD) ability to project military
forces is inextricably linked to commercial industry. Our industry
partners provide critical transportation capacity and global networks
to meet day-to-day and wartime requirements. USTRANSCOM also partners
with other U.S. Government departments and agencies, such as the U.S.
Department of State and U.S. Department of Transportation (DoT),
especially the Maritime Administration (MARAD) as it operates and
maintains the Government-owned sealift fleet and oversees the
administration of the Strategic Seaport Program. Within DoT we also
interconnect with the Federal Highway, Federal Motor Carrier Safety,
and Federal Railroad Administrations regarding DoD transportation
requirements within CONUS, including rapid equipment movement needs
from ``fort to the port'' on our national highway and railroad
networks. In addition to DoT, we partner with the Defense Logistics
Agency (DLA), the General Services Administration, and other key
logistics partners who provide the funding for deployment and
distribution operations as well as the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS), the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), the Transportation Security Agency,
and many more. Both individually as well as collectively, this entire
collective group of partners support as well as guide our efforts and
are also customers of the Defense Transportation System.
With our partners, USTRANSCOM works hard to develop the most robust
transportation network possible, both for current and future
operations. Because our networks are vulnerable to a wide range of
threats, from climate change to nation-state cyber attacks, USTRANSCOM
plans, operates, and routinely exercises so that our forces can operate
through disruption. This includes operating with partners in a cyber-
degraded or -denied environment and quickly and creatively rerouting
critical supplies to support our warfighters. I will address some of
our flagship efforts today.
strategic seaport program
To successfully execute our deployment mission, USTRANSCOM relies
on a collection of both DoD and commercially-owned U.S. strategic
seaports managed through the Strategic Seaport Program. Strategic
seaports are vital nodes in the Nation's transportation network and
play a critical role in DoD's ability to deploy forces and equipment
world-wide--6 military seaports and 18 U.S. commercial seaports are
officially designated as primary DoD strategic seaports with an
additional 1 military and 13 U.S. commercial seaports identified as
alternate seaports.
The basis for the program can be found in various Government
publications, including Executive Order 12656 regarding the assignment
of emergency preparedness responsibilities. These publications direct
Federal departments to identify facilities and resources, both
Government and private, essential to the national defense and
mobilization readiness; assess the vulnerabilities and develop
strategies, plans and programs to provide for the security of such
facilities and resources; and to avoid or minimize disruptions of
essential services during any national security emergency. The primary
purpose of the Strategic Seaport Program is to ensure DoD has access to
sufficient seaport capacity to meet the Nation's objectives.
strategic seaports
Within the UCP, USTRANSCOM is identified as the DoD Single Port
Manager. The Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command
(SDDC), as the surface transportation component to USTRANSCOM, executes
the Strategic Seaport Program for the DoD. Strategic seaports are
formally designated by the Commanding General, SDDC, based on
anticipated deployment requirements related to plausible major
contingencies, emergencies or disasters, and war. Although
participation in the Strategic Seaport Program is voluntary, the
strategic seaports accept specific planning and reporting
responsibilities.
national port readiness network
Once designated, the strategic seaports are administratively
managed through the National Port Readiness Network (NPRN). The NPRN is
made up of 9 Government agencies including USTRANSCOM, SDDC, Military
Sealift Command (MSC), U.S. Northern Command, U.S. Forces Command, U.S.
Coast Guard (USCG), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Transportation
Security Agency, and MARAD who Chairs the NPRN. The NPRN provides
coordination and cooperation to support the safe and secure movement of
military forces through the strategic seaports. A Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) outlines each of the 9 agencies' roles,
responsibilities, and authorities to facilitate planning and support
port readiness.
Port Readiness Plans
Each designated primary strategic seaport has a Port Readiness Plan
(PRP) which identifies the specific port facilities and berths that
would be made available to DoD within 48 hours of issuance of a rated
order contract. These port facilities include berths, open and covered
staging areas, rail spurs, and marshaling yards which can readily
accommodate the trans-load of substantial numbers of DoD's rolling
stock and containers within anticipated short time lines. MARAD serves
as the primary interface with the commercial strategic seaports to
establish and maintain the PRPs.
Port Readiness Committees
Chaired by the USCG Captain of the Port (COTP), the Port Readiness
Committee (PRC) is convened biennially to facilitate training and
periodic exercises to ensure the readiness of the port to support
military operations. The PRC is comprised of local port or port area
representatives that coordinate, evaluate, and test military out load
plans, force protection/military out load security and facilitate out
loads.
Readiness Reporting
The strategic seaports formally report to MARAD quarterly on their
ability to make PRP facilities available to support DoD's needs.
Informal, off-cycle reporting is also completed as events warrant.
Additionally, MARAD conducts an annual Enhanced Port Readiness
Assessment on each strategic port, with the assistance of the other
members, to ensure the PRC has a current understanding of the port's
ability to support military operations. These assessments cover the
availability of facilities and labor, port access, port security, and
other factors that may interfere with deployment.
ports for national defense program
The director of SDDC's Transportation Engineering Agency is
designated as the special assistant for transportation engineering to
provide executive-level representation for DoD on all transportation
engineering matters related to the National Defense Programs (Ports,
Highways, Railroads). These programs ensure DoD can readily access and
utilize the Nation's civil sector infrastructure to support major force
deployments by assessing and monitoring the sufficiency and viability
of all elements of the related infrastructure. The Ports for National
Defense Program (PND) provides the engineering/analytical foundation
for the DoD Strategic Seaport Program pursuant to Executive Order 12656
and in accordance with the authority in the Defense Production Act of
1950 (50 U.S.C. Section 4502, et seq.) by managing the identification
and assessments of strategic seaports.
The PND Office views strategic seaport capacities from an
aggregated coastal perspective (East, Gulf, West, Alaskan), and in the
Pacific. Each coast currently has the aggregate capacity necessary to
respond to plausible deployment requirements while also accounting for
normal delays (e.g., weather, transportation, etc.) and the potential
loss of one or more strategic seaports to manmade events or natural
disasters. The criteria PND uses to support the designation of a
strategic seaport extends beyond port infrastructure and throughput
capability. Proximity to origins (primarily Army Power Projection
Platforms) and the capabilities of the transportation networks
connecting these origins to the ports are also considered.
Port Look Studies
Beginning in 2008 with the publication of the original ``Port Look
Study,'' DoD has completed multiple reviews/assessments of the
sufficiency of the strategic seaports in meeting DoD needs. Many of
these reviews/assessments were Congressionally-directed via National
Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) language or were the result of
Government Accountability Office audit recommendations; however, some
were self-imposed in keeping with the tenets of the Strategic Seaport
Program.
To evaluate physical conditions at the strategic seaports, the PND
Office completed the ``Assessment and Report on Strategic Seaports'' as
directed by Section 3515 of the 2020 NDAA (Public Law 116-92).
USTRANSCOM submitted this report to Congress in July 2020. This study
found that while many of the ports assessed were found to have varying
degrees of structural deficiencies associated with PRP facilities, none
of these deficiencies were assessed to have significant impacts on
near-term deployment operations.
The PND Office also recently completed the ``Port Look 2021''
study. This study assessed throughput capabilities at current strategic
and alternate seaports, accounted for threats that could have an impact
on deployment operations (including cyber), assessed sufficiency of
existing strategic seaports to meet expected deployment requirements
and made recommendations to address capability gaps. The Port Look 2021
study recommended the designation of an additional strategic seaport on
the U.S. West Coast to ensure the strategic seaports on that coast can
overcome normal delays and the loss of a port due to manmade events or
natural disasters. In response to that recommendation, the commercial
Port of Everett, Washington, was formally designated a strategic
seaport in September 2021.
interagency security of the strategic seaports
While the Coast Guard is designated by the Secretary of Homeland
Security as the lead DHS agency for maritime security, seaport security
is a shared responsibility among private ownership, civil authorities,
DoD, and other Federal agencies. For example, owners, operators,
masters, and agents of vessels or owners and/or operators of waterfront
facilities have the primary responsibility for the protection of their
vessels or waterfront facilities. Military unit commanders are
responsible for the physical security of all equipment and resources
under their command. Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies
provide civil support, to include preventing the escalation of lawful
protest activity and ensuring continuity of port operations when
operations are potentially threatened by labor actions or other forms
of civil disturbance.
USCG and the Department of Homeland Security have overall
responsibility and enforcement authority for the safety, protection,
and security of vessels, harbors, waterfront facilities, and maritime
critical infrastructures and key resources that are carried out by the
USCG Captain of the Port. As mentioned earlier, the COTP is the chair
of respective NPRN PRCs, and assists in further coordinating
interagency efforts regarding port readiness issues.
The Navy (delegated to the Naval Component Commanders) is
responsible for force protection of military sealift assets. MSC, the
naval component to USTRANSCOM, its Area Commands, and/or the local MSC
Office coordinates for appropriate security support at commercial ports
with the USCG COTP and the SDDC Brigade/Battalion Commander.
SDDC Transportation Brigade/Battalion security personnel coordinate
with the appropriate port security/law enforcement authority where DoD
operations are being conducted. SDDC conducts threat assessments based
on Force Protection Conditions, Maritime Security (MARSEC) level,
applicable National Terrorism Advisory System alerts and available
intelligence and will coordinate with the COTP and Port Support
Activity to ensure appropriate balanced landside and waterside safety
and security measures around deployment activities.
mission impacts--resiliency
In general, if strategic seaports fail to maintain viability and
availability of the facilities outlined in their PRPs, the DoD could
exercise several options to support deployment and the DoD response to
national emergencies. Such options include increasing or changing PRP
facilities at existing strategic seaports, for example negotiating for
more or different marshalling areas, number of berths, staging area
locations/square footage, etc. DoD could also consider designating
different or additional strategic seaports. Finally, as previously
explained, the Strategic Seaport Program is intentionally designed to
carry excess capacity to mitigate lost seaport access due to exogenous
events.
Mission Assurance and Risk Management
The Secretary of Defense's recently-issued ``Homeland Defense
Policy Guidance 2023'' which supports implementation of the 2022
National Defense Strategy's highest priority, defending the homeland,
paced to the growing multi-domain threat posed by China.
Consistent with the Homeland Defense Policy Guidance, USTRANSCOM
manages risk to Defense Critical Infrastructure (DCI) through the
Mission Assurance (MA) Construct which is a process to protect or
ensure the continued function and resilience of capabilities and
assets, including personnel, equipment, facilities, networks,
information and information systems, infrastructure, and supply chains,
critical to the execution of DoD mission-essential functions in any
operating environment or condition. Central to this construct is the
Secretary of Defense's signed Mission Assurance Strategy with the
message that in today's global risk environment, strategic planning for
core defense missions must account for a wide variety of man-made and
naturally-occurring threats and hazards and their resultant
vulnerabilities. The Mission Assurance Strategy provides the Department
with a Mission Assurance-centric framework focused on ensuring
resiliency for the capabilities and assets supporting our core
missions.
The MA Construct outlines the process to identify the most
important capabilities and assets needed for the Department to carry
out its missions. These capabilities face multiple threats such as
natural disasters, foreign intelligence collection, and kinetic and
cyber threats. To successfully address these threats and hazards
requires the collective expertise, responsibilities, and authorities
from multiple organizations within the DoD and external to the DoD.
Through the MA Construct, we work across DoD to identify, analyze,
assess, and monitor DCI strategic-level risks to global mobility
operations and mission execution. This strategic level of risk
management effort addresses the protection and resiliency of DCI
identified as critical to Operation Plan execution. Commercial,
privately-owned and -operated infrastructure, and non-DoD publicly-
owned infrastructure are considered DCI to include seaports if they
support a DoD mission.
conclusion
In conclusion, strategic seaports are vital nodes in the Nation's
transportation network and play a critical role in DoD's ability to
deploy forces and equipment world-wide. We have designated 18
commercial strategic seaports and 6 military strategic seaports, 13
alternate commercial seaports, and 1 alternate military seaport. Each
designated strategic seaport has a mutually-agreed-upon Port Readiness
Plan (PRP) which identifies both DoD's and the port's needs,
expectations, and time line requirements. Although participation in the
Strategic Seaport Program is voluntary, each designated strategic
seaports accepts specific planning and reporting responsibilities.
The coordination between USTRANSCOM and the Department of Homeland
Security and the U.S. Coast Guard concerning the security of strategic
seaports is multi-fold. Such coordination includes roles and
responsibilities as identified within the NPRN nine-member interagency
MOU. Each designated strategic seaport has an established Port
Readiness Committee which is chaired by the USCG Captain of the Port.
The committee is comprised of local port or port area representatives
(both civilian and military) that coordinate, evaluate, and test
military out load plans, force protection/military out load security
and facilitate out loads. Through the Mission Assurance Construct,
USTRANSCOM also synchronizes inputs and coordinates discussions across
USTRANSCOM staff directorates, component commands, DoT, DHS, as well as
other relevant mission partners to include Federal Law Enforcement and
Counterintelligence Communities directly supporting commercial ports.
To ensure the Joint Force's ability to deploy via our seaports, our
Ports for National Defense Office has rigorously reviewed, analyzed,
and compared DoD's requirements to port locations, viabilities, and
capabilities. The Strategic Seaport Program is intentionally designed
to carry excess capacity in order to mitigate potential lost seaport
access. Each U.S. coast has the aggregate capacity necessary to respond
to deployment requirements while also accounting for normal delays
(e.g., weather, transportation, etc.) and the potential loss of one or
more strategic seaports to man-made events or natural disasters.
All in all, to remain successful, USTRANSCOM must be ready to
project power today and tomorrow, and we will only achieve this
together. The contested nature of logistics highlights that our actions
to improve mobility capabilities and to modernize the JDDE, must
continue in order for the DoD to maintain advantages and deliver on our
National security requirements.
Powered by dedicated men and women, USTRANSCOM underwrites the
lethality of the Joint Force, advances American interests around the
globe, provides our Nation's leaders with strategic flexibility, and
creates multiple dilemmas for our adversaries. I thank Congress for
your continued support to the men, women, and mission of USTRANSCOM.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Rear Admiral Trinque. I
recognize Rear Admiral Arguin for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF REAR ADMIRAL WAYNE R. ARGUIN JR., ASSISTANT
COMMANDANT FOR PREVENTION POLICY, UNITED STATES COAST GUARD

Admiral Arguin. Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking
Member Thanedar, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee.
I'm honored to be here today to discuss the United States Coast
Guard's efforts to protect the marine transportation system. I
ask that my written testimony be entered into the record.
Chairman Gimenez. Without objection.
Admiral Arguin. Our National security and economic
prosperity are inextricably linked to a safe and efficient
marine transportation system, or MTS. The vast system of ports
and waterways that make up the MTS supports $5.4 trillion of
annual economic activity, accounts for the employment of more
than 30 million Americans, and enables critical sealift
capabilities, allowing our armed forces to project power around
the globe. The connectedness and increasing complexity of the
MTS brings new vulnerabilities and threats, including the cyber
domain.
In response to dynamic threats, the United States Coast
Guard has taken decisive action in our maritime critical
infrastructure to harden and build resilience against cyber
attacks. Just last week, the President signed an Executive
Order which further enables our port security efforts by
explicitly addressing cyber threats. It empowers the Coast
Guard to prescribe conditions and restrictions for the safety
of waterfront facilities and vessels in port and includes
reporting requirements for actual and threatened cyber
incidents. With this authority, the Coast Guard issued a
directive requiring specific risk management actions for all
owners and operators of cranes manufactured by the People's
Republic of China. While the specific requirements are deemed
sensitive security information and cannot be shared publicly,
our captains of the port around the country are working
directly with crane owners to ensure compliance.
Last week, the Coast Guard also released a proposed
rulemaking to set baseline cybersecurity requirements for
vessels, facilities, and outer continental shelf facilities.
The service stresses the need for public participation in the
proposed rulemaking. The diversity of the maritime industry and
the dynamic nature of the cyber threat make public comment
critical. While the Coast Guard is focused on implementing the
major efforts initiated last week, work is far from done. The
MTS is indeed a system where an attack on one segment has a
potential to affect others. This demands collaboration across
Government and industry to ensure that a unified and
coordinated response to cyber challenges in the maritime
domain. Like all other risks to the MTS, cyber risk is a shared
responsibility.
As such, the Coast Guard will continue its work across all
levels of government and engage with industry to assess
security vulnerabilities, determine risk, and deploy mitigation
strategies. This layered approach from the local to
international level is critical to the size, diversity, and
interconnectedness of the MTS. As the proven prevention and
response framework is applied to prevent and minimize
disruptions to the MTS and ports around the country, I'm
grateful for the support of this committee to ensure the Coast
Guard has the authorities and the resources needed to stay
ahead.
I look forward to your questions on the vital work the
Coast Guard does every day to safeguard America's ports. Thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you today and for your
continued support of the United States Coast Guard.
[The joint prepared statement of Admiral Arguin and Admiral
Vann follows:]
Joint Prepared Statement of Wayne R. Arguin and John C. Vann
29 Feb 2024
introduction
Good afternoon, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. We are honored to be here
today to discuss a top priority for the U.S. Coast Guard: protecting
the Marine Transportation System (MTS). At all times, the U.S. Coast
Guard is a military service and branch of the U.S. Armed Forces, a
Federal law enforcement agency, a regulatory body, a co-Sector Risk
Management Agency, a first responder, and an element of the U.S.
intelligence community (IC). The service is uniquely positioned to
ensure the safety, security, and stewardship of the maritime domain.
Since the early days of the Revenue Cutter Service, the service has
protected our Nation's waters, harbors, and ports. While much has
changed over the centuries--with our missions expanding from sea, air,
and land into cyber space--our ethos and operational doctrine remain
steadfast. Regardless of the threat, we leverage the full set of our
authorities; the ingenuity and leadership of our workforce; and the
breadth of our military, law enforcement, and civil partnerships to
protect the Nation, its waterways, and all who operate on them.
the criticality of the marine transportation system
Our national security and economic prosperity are inextricably
linked to a safe and efficient MTS. It is difficult to overstate the
complexity of the MTS and its consequence to the Nation. It is an
integrated network that consists of 25,000 miles of coastal and inland
waters and rivers serving 361 ports. However, it is more than ports and
waterways. It is cargo and cruise ships, passenger ferries, waterfront
terminals, offshore facilities, buoys and beacons, bridges, and more.
The MTS supports $5.4 trillion of economic activity each year and
supports the employment of more than 30 million Americans.
It supports critical national security sealift capabilities,
enabling U.S. Armed Forces to project power around the globe. The U.S.
Coast Guard remains laser-focused on the safety and security of this
system as an economic engine and strategic imperative.
port security--a shared responsibility and layered approach
The U.S. Coast Guard is the Nation's lead Federal agency for
safeguarding the MTS. The service applies a proven prevention and
response framework to prevent or mitigate disruption to the MTS from
the many risks it faces. U.S. Coast Guard authorities and capabilities
cut across threat vectors, allowing operational commanders to quickly
evaluate risks, apply resources, and lead a coordinated and effective
response.
The U.S. Coast Guard works across multiple levels of government and
industry to assess security vulnerabilities, determine risk, and
develop mitigation strategies. This layered approach--from the local to
the international level--is critical due to the size and
interconnectedness of the MTS.
locally: vessel and facility security
Security in U.S. ports and waterways starts with individual
vessels, port facilities, and outer continental shelf facilities. The
Maritime Transportation Security Act (MTSA) and its implementing
regulations place specific requirements on regulated entities to
conduct security assessments, analyze the results, and incorporate
their findings in U.S. Coast Guard-approved security plans.
These plans set baseline requirements that regulated U.S. vessels
and facilities must follow to protect the MTS, including addressing
access control, computer systems and networks, restricted area
monitoring, communication, security systems, cargo handling, delivery
of stores, personnel training, and drills and exercises. U.S. Coast
Guard inspectors verify compliance with these plans during scheduled
and unannounced inspections throughout a given year. Additionally, the
Coast Guard released a proposed rulemaking leveraging the applicability
of the MTSA regulations to further raise cybersecurity standards for
vessels, facilities, and Outer Continental Shelf facilities. For
foreign-flagged vessels, the approach to security is very similar to
that of MTSA-regulated domestic vessels. Per the International Maritime
Organization's (IMO) International Ship and Port Facility Security
(ISPS) Code, each foreign vessel must conduct a Ship Security
Assessment that identifies: key shipboard operations that are important
to protect; possible threats to key shipboard operations and likelihood
of their occurrence; existing security measures and procedures; and
potential weaknesses, including human factors, in security policies and
procedures. This assessment then leads to the development of a Ship
Security Plan, which must be approved by the ship's Flag Administration
prior to a vessel being certificated as compliant with the ISPS Code.
This certification is verified by the U.S. Coast Guard during regular
compliance examinations when the vessel arrives in a U.S. port.
regionally: area maritime security coordination
At the regional level, Area Maritime Security Committees (AMSC) are
required by MTSA and its implementing regulations to serve an essential
coordinating function during normal operations and emergency response.
Comprised of Government and maritime industry leaders, an AMSC serves
as the primary regional body to jointly share threat information,
evaluate risks, and coordinate risk mitigation activities. As the
Federal Maritime Security Coordinator (FMSC), U.S. Coast Guard Captains
of the Port (COTP) direct their regional AMSC's activities.
AMSC input is vital to the development and continuous review of the
Area Maritime Security (AMS) Assessment and Area Maritime Security Plan
(AMSP). The AMS Assessment must include the critical MTS infrastructure
and operations in the port; a threat assessment that identifies and
evaluates each potential threat; consequence and vulnerability
assessments; and a determination of the required security measures for
the three Maritime Security levels.
These AMS assessments then lead to the collaborative development of
AMSPs to ensure Government and industry security measures are
coordinated to deter, detect, disrupt, respond to, and recover from a
threatened or actual Transportation Security Incident.
The U.S. Coast Guard COTP and AMSCs are also required by
regulations to conduct or participate in an exercise once each calendar
year to collectively assess the effectiveness of the AMSP in today's
dynamic operating environment.
nationally: interagency collaboration
The U.S. Coast Guard functions on behalf of the Department of
Homeland Security as the co-Sector Risk Management Agency (SRMA) for
the Maritime Transportation Subsector along with the Department of
Transportation. As an SRMA, the U.S. Coast Guard is responsible for
coordinating risk management efforts with the Department of Homeland
Security's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA),
other Federal departments and agencies, and MTS stakeholders.
CISA is a key partner whose technical expertise supports the U.S.
Coast Guard's ability to leverage our authorities and experience as the
regulator and SRMA of the MTS. CISA integrates a whole-of-Government
response, analyzes broader immediate and long-term impacts, and
facilitates information sharing across transportation sectors. Our
relationship with CISA is strong and will continue to mature.
As an element of the IC, the U.S. Coast Guard possesses unique
authorities, and has opportunity and capability to collect, analyze,
and share information from domestic, international, and non-government
stakeholders which operate throughout the MTS. This ability allows the
U.S. Coast Guard to gain a collective understanding of threats and
vulnerabilities facing the maritime domain, including physical security
and cybersecurity.
Our enduring relationship with the Department of Defense (DoD) is
also crucial to safeguarding the MTS. In many cases, DoD's ability to
surge forces from domestic to allied seaports depends on the same
commercial maritime infrastructure as the MTS. The relationship between
the U.S. Coast Guard and DoD ensures the Nation's surge capability and
lines of communication will be secure and available during times of
crisis. By sharing threat intelligence, developing interoperable
capabilities, and leveraging DoD's expertise, the U.S. Coast Guard
enables national security sealift capabilities and jointly supports our
Nation's ability to project power around the globe.
The U.S. Coast Guard also supports the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) in the Port Security Grant Program (PSGP) by providing
subject-matter expertise in maritime security. The PSGP is designed to
support and protect critical port infrastructure from terrorism. FEMA
is responsible for the administration and management of the program,
which has distributed more than $3.8 billion to MTS stakeholders since
the program's inception in 2002.
internationally: international port security program
U.S. Coast Guard efforts to secure the MTS also extend overseas. By
leveraging international partnerships, including through the U.S. Coast
Guard International Port Security (IPS) program, the U.S. Coast Guard
conducts in-country foreign port assessments to assess compliance with
the ISPS Code and the effectiveness of security and anti-terrorism
measures in foreign ports. In addition, the IPS program conducts
capacity-building engagements to assist foreign ports in implementing
effective anti-terrorism measures, where possible.
If the U.S. Coast Guard finds that a country's ports do not have
effective security and anti-terrorism measures, the service may impose
additional security measures called Conditions of Entry (COE) on
vessels arriving to the United States from those ports and may deny
entry into the United States to any vessel that does not meet such
conditions. Verification that a vessel took additional security
measures when it was in foreign ports that lacked effective anti-
terrorism measures may be required before the vessel is permitted to
enter the United States.
the growing cyber risks
Cyber attacks can pose a significant threat to the economic
prosperity and security of the MTS for which whole-of-Government
efforts are required. The MTS's complex, interconnected network of
information, sensors, and infrastructure continually evolves to promote
the efficient transport of goods and services around the world. The
information technology and operational technology networks vital to
increasing the efficiency and transparency of the MTS also create
complicated interdependencies, vulnerabilities, and risks.
The size, complexity, and importance of the MTS make it an
attractive cyber target. Terrorists, criminals, activists, adversary
nation-states and state-sponsored actors may view a significant MTS
disruption as favorable to their interests. Potential malicious actors
and their increasing levels of sophistication present substantial
challenges to Government agencies and stakeholders focused on
protecting the MTS from constantly-evolving cyber threats.
Cyber vulnerabilities pose a risk to the vast networks and system
of the MTS. Cyber attacks, such as ransomware attacks, can have
devastating impacts on the operations of maritime critical
infrastructure. A successful cyber attack could disrupt global supply
chains and impose unrecoverable losses to port operations,
electronically stored information, and national economic activity. The
increased use of automated systems in shipping, offshore platforms, and
port and cargo facilities creates enormous efficiencies, but also
introduces additional attack vectors for malicious cyber actors.
Growing reliance on cyber-physical systems and technologies requires a
comprehensive approach by all MTS stakeholders to manage cyber risks
and ensure the safety and security of the MTS.
Last week, the President signed an Executive Order which further
enables our port security efforts by explicitly addressing cyber
threats. It empowers the Coast Guard to prescribe conditions and
restrictions for the safety of waterfront facilities and vessels in
port and includes reporting requirements for actual or threatened cyber
incidents. With this authority, the Coast Guard issued a directive
requiring specific cyber risk management actions for all owners or
operators of cranes manufactured by companies from the People's
Republic of China. Our Captains of the Port around the country are
working directly with crane owners and operators to ensure compliance
and further mitigate the threats posed by these cranes.
the u.s. coast guard's approach
In support of the whole-of-Government effort, the U.S. Coast Guard
applies a proven prevention and response framework to prevent or
mitigate disruption to the MTS from the many risks it faces.
Prevention
The Prevention Concept of Operations--Standards, Compliance, and
Assessment--guides all prevention missions, including port security. It
begins with establishing expectations in the MTS. Regulations and
standards provide a set of baseline requirements and are critical to
establishing effective and consistent governance regimes. With
effective standards in place, vessel and facility inspectors verify
systematic compliance activities to ensure the governance regime is
working. This part of the system is vital in identifying and correcting
potential risks before they advance further and negatively impact the
MTS. Effective assessment is paramount to continuous improvement. It
provides process feedback and facilitates the identification of system
failures so that corrective actions can be taken to improve standards
and compliance activities.
In addition to vessel and facility inspectors, the U.S. Coast Guard
also has Port Security Specialists and MTS Cybersecurity Specialists in
each Captain of the Port Zone. These dedicated staffs build and
maintain port-level security-related relationships, facilitate
information sharing across industry and Government, advise U.S. Coast
Guard and Unified Command decision makers, and plan security exercises.
Response
The U.S. Coast Guard has a proven, scalable response framework that
can be tailored for all hazards. Whether a cyber or physical security
incident, our operational commanders immediately assess the risk,
consider their authorities, and deploy assets or issue operational
controls to mitigate risks. Depending on the incident's size and
severity, commanders set clear response priorities, request specialized
resources to help mitigate risk, and notify interagency partners to
help coordinate the response.
For complex responses, the U.S. Coast Guard maintains deployable
teams with specialized capabilities that can support operational
commanders across a spectrum of needs and domains. These teams include
specially-trained law enforcement teams that can bolster physical
security, and pollution response teams that can address significant oil
spills or hazardous material releases. In addition, the U.S. Coast
Guard has established three Cyber Protection Teams as commands under
U.S. Coast Guard Cyber Command. These units assist Captains of the Port
with measuring cyber risk and are poised to deploy in support of time-
critical or nationally significant cyber activities.
future focus
Given today's dynamic operational environment, the U.S. Coast Guard
is ever vigilant and on watch to identify emerging threats, evaluate
associated risk, and apply authorities and capabilities to protect the
MTS. While the U.S. Coast Guard has a proven prevention and response
framework that has been honed over many years, the service is dedicated
to continually assessing and enhancing the way we execute both enduring
and emerging missions. The U.S. Coast Guard's commitment is to continue
to lead with the same level of professionalism, efficiency, and
effectiveness that the public has come to expect.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and thank you for
your continued support of the U.S. Coast Guard. We look forward to
answering your questions.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Rear Admirable Arguin. I now
recognize Rear Admiral Vann for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF REAR ADMIRAL JOHN VANN, COAST GUARD CYBER COMMAND,
UNITED STATES COAST GUARD

Admiral Vann. Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking
Member Thanedar, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee.
I'm honored to be here today to discuss the protection,
defense, and resiliency of the marine transportation system,
the MTS from today's cyber threats. I ask that my written
testimony be entered into the record.
Chairman Gimenez. Without objection.
Admiral Vann. The Coast Guard is committed to addressing
cybersecurity risks and responding to cyber incidents in the
marine environment to ensure our Nation's economic and national
security. The size, interdependence, complexity, and
criticality of the MTS makes it a prime target for criminals,
activists, terrorists, State-sponsored actors, and adversarial
nation-states. The diversity of potential malicious actors and
their increasing levels of sophistication presents substantial
challenges to stakeholders and government agencies focused on
protecting the MTS from these evolving cyber threats.
The threat of disruptive cyber effects to our critical
infrastructure, specifically to the MTS, require us to be
vigilant, proactive, collaborative, and resourceful. Cyber
intrusions and attacks, such as ransomware attacks, have a
devastating impact on transportation critical infrastructure. A
successful cyber attack could impose unrecoverable losses to
port operations and electronically-stored information,
hampering national economic activity, and disrupting global
supply chains. The increased use of automated systems in
shipping, offshore platforms, and port and cargo facilities
creates enormous efficiencies and introduces additional attack
vectors for malicious cyber actors. This growing reliance on
cyber physical systems and operational technologies requires a
comprehensive approach by all stakeholders to manage cyber
risks and ensure safety and security of the MTS.
With the support of Congress, the Coast Guard has invested
in growing and maturing Coast Guard cyber command to assess,
identify, and respond to cyber risks and threats. CG Cyber
currently has two cyber protection teams, or CPTs, with a third
CPT expected to reach full operational capability later this
summer. Using Coast Guard authorities, the CPTs partner with
local captains of the port and industry to address
cybersecurity risks in the MTS. In fact, a Coast Guard CPT was
the first Federal cyber response team in 2021 to identify
probable port network intrusion by a People's Republic of China
actor known as Volt Typhoon. Our ability to share information
and critical vulnerabilities with the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, CISA, and law enforcement
partners enabled a timely response and rapid mitigation of
risks with that port partner.
CG Cyber's Maritime Cyber Readiness branch, subject-matter
experts in cybersecurity and marine safety, regularly engages
with industry to improve cyber literacy and support Coast Guard
captains of the port in measuring cyber risk. We will soon
release the third annual cyber trends and insights in the
Marine Environment Report, which provides key insights into
trends to aid industry and other stakeholders to identify and
address current and emerging cyber risks.
Through consistent work and collaboration with other
departments, agencies, and industry, CG Cyber shares critical
vulnerability information mitigation strategies, and threat
intelligence. Our CPTs regularly deploy with Department of
Defense and CISA teams to provide maritime and operational
technology subject-matter expertise around the globe. We are
better and more resilient because we exercise and execute
operations together.
I look forward to continuing this conversation and
appreciate the opportunity to answer your questions. Thank you.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Rear Admiral Vann. I now
recognize Ms. Brzozowski for 5 minutes to summarize her opening
statements.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTA BRZOZOWSKI, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR TRADE
AND ECONOMIC SECURITY, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Ms. Brzozowski. Good morning, Chairman, Ranking Member, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the Department of Homeland Security's
role in securing maritime infrastructure and bolstering supply
chain resilience. The Department is deeply committed to
preventing and countering all threats to our national and
economic security, including cyber attacks and other
disruptions that could impact the efficient movement of goods
through our Nation's seaports.
To advance this mission, DHS has a wide range of expertise
and authorities, including protecting cyber spaces, securing
critical infrastructure, facilitating lawful trade and travel,
and preparing for and responding to disasters. Alongside the
U.S. Coast Guard, DHS employees from the U.S. Customs and
Border Protection, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the
Transportation Security Administration, and others, work
diligently to protect our seaports. They also work to protect
the broader maritime transportation system and other critical
infrastructures and address and mitigate against all hazards
threatening our security.
At DHS, we are incredibly vigilant and committed to making
maritime ports and other critical infrastructures and supply
chains as secure as we can. But we live in a world of
constantly-evolving threats. We know that adversaries are
constantly probing and developing new tactics and that supply
chains are vulnerable to a wide range of shocks and
disruptions. That's why DHS operational components are
continuously monitoring for new risks, providing key services
to the private sector, and ensuring that they also recognize
and manage these risks as both core business risks and as
fundamental to national and economic security.
That's also why we established a new Supply Chain
Resilience Center within the Department. The new center serves
to coordinate the Department's supply chain efforts and work
with partners and allies to research and assess potential
threats and plan how we can bolster resilience throughout the
U.S. supply chain. The DHS Supply Chain Resilience Center
supported the development of the Executive Order on amending
regulations relating to the safeguarding of vessels, harbors,
ports, and waterfront facilities, and the Coast Guard's related
maritime security directive, both announced last week. We will
continue to support the Coast Guard and other DHS operational
components as they amplify and execute on these new provisions.
Since our launch, the DHS Supply Chain Resilience Center
has connected and collaborated across DHS components with the
U.S. interagency and with private-sector partners from the
transportation and trade communities. We have engaged to share
our concerns with industry and seek their feedback on potential
risks posed by port cranes and other port equipment and systems
manufactured by the People's Republic of China. We supported
the development of cybersecurity practices and conducted
internal tabletop exercises to assess how the Department would
respond to a disruption from these types of potential threats.
We are also engaging with international partners to learn
more about their perceptions of the risk and to share our
insights on practical mitigations to further U.S. supply chain
resilience.
Looking ahead, we'll focus on issue areas where we can
bring the full weight of DHS authorities and expertise to bear
to counter PRC threats, not only today, but into the future. We
are committed to effectively employing all appropriate tools to
secure these vital supply chains and facilitate the trade that
keeps our economy functioning.
We will work very closely within the new Cabinet-level
council on supply chain resilience and with our interagency
partners, including the Departments of Commerce,
Transportation, and Defense, to bring a whole-of-Government
approach to this vital mission.
In addition to the Supply Chain Resilience Center's work,
my office is also responsible for representing the Department
of Homeland Security in interagency processes to screen foreign
direct investment for national security risks, namely the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, or CFIUS.
We play a leading role in reviewing cases that implicate U.S.
critical infrastructure, including our ports, in the broader
trade and logistics sectors of which they are apart.
Our National security and economic prosperity are
inextricably linked to a safe and efficient maritime security
system, which, of course, includes our seaports. Each day, DHS
plays a critical role in facilitating the safe and secure flow
of millions of tons of cargo shipments into the U.S. market. We
know that a port disruption can snarl supply chain and impact
the delivery of goods.
That's why the Department is committed across our
operational components and through the new Supply Chain
Resilience Center to exercise the full range of our
authorities, partnerships, and expertise to ensure Americans
get the goods and materials they need.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Brzozowski follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christa Brzozowski
February 29, 2024
introduction
Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the U.S Department of
Homeland Security's (DHS or Department) role in securing maritime
infrastructure and bolstering supply chain resilience against potential
threats posed by the People's Republic of China (PRC).
The Department is deeply committed to its national and economic
security missions. Across DHS, we work diligently to address all
hazards that threaten our transportation systems, critical
infrastructure, and the safe and lawful flow of goods and people. The
dedicated men and women of the Department work every day to protect our
ports, screen and vet goods and travelers, and help infrastructure
owners and operators respond to the threats of today and prepare for
the threats of tomorrow. DHS leverages the extensive authorities, data,
and expertise from its operational components in trade and travel
facilities, physical and cybersecurity, and disaster response and
preparedness to protect our vital trade infrastructure, ensure the safe
and lawful flow of critical goods, and protect U.S. economic security.
supply chain resilience center
Understanding the depth and breadth of the Department's expertise,
authorities, and capabilities in the economic security realm, Secretary
Mayorkas has challenged the Department to coordinate and enhance its
supply chain resilience efforts. In 2022, the Secretary called upon the
Homeland Security Advisory Council (HSAC) to recommend new ways that
DHS can advance supply chain resilience leveraging the Department's
expertise and authorities. On November 27, 2023, in response to a
resulting HSAC recommendation, President Biden and Secretary Mayorkas
announced the creation of the Supply Chain Resilience Center (SCRC or
Center) within the Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans, to enhance
coordination of the Department's supply chain efforts.
To prepare for the next economic disruption, be it a pandemic,
conflict, or adversary-led market distorting activity, DHS, through the
SCRC, is identifying threats to supply chain resilience, addressing
security vulnerabilities, and helping Americans prepare for and
mitigate supply chain disruptions. To accomplish these goals, the SCRC
is coordinating all the tools at the Department's disposal, including
our wide range of component authorities and capabilities, to bolster
critical supply chain resilience. By placing the SCRC within the DHS
Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans, the aim is to ensure that our
many efforts to advance supply chain resilience across the DHS
enterprise are more than the sum of their parts. The SCRC will ensure
that the DHS approach to supply chain resilience is holistic in scope
and tightly coordinated with the private sector to co-develop practical
mitigations that protect our economy.
As the Department's central supply chain coordinator, the SCRC will
leverage data and intelligence resources to identify future threats to
critical U.S. supply chain. In this vein, we are building a Watch
Center concept that will use both publicly-available information and
Government information feeds to provide early identification of
emerging or on-going threats. The current Watch Center provides daily
situational briefs to my office's leadership that synthesizes internal
and external information sources. Concurrently, we are working closely
with the Department's Office of Intelligence and Analysis and the
broader U.S. intelligence community to ensure our leaders are up-to-
date on the latest threats.
The SCRC is collaborating closely with our interagency partners to
build supply chain resilience in critical infrastructure, to ensure our
Nation is better prepared for and able to respond to any threat. The
SCRC will seek to advance a coordinated Department of Defense-DHS
approach to civilian/military supply chain resilience preparedness
policy under the National Defense Industrial Strategy's implementation
plan. The SCRC is collaborating with the White House and the rest of
the Federal Government in the President's Council on Supply Chain
Resilience to ensure a whole-of-Government response to promote supply
chain resilience and protect key systems and infrastructure.
To build our network of allies, the SCRC has begun establishing
partnerships with foreign governments. We are working with trusted
international governments to develop best practices, identify supply
chain risks and shared mitigations, and coordinate exercises to test
our capabilities. I am pleased to share that the SCRC will be working
with other Executive branch agencies to partner with our colleagues in
Canada to assess port security processes as they relate to supply
chains. Together we will conduct a binational interagency tabletop
exercise later this year. The exercise will involve a simulated
Northern Border land port disruption of trade and transportation. The
exercise will address potential bottlenecks at the U.S.-Canada border
and identify best practices to mitigate risks and create a more
resilient border.
scrc & maritime infrastructure
Just weeks after announcing the SCRC, Secretary Mayorkas hosted a
roundtable meeting with senior business leaders to introduce the SCRC
and how it is leveraging DHS capabilities to identify and mitigate
risks with the potential to create major supply chain disruptions.
Among the topics raised were the risks posed by PRC-manufactured ship-
to-shore cranes.
To better understand and test DHS capabilities to respond to
threats to port infrastructure, the SCRC held its inaugural tabletop
exercise to understand how the Department might respond to a supply
chain disruption caused by a port cyber incident affecting ship-to-
shore crane operability. Participants included members from the U.S.
Coast Guard (USCG), Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA), U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), Transportation Security Administration (TSA),
and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). The exercise
identified key communication areas that are well-implemented, but also
highlighted the need for holistic coordination planning across the
Department. Our next action will be an after-action review that will
provide analysis and recommendations informed by the exercise. Moving
forward, we are also working to research and map key U.S. maritime
infrastructure for homeland security equities. This comprehensive
analysis will combine trade import data, DHS critical infrastructure
information, and DHS and interagency geospatial data, and will help us
to understand the landscape of U.S. maritime infrastructure security.
Concurrently, the SCRC is evaluating the risks to U.S. ports posed
by adversarial nation-state threats and the potential overreliance on
untrustworthy equipment and vendors that are subject to nation-state
control and may pose data exploitation, insider threat, and unvetted
virtual and physical access risks. The SCRC is closely collaborating
with port authorities and operators, other industry stakeholders, and
the interagency to conduct this analysis. With this analysis, the SCRC
has worked closely with USCG and CISA to verify that our authorities
and capabilities are current to keep pace with this emerging threat.
Finally, the SCRC is pleased to expand upon the messages
promulgated by President Biden and Secretary Mayorkas in the recent
release of the Executive Order on Amending Regulations Relating to the
Safeguarding of Vessels, Harbors, Ports, and Waterfront Facilities of
the United States, USCG's Maritime Security Directive on cyber risk
management actions for PRC-manufactured cranes, USCG's Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking on Cybersecurity in the Maritime Transportation
System, and the administration's announcement that PACECO Corp., a
subsidiary of Japanese conglomerate Mitsui, is planning to on-shore
crane production. To amplify these announcements, the SCRC hosted a
private-sector roundtable with USCG and the Office of Intelligence and
Analysis to discuss the threat landscape, highlight the Executive
Order's impact on port security, and gather more information from
industry representatives about concerns they have.
foreign investment screening
The United States remains vigilant against the threats to the
security of our Nation's critical infrastructure that may arise from
foreign investments such as investments in our trade and logistics
sector, including our maritime ports. In addition to the SCRC's
efforts, DHS has played a leading role for the past two decades on the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) by
identifying and mitigating risks arising from foreign investments in
port infrastructure and protecting sensitive trade and logistics data
from aggregation and exploitation by foreign adversaries. By law, CFIUS
analyzes the facts and circumstances of each foreign investment in port
infrastructure within its jurisdiction on a case-by-case basis,
following a rigorous risk-based review process. In recent years, DHS
has increasingly used its role in CFIUS to lead committee reviews and
mitigation efforts related to foreign investments in U.S. container
terminals, and DHS will continue to identify and mitigate other
investments in U.S. maritime physical infrastructure that pose national
security risks.
Through CFIUS, DHS is also moving to address new and emerging risks
in the maritime space. Beyond ports, PRC investments in the global
shipping and logistics supply chain permit Beijing to aggregate
sensitive supply chain data, which can be exploited to target supply
chain vulnerabilities, circumvent U.S. customs, export control, and
forced labor laws, and monitor U.S. military logistics. As the U.S.-
China Economic and Security Review Commission noted in its 2022 issue
brief, LOGINK: Risks from China's Promotion of a Global Logistics
Management Platform, China aims to monitor and shape the movement of
goods around the world, including by accruing dominant market positions
in shipping. The PRC increasingly seeks to collect data in foreign
markets related to the shipment of goods, exemplified by the PRC
Ministry of Transportation's promotion of LOGINK, a unified logistics
platform to pool logistics and shipment tracking data. PRC equity
investments in freight forwarders, non-vessel operating common carriers
(NVOCCs), and other third-party logistics firms may permit Beijing to
aggregate and exploit trade and logistics data. DHS will use the full
range of authorities available, including CFIUS, to identify national
security risk, take appropriate measures such as mitigation, and--where
necessary--recommend divestment to the President to protect national
security.
dhs component efforts to protect maritime ports
The Department leverages its wide range of expertise and
authorities to protect key transportation infrastructure and advance
the resilience of the U.S. supply chain. In addition to USCG, which
serves as the co-Sector Risk Management Agency (SRMA) for the maritime
subsector and regulator for covered maritime facilities and vessels,
other DHS operational components work diligently every day to
facilitate the safe and lawful flow of goods and people upon which our
economic security relies.
CBP secures ports of entry throughout the United States,
facilitating the lawful flow of people and goods across our borders,
and deterring threats from bad actors. CBP has led the way in securing
our trade infrastructure with innovative initiatives like the Customs
Trade Partnership Against Terrorism. CBP has tailored this program for
the maritime port community, developing security standards for marine
port authority and terminal operators. CBP leverages a wide range of
trade data to target high-risk cargo, enforce our Nation's trade laws,
protect key infrastructure, and promote supply chain resilience.
TSA plays a key role in securing our Nation's transportation
systems, including aspects of maritime ports, through enrollment,
vetting, and credentialing programs. In partnership with USCG, TSA
administers the Transportation Worker Identification Credential (TWIC),
which screens workers who access the most secure areas of our maritime
ports. Through the TWIC, TSA vets millions of transportation workers
including longshoremen, truck drivers, and merchant mariners.
CISA works to manage and reduce risk to our Nation's critical
infrastructure. CISA takes a unique approach to this mission,
partnering closely with critical infrastructure owners and operators
and other Government agencies to assess risk across the country. CISA
works collaboratively with USCG, TSA, other SRMAs, and public and
private-sector partners to develop risk mitigation solutions for
critical infrastructure organizations of all sizes. Port owners and
operators can consult a range of CISA cyber and physical security
guides and even request one-on-one guidance from CISA through its cadre
of local and regional security advisors.
FEMA supports port owners and operators through the Port Security
Grant Program in partnership with USCG. This program offers vital
funding to protect ports from adversaries, enhance security risk
management, improve maritime domain awareness, and implement maritime
security mitigation protocols that can help ports prepare for and
respond to a range of hazards.
conclusion
The Department is dedicated to preparing for, responding to, and
mitigating any and all threats to U.S. supply chains. We are deeply
committed to our national and economic security missions and ensuring
all stakeholders are prepared for the threats of tomorrow. I appreciate
this opportunity to testify on this issue, and I look forward to
answering your questions.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Ms. Brzozowski. Members will
be recognized by order of seniority for their 5 minutes of
questioning. I recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
During my conversations with the firm ABB, we found out
that while they supply many of the motors, drives, et cetera,
software for a crane, the crane built in China is the steel
structure, and then the things that operate it and move and all
are sometimes manufactured in China. All right. Wholly
manufactured in China. Sometimes they are manufactured by other
companies, some of which are Western companies, ABB being one
of them. One of the things that I found most disturbing about
that testimony or our conversation was that they relay to us
that ABB actually ships their motors, software, hardware to the
PRC, and that by contract, the CPMC makes them, gives to them,
CPMC engineers will be installing that hardware, software, et
cetera, that makes the cranes go.
Rear Admiral Vann, is it possible that during that process,
the CPMC could be installing malware, ransomware, or Trojan
horses in the software that's actually provided by, and the
hardware actually provided by Western companies?
Admiral Vann. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman.
What we have found in our activities, our operations aboard
ZPMC cranes and the networks on the cranes that connect to the
cranes and shore side that communicate with the cranes are
either, by design, vulnerabilities of open connections. Again,
I say by design, because oftentimes the monitoring of the
cranes and the maintenance of the systems on board the cranes
is done from a hub outside the port or in the port land side
infrastructure, and then communicated to the crane through a
connection. So, we have found, I would say, openings,
vulnerabilities that are there by design.
What we have not found is instances, as you put it, of
malware or Trojan horse type software. Our concern is with the
vulnerabilities and the operators that operate these cranes,
being aware those vulnerabilities exist, and then considering
the reporting that we have heard about PRC, attempting to get
onto critical infrastructure. These are obviously important
nodes in our marine transportation system, sir. So, haven't
found that yet. But those vulnerabilities exist to be able to
access what's on the crane.
Chairman Gimenez. That's interesting, because the ABB folks
told me that the crane system is actually like a closed system.
It doesn't communicate with the outside world. I found that a
little bit strange. Now you are telling me that, no, it has to
communicate with the outside world, because I would figure
there'd be software updates, right? Then also the crane itself
communicating somewhere and saying, hey, this is bad over here,
you have to replace it. So, are these cranes fully enclosed and
enclosed and protected from the outside world, or do they
actually communicate with the outside world?
Admiral Vann. Sir, what we have found is the cranes are
designed to be able to communicate with the outside world. They
can be operated disconnected from the outside world. But as you
mentioned, sir, oftentimes for maintenance reasons or
monitoring, some of our operators will make a connection just
for that activity. Others will leave the crane disconnected and
have a technician come onsite to access that data, and others
will operate with the crane connected all of the time.
Chairman Gimenez. Very good. We also found that there were
some modems installed in some cranes, and we were advised then,
no, it is still a closed system. But then why would you need a
modem if it is a closed system? It came with modems. So, I will
leave that for another day. We can discuss that another day.
Another concern that I have is, in the United States, 80
percent of the cranes that we operate in our port system are
built by communist China. If the communist Chinese decide to
embargo spare parts, what would happen to our port
infrastructure? What would happen to our trade if, in fact,
that happened? How long will it take for, if there is an
effect, for that to take hold?
Admiral Vann. Mr. Chairman, you are referring to spare
parts for the cranes?
Chairman Gimenez. Yes. So maybe Rear Admiral Trinque, you
can answer that question or somebody else who may. This is not
just about cybersecurity, this is actual spare parts for the
cranes.
Admiral Trinque. Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry. I would have to
defer to someone else on how long it would take to get
replacements for those cranes.
Ms. Brzozowski. Yes, I'm happy to jump in. I don't think I
have a specific time frame for that particular component. But I
think the larger issue here that we absolutely agree with is
that we do see an over-reliance on these PRC-manufactured
cranes. This is not an anomaly. We see this as a concerted
effort where the PRC has proven and stated its intent to be the
leading manufacturer in not only cranes like this, but other
types of maritime equipment. That does introduce
vulnerabilities like you are talking about, not only the cyber,
but the ability to have access to the materials that are going
to be necessary to maintain the smooth functioning of that
equipment in our ports.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you. My time is up. I now yield to
the Ranking Member from Michigan, Mr. Thanedar.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez. Madam Assistant
Secretary, thank you for your testimony. I appreciate the
concerns that have been raised about foreign-made cranes.
However, U.S. critical infrastructure and supply chains face a
wide range of threats beyond cranes. How does DHS identify
vulnerabilities to critical infrastructure and supply chains,
and how does DHS take action based on relative risks?
Ms. Brzozowski. Absolutely. I think you have made a good
point in that not only the role of seaports are indispensable
to national security, but broader supply chain security,
resiliency, and efforts are indispensable. DHS has a wide
mission, as I mentioned in my opening statement. Trade
facilitation and enforcement, protecting our cyber spaces,
critical infrastructure, security and emergency preparedness
and response. We have to execute on all of those missions
across the totality of critical infrastructures. So not only
seaports, transportation systems, but all the 16 sectors of
critical infrastructure nodes.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. Madam Secretary, I represent the
city of Detroit. The port of Detroit is not among the largest
U.S. ports and does not have any container cranes. But it is
still vital to the local economy and must be protected against
cyber attacks. However, small and medium-sized ports do not
always have the same resources available to large ports, as
they seek to invest in cybersecurity measures. What is DHS
doing to ensure small and medium-sized ports are not left
behind as we look to enhance cybersecurity?
Ms. Brzozowski. Thank you so much for the question. As we
had said in our earlier statements as well, national security
is very much inextricably linked to the smooth functioning of
ports. That means not only the large ports, but many of the
smaller ones that constitute our maritime transportation
system. On a typical day, we see CBP processing, as I said,
billions of tons of goods--I'm sorry, millions of tons of
goods, and processing up to $9.2 billion of imported products.
So, the value as well as the volume is quite significant.
From a DHS perspective, we are committed to across all
sizes of businesses and critical infrastructure organizations,
providing a whole host of free, cost-free, services that enable
those organizations to take cyber hygiene, training, guidance,
other types of services. We also are leveraging hundreds of
advisors and subject-matter experts drawn from all sectors and
all types of businesses to make sure that they are at the table
in helping inform and develop those guidelines. Then finally,
DHS also provides funds to State and local and private sector,
not only in the maritime critical infrastructure sectors, but
across those sectors, to aid in cyber preparedness, but also in
prevention and testing and exercise against the whole range of
hazards.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you so much. Arguin, I'm glad to see
the administration taking board actions to enhance
cybersecurity. However, some of these actions will take quite a
while to show results, such as domestic manufacturing of cranes
and the publication and implementation of regulations. What is
the Coast Guard doing to address cybersecurity threats in the
near term?
Admiral Arguin. Ranking Member, you are correct. The notice
of parole's rulemaking that is out there. We are going to get a
lot of feedback on that so that we get that right as we move
forward, which will raise the bar across the entirety of the
MTS. I would say that there are existing requirements to do
vulnerability assessments across the MTS and assess those
threats and hazards, working across the interagency to ensure
that when those vulnerabilities are identified, we reach back
into the facility security officers to ensure that those
vulnerabilities can be closed. I think it is important to note
that the Executive Order that was issued, explicitly gives us
the authority to control access vessel movements, access to
facilities when an identified vulnerability exists. So, I think
we can take immediate action today, but I think raising the bar
across the board for the rulemaking process will get a more
level playing field across the MTS.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez. I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you to the Ranking Member. The
Chair now recognizes gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgens.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
Congress has a responsibility to observe carefully and evaluate
the actions of our Executive branch and to condemn Executive
actions that we believe weaken national security or injure our
country. We have an equal responsibility to observe and
carefully evaluate the actions of our Executive branch and to
commend the actions of our White House and our Executive
authorities when we believe they have done something right
that's in support of national security and furthers the best
interests of our Nation.
There's a rare moment when I'm going to commend the Biden
administration. On February 21 this year, President Biden
issued an Executive Order to bolster the security of our
Nation's ports, alongside a series of additional actions that
will strengthen maritime security, fortify our supply chains,
and strengthen the United States industrial base. The Executive
Order, the authority to respond to malicious cyber activity in
the Nation's maritime transportation systems and will require
the Coast Guard to report cyber threats and incidents involving
a vessel, port, or waterfront facility. Further, the Executive
Order invests $20 billion into port infrastructure over the
next 5 years to bring manufacturing capacity back to the United
States, with an emphasis on safe and secure cranes operating at
port facilities.
In 2022, Chairman Gimenez introduced H.R. 6487, the Port
Crane Security and Inspection Act of 2022, which would limit
the operation of foreign cranes in U.S. ports. Specifically,
foreign cranes are defined in that bill as those that are
manufactured by companies that are subject to the control or
influence of a country designated as a foreign adversary and
using software or other technology that connects that crane to
the port's cyber infrastructure. I was a co-sponsor of that
legislation. Mr. Chairman, that sort-of effective response from
Congress, as our Legislative branch, and from the White House,
as our Executive branch, that's what's required for our Nation
to respond to emerging cyber threats.
So, I will stand unwaveringly in the corner of the Coast
Guard as it relates to your on-going and historically quite
effective actions to protect American commerce and our maritime
activities and our maritime ports. The air and the sea and the
land that's patrolled by our Coast Guard is under increasing
threat. Therefore, the focus that Congress provides to the
needs of the Coast Guard has evolved and are enhanced.
Admiral Arguin and Admiral Vann, let me just thank you for
the work the Coast Guard does. As you know, Louisiana's third
district, my district, produce around 60 percent of all the LNG
exports shipped across the world. A 2022 Government
Accountability Office report found that the Coast Guard has a
shortage of approximately 400 marine inspectors. This impacts
the ability to properly and effectively inspect gas-carrying
vessels.
Admiral Arguin, can you speak to how military recruiting
challenges are affecting Coast Guard readiness and on how the
Coast Guard plans to fill those billets, including the 400
marine inspectors needed to conduct gas carrier exams?
Admiral Arguin. Congressman, we are actively investing in
our recruiting efforts to bring in not only marine inspectors,
but the entirety of the shortfall that we see, roughly 3,000
billets that are impacting our ability to deliver the effects
that Congress and the American public expect.
Mr. Higgins. Yes, sir. So, Admiral, clearly the Coast Guard
squared away. You are doing your best to fill these slots, but
can you, as we have a shortage of inspectors, address your
statement? What are your thoughts on using risk-based approach
to conduct inspections of LNG vessels, which is highly
recommended by some of us?
Admiral Arguin. Congressman, the Commandant's been very
clear. We need to think differently about how we do our
business, whether that's a resource issue or just thinking
about the ability to get after ensuring compliance with
existing standards or evaluating the safety of a particular
vessel. A risk-based approach is something that we are
certainly interested in applying based on not only resource
shortfalls, but just the risk associated with those types of
platforms. It gives us a different way to assess compliance and
safety security of vessels.
Mr. Higgins. We are in support of risk-based inspections.
You can count on my office to be at the Coast Guard's avail,
gentlemen, ma'am, as we move forward with expanding risk-based
inspections to LNG vessels. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired,
and I yield.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, gentlemen from Louisiana. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ranking Member, and I
want to thank the witnesses for joining us today. Full
disclosure, as a young man, teenager, I had a great deal of
reverence, still do, but at one time, I wanted to be in the
Coast Guard. I guess I wasn't able to cut the mustard, so I
didn't make it. But I have always had an affinity for the Coast
Guard as to the other branches of the service.
So, Port Newark, located in my district, is known as the
birthplace of containerization. For years, goods were located
bundle by bundle onto pallets, surrounded by netting, then
lifted by crane out of the ships and onto the dock, and then
loaded onto trucks and trains. My father, along with several
other friends and family, worked at Port Newark in their
younger years. In 1956, the SSIDLX became the world's first
container ship, carrying 58 rectangular containers from Port
Newark to Houston. In 1962, the world's first container
turnover opened at the Port of Newark.
These achievements revolutionized global maritime commerce
and trade. Times have changed, and drastically at ports across
the United States. With automation and new technology, our
ports are shipping and receiving more goods than ever. It is
critical for us to create new guidelines to fortify our ports
and maritime security framework and enhance our overall
resilience in the face of evolving threats.
Secretary Brzozowski, according to DHS, one of the
functions of the newly-created Supply Chain Resilience Center
is to evaluate the risk to ports posed by adversarial nation-
states' over-reliance on untrustworthy equipment, data
extraction, and unvetted access. Port Newark uses some ship-to-
shore cranes manufactured by ZPMC that may potentially pose
cyber threats. Are there any examples where over-reliance on
ZPMC cranes has led to vulnerabilities to port security?
Ms. Brzozowski. Thank you for the question. Thank you as
well for that shout-out about the history of containerization
and how it is revolutionizing the shipping industry. I think we
really are, and agree, at such an inflection point right now.
Particular to the presence of these PRC-manufactured cranes and
whether we have seen any specific vulnerabilities, not to my
knowledge. But I think as we are taking a close look at this
issue, it is because of the potential for such a risk and the
known exploitation by the PRC of critical infrastructure, even
domestic critical infrastructure sectors.
Mr. Payne. Yes, I believe that there are 200 cranes that
they have had, and I believe the Coast Guard has made a check
of 92 of them and haven't found any problems. The SCRC plans to
conduct at least two tabletop exercises in 2024 to test the
resiliency of the critical cross-border supply chain with other
U.S. Federal agencies, foreign governments, and industry. One
critical component that I believe could be addressed with
exercises and engagement and coordination with local
governments. Will opportunities be presented for local
governments to participate or gain knowledge so that they are
well-prepared in the event of an incident?
Ms. Brzozowski. Absolutely. Local, State--local officials,
as well as State and local critical infrastructure
organizations--are going to be a key point of any tabletop
exercises and will certainly be part of the ones that we are
planning under the Supply Chain Resilience Center.
Mr. Payne. Thank you very much, and I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, gentleman from New Jersey. The
Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from Florida, Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Building domestic
infrastructure capacity is critical to reducing our reliance on
foreign-made machinery, safeguarding our seaports from
debilitating cyber attacks, and maintaining functional
equipment. Thoughtful consideration of modernization of
procurement policies to benefit the utilization of
domestically-manufactured equipment is critical to mitigating
our reliance on cranes produced by foreign actors. Due to cost,
regulations surrounding procurement and other limitation,
nearly all cranes used in U.S. seaports are manufactured in
China. This includes 2 of the 5 cranes at Port Tampa Bay. I
appreciate the thoughtful discussion and testimony we have
heard already today about this issue and how we can be working
together to mitigate these threats and ensure that our ports
are safeguarded.
I would like to follow up, Secretary Brzozowski, with you
on this question. As Members of Congress, we spoke a little bit
earlier about supply chain as it relates to cranes. I'm
interested in your thoughts on what we can be doing as Members
of Congress to work with DHS to help build domestic
infrastructure capacity for components of the supply chain as
it relates to our cranes.
Ms. Brzozowski. Thank you very much for the question.
Again, I think--thank you for your leadership, and I think we
agree that there's very serious vulnerabilities associated with
an over-reliance on any type of supply chain component that's
not produced here in the United States. The Department of
Homeland Security is not in the position of providing a lot of
the incentives to incentivize domestic production beyond our
partnerships with them to make sure that they are understanding
that being part of a secure and resilient supply chain is
something that's going to afford them opportunities. We know
that if an adversary is exploiting some of these systems, the
port can completely shut down. That's why we are working very
closely with the Department of Transportation, the Department
of Commerce, on some of these incentive programs. So, I think
full funding of those programs, communication out to your
constituencies about the availability of these programs, and an
amplification of the vulnerabilities that we are seeing from a
security perspective would just raise the attention and promote
further production of some of these capabilities.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. Admiral Arguin, one of the other things
that we have heard mentioned today is the Executive Order that
the President recently signed to empower the Coast Guard to
issue directives regarding cranes manufactured in the PRC. Can
you touch on what actions, how crane operators have responded,
and how this is affecting your operations?
Admiral Arguin. So, ma'am, the maritime security directive
required notification of affected crane owners and operators
within 48 hours. We have touched base with each one of those
crane operators. They've acknowledged that the maritime
security directive applies to their operations. So, we're now
continuing the conversation about what needs to be done within
the elements of the sensitive security information to close
those vulnerabilities. If there are questions that come up
about the specific details, then my colleague at the Coast
Guard Cyber will be able to support, or others that have
technical supporting role, we'll be able to help them close
those vulnerabilities. Then there's a window that we will have
confirmation that all of those vulnerabilities have been closed
within those ports.
Ms. Lee. Admiral Vann, would you add to that response for
us?
Admiral Vann. Yes, Congresswoman. As was alluded to, if it
is determined that vulnerabilities do exist, as I mentioned
earlier, open doors in the network, on the cranes or to the
cranes, the services that we provide from Coast Guard Cyber
Command, assess those vulnerabilities, can hunt to see whether
or not there's adversarial action on the crane network and then
help the operator eradicate it. There are other sources of
these types of services. Some companies have them internal to
their organizations, others can hire this kind of help, but we
can validate behind someone else's actions. We actually will
deploy out into the port, onto the crane network, and we are
doing that now. As was mentioned, we have assessed almost half
of the PRC manufactured cranes in the country already.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you to the gentlewoman from
Florida. Now the Chair recognizes gentleman from New Jersey,
Mr. Menendez.
Mr. Menendez. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, thank you
for convening today's hearing on port cybersecurity and for
allowing me to waive on. To our witnesses, thank you for being
here. In my time on the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection, I have been proud to work with our
Federal partners and private-industry stakeholders to improve
the security of our critical infrastructure. New Jersey's 8th
Congressional district is home to the largest port on the East
Coast, where hundreds of billions of dollars of goods move each
year. The smooth and effective movement of cargo through the
Port of New York and New Jersey is critical to our economy,
both regionally and nationally. I'm glad to be able to
participate in today's hearing as we discuss how we can
continue to keep our ports safe from cyber threats.
Secretary Brzozowski, in your testimony, you mentioned that
the Supply Chain Resilience Center within DHS has begun
building partnerships with foreign governments. Our
international partners are going to be facing many of the same
vulnerabilities as our own ports, including those related to
ZPMZ-built cranes and the full range of cyber threats. How is
DHS working with our international partners on cyber threat
information sharing related to our ports and their ports?
Ms. Brzozowski. Maybe I will provide a broad overview, but
then would defer to my Coast Guard colleagues on the actual
cyber-specific information sharing. Through the Supply Chain
Resilience Center, we are working with a variety of foreign
nations on looking at this particular threat, comparing notes
and seeing what their perspective is, and also discussing
particular mitigations. We are also working to identify other
countries that have models of Supply Chain Resilience Center
that could afford a good template for not only what the
Department of Homeland Security is doing, but how we are
working with our interagency partners in Transportation,
Commerce, and the Department of Defense. Having the center be
able to work with our interagency colleagues and with the
private sector is very important. But also having our center be
able to connect with similar centers internationally and
develop early warning systems and share information about not
just cyber threats, but the movement of goods, shipping trends,
logistics information, and be able to not only predict and
mitigate, but also practice for and exercise our capabilities
in terms of enhancing the resilience against any type of
threat.
Mr. Menendez. Have you identified any models or any of our
international partners who are sort-of perhaps ahead of where
we are on identifying and addressing these challenges?
Ms. Brzozowski. We have had great conversations with a
range of international partners, one with our colleagues in
Finland stands out. They have maintained a Supply Chain
Resilience Center that has kept domestic production and has
exercised against a range of hosts, you know, throughout the
Cold War, since World War II. You know, they are operating on a
different scale than we are. But many of the models, the
frameworks, and the ideas are ones that we are finding very
valuable and informative.
Mr. Menendez. Appreciate that. We have talked a lot in our
Cybersecurity Subcommittee, this Congress, about how to
streamline reporting requirements to make sure they are
effective. The Coast Guard seems well-positioned to lead in
this area because of the existence of the National Response
Center, which is the single reporting point for physical
security breaches at ports and has a mature process for passing
that information to Federal, State, and local agencies. For any
of the witnesses that would like to take this, could the Coast
Guard leverage the existing National Response center to
streamline cyber incident reporting?
Admiral Arguin. Congressman, we currently use our National
Response Center as the single point for reporting information
related to maritime cyber incidents. There is an on-going
effort by CISA to try and harmonize that across the
interagency, and we are participating in that to ensure that
there's a seamless connection to two Federal entities that need
to know about incident reporting or incidents that have
happened within other segments.
Mr. Menendez. Appreciate it. Sort-of just to follow up on
that, I want to make sure that we are preparing for that
information sharing to go both ways so that our ports have
access to timely, actionable intelligence about cyber threats.
How does the Coast Guard share reported threat information with
industry participants, and how does the Coast Guard work with
partners like CISA, the MTS, or ISAC to ensure effective
information sharing?
Admiral Vann. Congressman, I will take a stab at that one.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you.
Admiral Vann. So we absolutely do provide from Coast Guard
Cyber command resources to include current information on
threats that's available to operators imports. Additionally,
working across the interagency with CISA and others, we will
produce maritime cyber alerts as timely as possible. So, those
are kind-of as-needed as threats emerge. Then, we are a member
of the intelligence community, so we are working with other
agencies and DoD across intel, and we have had examples of
declassifying higher classification information and then making
that available to port operators. Finally, you mentioned the
ISAC. We absolutely cooperate, share information. They do a
good job of pushing it out across all operators in the system.
Mr. Menendez. Appreciate that. I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you to gentlemen from New Jersey.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
D'Esposito.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking
Member, thank you for allowing me to waive on this morning.
Thank you to the panel for being here and for your service to
this country. I represent New York's fourth district, which is
Nassau County on Long Island. I know how important the Port of
New York and New Jersey is to not only New York, but our region
and, of course, this country as a whole. According to a report
by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, this port is
the largest container port on the East Coast, moving hundreds
of billions in goods each year.
This is really an open question to any of you. In 2022,
China was by far the No. 1 country of origin for goods coming
into this port. Can anyone speak roughly to the size of the
physical Chinese presence at both the Port of New York and New
Jersey, and specifically other ports on the East Coast? Not all
at once.
Ms. Brzozowski. Not specifically, no. I mean, this is very
much the issue that under the new Supply Chain Resilience
Center, we are taking a close look at to get an understanding
of not only the dominance in port cranes, but looking across
other types of port equipment and then looking across broader
infrastructures.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. So, I think we would agree that there
is a presence. Obviously, the goods are the presence, and they
have a physical presence at the ports. So, are there any
implications for our cybersecurity due to their large presence,
not only physically, and the goods in the ports of New York and
New Jersey and the Northeast?
Admiral Vann. Congressman, I would just say that what we
experience when we operate on critical infrastructure networks,
in ports, on operational technology and information technology
networks, I guess I would offer, there are a number of vectors
by which access can be gained. It could be physical access. It
could be remotely through networking and communication lines
that come in from the outside, or conceivably it could be local
physical presence that then either connects through a physical
connection or a Wi-Fi connection to a network. So, that doesn't
directly answer your question, but certainly presence as a
threat vector, if that does.
Mr. D'Esposito. Right. So, I think that it is important to
realize our ports. Obviously, there's so much that goes into
the logistics of the ports, whether it is the physical port
itself, the trucking industry, the warehousing, the cargo
that's in the port. Can you just describe the implications,
because I think it is sort-of hard to understand, the
implications of even what a short-term halt would do to a port
like the Port of New York and New Jersey.
Admiral Arguin. Congressman, what I would maybe try and
take sort-of the view is, any disruption, cyber or otherwise,
hurricane, anything that would cause a ripple in that very
tightly fine-tuned system will have really diverse impacts. So,
part of what each local sector commander, captain of the port,
is focused on each and every day with their teams is to ensure
that are we looking at the right things to determine whether or
not those disruptions are predictable? If they are, what can we
do to minimize that disruption downstream? You know, it's one
aspect of the marine transportation system is to get the cargo
to the port. There's an entire rest of that conversation that
will be impacted downstream. So, we are hyper-focused on that.
I know that the Supply Chain Resiliency Center is also looking
at that to ensure that that disruption is minimized to the
extent possible.
Mr. D'Esposito. Right. So specific to, again, talking about
responses and shutdowns at ports. Obviously, to your point,
there's so much that goes into preparing and mitigating, and we
always want to ask ourselves, are we better off today than we
were yesterday in preparation for whatever the inevitable is?
So how fast would the Coast Guard be able to respond to an
incident at the port? Specific to New York and New Jersey, is
it almost instant?
Admiral Arguin. So we maintain a 24/7 presence in all
ports. So as soon as we are aware of the challenge, we'll
decide which teams need to be involved at understanding the
impact of that, and then what we need to do to minimize that
disruption.
Mr. D'Esposito. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I yield
back.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you to the gentleman from New York.
Now the Chair recognizes gentleman from Texas, Mr. Pfluger.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for
allowing me to waive on. I appreciate the witnesses for your
service. Also, during this time, through our own investigation
here on Capitol Hill and through your efforts, I think every
American should be concerned about even the possibility of the
vulnerability that we see in our ports, with regards to the
Chinese Communist Party and their use of trade to facilitate
many different nefarious actions.
So, I will start with Admiral Trinque. To the extent that
you can, can you share what policies or plans that TRANSCOM has
taken under the National Port Readiness Network that use
Chinese manufactured port equipment and technology to make sure
that we are secure and what those vulnerabilities are?
Admiral Trinque. Congressman, thank you very much for the
question. Our strategic seaports are critical to our ability to
project and sustain the joint force. So, the National Port
Readiness Network allows us, at an interagency level, to assess
and remediate risks in those ports. Specific to the technology
to which you refer, in our strategic seaports, when we deploy
out of an Army unit, for instance, out of our strategic
seaports is generally not using those cranes. It is generally
using other types of vessels, other modes of transport.
Additionally, in our strategic seaports that do have those
cranes, there are other cranes that could be used. So, our
current assessment is none of our strategic seaports right now
are wholly dependent on those cranes.
Mr. Pfluger. OK, I will go to Admiral Vann. During our
investigation, we learned that ZPMC manufactures many of its
ship-to-shore cranes at Shenzhen base, which is also very close
to the Shenzhen Island, which is close to where the PLAN
produces a lot of its warships. Obviously, there's the
proximity, and just knowing how many of these companies operate
inside China is concerning. So, No. 1, are you aware that the
ZPMC ship-to-shore cranes used by U.S. ports are manufactured
near the PLAN ship-building site?
Admiral Vann. No, Congressman, I was not aware that the
construction of the cranes occurs at a location close to a PLA
Navy site.
Mr. Pfluger. Does anybody on the panel want to take a stab
at this or is this something that y'all are aware of?
Admiral Trinque. Congressman, I was not aware of that. I
don't know that that increases the level of risk, because I
think we view the proliferation of Chinese technology in our
seaports as a potential strategic risk regardless of where in
the PRC they are constructed.
Mr. Pfluger. Yes, I mean, it is hard not to think that it
wouldn't increase the risk if their proximity was either co-
located or on the same island, or that they share either some
sort of trade secrets or intellectual property. There are some
of these things that we don't know, so I maybe disagree with
you slightly that that wouldn't increase the risk. But I guess
the question here is, what are we doing about those types of
things, whether geographically co-located or there's a network
of leadership that is tied together? What are we doing as a
U.S. Government to either prevent that or stop those normal
bills? It looks like you want to answer?
Admiral Arguin. So, I won't really dive into stop the
manufacturer piece. That's really outside of my lane. What I
would say is the Executive Order, specifically with respect to
Chinese manufacturer cranes, required certain things to be done
to close known vulnerabilities and assess those vulnerabilities
to ensure that they cannot be exploited. Then our proposed
rulemaking would require a vulnerability assessment across all
modes, regardless of where something had been manufactured, to
understand where there may be exploitable connectivity, and
then requirements that would close those down.
So, to some extent, regardless of where you manufacture
something, we would understand where there were potentially
doors were open and so that we could close those doors to
prevent some sort of nefarious activity.
Mr. Pfluger. OK, talking about the Executive Order, and I
will go to Ms. Brzozowski. Was this Executive Order in any way
linked to Volt Typhoon and the malicious activity that
Microsoft, I guess, first allegedly reported on?
Ms. Brzozowski. I actually defer to my Coast Guard
colleagues on that who are aware of all the details.
Admiral Vann. Congressman, I'm just happy to talk a little
bit about that particular threat. That actor is a threat that
uses a technique called living off the land. These are
activities on a network that are not easily recognizable
because they get on a network and then use standard activities
that occur in network traffic all of the time. So, what it
requires us to do, as we look for adversaries, is to look for
behavioral patterns. So, a significant amount of analysis after
we look at a network.
Back to the question of the EO. What the EO really does,
again, is allow a captain of the port, if it is determined that
there is a threat or there's been some disruption because of a
cyber intrusion, to take action to, maybe in this case, in your
example, to secure a crane or secure a terminal until such time
that the operator, maybe with our assistance, at least with our
validation, takes action to secure that particular node of the
system.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired,
but I commend you for this hearing. Obviously, 5 minutes is not
enough to dig into all the issues. But thank you for allowing
me to waive on.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, gentlemen from Texas. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Garcia.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm proud to represent
a district that includes the Port of Long Beach. It is one of
the largest ports in the United States and the second-largest
container seaport. The Port of Long Beach is a city department
in Long Beach, and when I was mayor, for the last 8 years, the
harbor department was a huge part of the work that we do in the
city and, of course, across California and the West Coast. I'm
also proud to co-chair the Congressional Ports Caucus, and
security of our ports is incredibly important and a top
priority for us and the work that we do. We know that the
port's impact on the economy is critical. Of course, we saw its
impact when we had the supply chain crisis just not long ago.
My port alone handles trade valued over $200 billion every
year, and we support 2.6 million jobs throughout the supply
chain and throughout different types of trade and
transportation jobs across the country.
It is great to see bipartisanship today on this issue. I
will love to add that I think President Biden has been a great
leader on issues around ports and security. I think the
investments being made in the infrastructure bill are
significant, and he's also taken reasonable and common-sense
steps to improve maritime security. Last week, of course, he
had his Executive Order, which got support from both sides of
the aisle as well. Chairman Gimenez and I also work together as
former mayors as co-chairs of the Peru Caucus, which is nice to
say, also to have bipartisan support there as well.
Now, under the Executive Order, the U.S. Coast Guard will
have the authority to respond to cyber attacks or espionage in
the supply chain with new standards. We will also require
reporting of cyber incidents or active cyber threats,
endangering vessels, harborous ports, or other waterfront
facilities. We know this is critical because we know that the
maritime supply chain include many overlapping companies and
actors as well. Now, our hearing today, I know, is focused on
cranes, which is critical and surely has to be discussed and
investigated. But we know that cyber attacks can hit anywhere
in the supply chain, including at port terminals or vessel
communications.
Rear Admiral Vann, I'm sure you are familiar with the
history of ransomware attacks which have impacted port
operations, including back home in California and around the
world. Can you speak more about how President Biden's Executive
Order will increase security at other parts of the supply
chain, from terminal operators to other important
communications networks?
Admiral Vann. Yes, Congressman. Again, what the Executive
Order does is give that local captain of the port the ability
to either react to a known threat or respond to an actual
attack. Not just to cranes, but to all of the operational
technology in the marine transportation system, and business
systems as they apply to impacting the operations of ports. So,
in our work in the Coast Guard Cyber Command, we go about the
business of assessing the vulnerabilities that exist, about
notifying partners, that we talked about, with threat
information and then about locating malicious activity and
helping port partners eradicate it. Again, the Executive Order
gives that local captain of the port the opportunity, the
ability to keep the port safe and secure while a cyber threat
is addressed.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. I want to also, just to add on that
rear admiral, the issue of the way automation is also changing
our needs around being cyber secure. Certainly, it is impacting
not just cranes but other types of vehicles and equipment at
our ports and harbors. Do you see that the increase in
automation, which there is some concern about and certainly
from the IW dock workers and others, does that actually
increase our kind-of vulnerability to attacks and to some of
these concerns being shared today?
Admiral Vann. Thank you, Congressman. I have kind-of been
waiting for this question. Absolutely. As we increase
automation, while it brings efficiencies, it increases the
terrain, the cyber terrain that we must protect. The point I
really want to make here is that all of us, whether it is
government, private companies that are operating in the ports,
all need to take the vulnerabilities that are created by this
increased surface, this threat surface, that's now there with
increased automation, need to take that very seriously, make it
part of their calculus in securing the system.
Mr. Garcia. I think that's absolutely right. That's one of
the concerns that I share also with kind-of automation that's
not really gone through a real process with the workers in the
community and cyber experts and what we are seeing. Just last,
just more of a comment than anything else. So, I have been to
China a few times as mayor of Long Beach and met with port
operators and companies there. It is important to remember that
China is absolutely competitive with the United States. They
are in it to beat us in every single way. We want to make sure
that we are always ahead. It is also critical to note that
China is our single largest trading partner in the United
States, on the West Coast especially. Our ports, all on the
West Coast, depend on Chinese trade, and so, we must look at
China both as a competitor but also a strategic partner when it
comes to commerce. West Coast ports would collapse without
Chinese trade, and millions of jobs would be lost, certainly in
districts like mine and others along the West Coast as well.
So, we have to, I think, both balance those while continuing to
push and understand the real threats that China poses to our
economy and certainly to cybersecurity.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you from gentlemen from California.
I will be open to a second round for those who want to stick
around. So, there are some other questions that I want to ask.
I know you were expecting it, but here we go. All right.
As the testimony is, you know, as I'm listening to the
testimony my mind goes somewhere else. I know about
cybersecurity, but my mind goes to actual physical impediments.
So, none of you, I don't believe, have the answer to my
question. What would happen if China somehow embargoed spare
parts, maintenance, et cetera, of cranes? What would happen to
our ability to move our commerce? Because 80 percent of the
commerce that comes in the United States through the seas,
actually, somehow a Chinese crane touches it, because we have
80 percent of the cranes in this country are Chinese-
manufactured.
Another question that I have is, how do they get there? How
were they able to achieve such dominance, and are they
increasing their dominance around the world, and how can we
combat that? Not sure, again, that any of you have the answer
to that question. But maybe you have the answer to this
question. I have recently came back from Peru, and a CODEL down
to South America, Panama. Interesting that the canal that we
built has Chinese control port on the Pacific side and on the
Atlantic side. They are building a new port down in Peru for
the Peruvians. The Peruvians are going to ask for another port
down in south Peru, and hopefully we can bid on it. But
something tells me somehow that the Chinese, the CCP, are going
to underbid the United States. Is it possible, as a
possibility--and they are building airports and seaports around
the world. Is it possible that without safeguards, that our
trade can actually be disrupted across the world with the
dominance of the crane, not only the cranes, but also the ports
in a nefarious fashion, so that Chinese manufactured goods, et
cetera, flow very smoothly, but somehow American manufactured
goods and trade don't flow quite as smoothly? Is that a
possibility?
Ms. Brzozowski. I'll take that and say, yes. I think it's
not only a possibility, but something that we're seeing play
out around the world. It's no secret that China has both the
capability and the intent to challenge the rules-based trade
system, and they are leveraging all instruments of their
national power to do so. They're looking to gain access not
only to technology and data, and in particular the
vulnerabilities that we're talking about around the cranes
today, but engaging in a number of other practices to undercut
American workers and businesses. We're seeing an influx of
production of fentanyl through American ports, if you're
talking about physical ports, we're seeing a use of vile
practices associated with forced labor to undercut the
competitiveness of United States and other global companies and
bringing goods to market. That are not only made in a means
that are very contrary to U.S. values, but undercut, as I said,
legitimate businesses that can't compete in that type of
situation. We're also seeing that we're blind to economic
influences coming in through investments. I spoke that DHS is
part of the CFIUS committee, the Committee on Foreign
Investment in the United States, and we're taking a very, very
close look at investments, particularly in our critical
infrastructure sectors.
Chairman Gimenez. I take concern with their zeal in
creating and investing and actually manufacturing, creating the
infrastructure that they need in order to create ports,
airports, et cetera, that will dominate trade around the globe.
They do this, it is really not a great value for those
countries. It is a cheap price, but not a great value, and I
will explain why. They will give a cheaper price, but then
they'll bring the labor from China to do the work, which in
essence, means that that country's capital is actually leaving,
going to China versus what we do. Usually we bring our
expertise, but the actual work force for that infrastructure is
actually from the country, which means more of that money is
actually invested in the country. So, this Belt and Roads
Initiative caused me great concern. It is not just about the
cranes, it is about the entire--and they do it in a very
holistic fashion, and they are very committed to that. So, I
share great concerns about that. So, I will yield now to the
Ranking Member from Michigan, Mr. Thanedar.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yesterday,
Congressional leaders announced a plan to address Government
funding for the remainder of the fiscal year. I'm hopeful that
we can avoid a costly and unnecessary Government shutdown. But
given how elusive a funding agreement has been, I am not making
any assumptions until a bill is passed and signed by the
President. The last Government shutdown in 2019 had a dramatic
and lasting impact on the Coast Guard, among other agencies,
and a shutdown now would have a similar effect. I want to ask
each one of you, any one of you, how would a Government
shutdown affect your agency's work force and mission, in
general, and port security in particular?
Admiral Arguin. Ranking Member, the uncertainty associated
with a Government shut-down or continuing resolutions certainly
has an impact on our ability to continue to purchase and bring
to bear new technologies that are going to be important in
protecting the Nation's ports. It also has a negative impact on
our ability to recruit and retain. We talked earlier about the
challenges that we are currently having to bring in new talent,
the talent that's necessary to deliver on the services that you
and the American public expect. You mentioned 2019, 35-day
shutdown where the Coast Guard was not getting paid, that is
still having reverberating effects on our existing work force,
on our ability to retain individuals. So, that will not help us
bring in that talent that we need.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. Anybody else?
Ms. Brzozowski. Yes, thank you for the question. I will say
without equivocation that any lapse in Federal funding disrupts
the vital work of the department and will leave Americans less
safe as a result. Three out of 4 DHS employees would be
required to work without pay should there be a shutdown. This
includes enforcement officers at the borders, analysts,
investigators, and, of course, the men and women of the U.S.
Coast Guard.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Admiral Arguin,
last week, the Coast Guard issued a notice of proposed
rulemaking to enhance cybersecurity by requiring port owners
and operators to implement a wide range of measures. This
proposal builds upon a series of security directives TSA has
issued for various modes of transportation over the past few
years, and it represents a change from the voluntary approach
the Coast Guard has previously taken in issuing cybersecurity
guidelines. Why did the Coast Guard decide to initiate the
rulemaking process rather than continuing to rely on voluntary
standards?
Admiral Arguin. Ranking Member, I think the entirety of
this hearing has kind-of highlighted the increasing
vulnerabilities, the increasing connectedness of systems within
the marine transportation system and those vulnerabilities and
its long-term consequences of not doing something requiring
vessels and facilities that operate in that system to have an
elevated standard. We are very much interested in getting
feedback on whether or not that standard is going to be
effective, but we also recognize that whatever standard gets
put in place is going to have to regularly evolve, given the
emerging threats.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. How did the Coast Guard coordinate
with TSA in developing the proposed rulemaking? How do the
Coast Guard's requirements mirror those issued by TSA and how
do they differ?
Admiral Arguin. Ranking Member, so every 2 weeks we have a
cybersecurity interdepartmental conversation about where each
of the interagency rulemakings are in the process. So, we were
looking to harmonize that just within the Department. Then we
also participate with CISA's Cyber Incident Reporting Council
to ensure that we have got harmonization within the Department.
But there have been regular conversations about where certain
things are required. I mean, in fairness, cybersecurity is not
inherently special to the maritime. Those same systems and
vulnerabilities exist across all modes, all sectors. So, we
want to make sure that those same vulnerabilities are being
closed across each of those so that work will continue.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. Chair, I yield it back.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you to the Ranking Member. Mr.
Payne, you are recognized.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member. Last
week, the Biden administration announced billions in funding to
support domestic crane manufacturing to strengthen our critical
infrastructure resilience at ports across the country. I am
very happy to see the President's effort in bringing a lot of
this manufacturing back home. We passed the CHIPS Act to make
sure that we have the chips that we need and don't have to rely
on foreign adversaries. Also, it is good to see that they are
bringing back the crane composition. We need to manufacture
here at home. The Biden administration has taken many steps in
order to secure the equipment that we need at home and not rely
on foreign actors.
So, Assistant Brzozowski, as the administration makes these
needed investments, how will the SCRC ensure opportunities are
made available to local business, particularly minority-owned-
operated businesses, to serve as contractors or subcontractors?
Ms. Brzozowski. Thank you very much for the question. The
Supply Chain Resilience Center is working across the
interagency to identify the areas where, from a security
perspective and a resilience perspective, we would like to see
domestic production increase. We work very closely with the
other agencies that are going to be responsible for
administering those funds that go out to incentivize some of
that return of production, that includes the departments of
Transportation and Commerce. Of course, we would love to see
and very much believe that local businesses, local critical
infrastructure operators, will be a key part of bringing some
of those production capabilities back under some of these
incentive programs.
Mr. Payne. Thank you. Rear Admiral Arguin, considering that
the Port of Newark is a crucial hub that drives economic
activity both locally and nationally, and I ensure it remains
that way, how will the Coast Guard work with ports to ensure
that they have full understanding of the required cybersecurity
measures and to check for compliance?
Admiral Arguin. Congressman, so Captain Zeita Merchant,
who's the current sector commander of captain of the port,
regularly engages with industry stakeholders within her
operational area. Her staff have been engaging with, not only
the facilities that have cranes that could be considered
underneath this Executive Order, but across the board, any one
of those facilities that has a potential vulnerability that
could disrupt the flow of commerce within the Port of New York,
New Jersey, she is hyper-focused on.
Mr. Payne. Excellent. Are there grant funding that's
available for ports as they work to enhance cybersecurity?
Admiral Arguin. Yes, sir. Each year, FEMA puts on port
security grant programs. The local sectors, captains of the
port, support bringing in industry stakeholders, evaluating
those proposals against potential buy downs of risk, and then
we provide those recommendations to FEMA for a decision on
whether or not those particular grants would be supported.
Mr. Payne. Well, thank you for that. I thank you for your
answers from all the panel. Thank you for your service to this
country. With that, I will yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, gentlemen from New Jersey. The
Chair now recognizes gentleman from California, Mr. Garcia.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. Just to circle back, I'm trying to
remember if someone knows the company that actually produces
most of the Chinese cranes is ZPMC, I believe, if that's
correct, and maybe this was discussed earlier. So interestingly
enough, I have been to the ZPMC factory in China, when I was
mayor, and especially because so much of our economy was port-
related and working. They obviously have a huge American
presence as well and are very present in the Long Beach-Los
Angeles area. Of course, their operations are immense and
incredibly impressive.
So, I just want to add to what my colleague was saying is
the one thing that I took away from that experience was how
lacking our ability to produce this level of infrastructure is
in the United States. We have nothing near ZPMC's kind of
output because they are producing globally. My concern would
also be, is that this is not only a national security issue for
the United States, where we import numerous ZPMC cranes, but it
is a national security issue across the world, where every port
that they are building or every crane that's going to another
port, the Chinese do have influence or the ability to possibly
have disruptions there.
So I just want to add that anything that we can do as a
committee or as Members to assist in encouraging the production
of cranes and port manufacturing here in the United States is
something that we must do. I'm not sure if there's a comment on
that from anyone.
Ms. Brzozowski. I'm going to jump on that, because I would
love a second bite at the apple of a prior question about what
Congress can do. Of course, as we stand up the Supply Chain
Resilience Center, we are pulling from existing resources
within the Department. We would love to work with Congress to
fully fund that effort and ensure that we have got the
capabilities, as do our other departments, that we'll be
coordinating with to deep dive, have that analytical
visibility, the research capabilities, and to be able to really
create an agile and responsive capability in service of
ensuring supply chain resilience.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. Then I have one question that's
unrelated, it is about the Conception fire, and I want to touch
on this topic. In Southern California, the Conception fire,
obviously, for those that don't know, was a dive boat that
caught fire and sank off the Santa Cruz Island, off the coast.
Thirty-three passengers and 1 crew member were killed when a
fire broke out below decks. Worst maritime disaster in
California in over 150 years. We obviously want to make sure
that this doesn't happen again. The NTSB's report on the
accident concluded they had a safety management system--I'm
sorry, they concluded that had a safety management system been
in place, the owner operator of Conception could have
identified unsafe practices and fire risks on the boat and
taken corrective action before the catastrophe and loss of life
occurred.
We know that the Coast Guard obviously is involved in
looking at this. The Coast Guard since 2021, we believe, has
not really been producing as quickly as we would like to see
the information. This was 3 years ago. Last year, I asked about
making progress on the rulemaking and was told, ``The Coast
Guard is actively working on the notice of proposed rulemaking
for the safety management systems on passenger vessel
rulemaking.''
Admiral Arguin, it is almost been a year since then. I can
best tell there's been no real progress made, but maybe there
has been. I know this falls under your Command for Prevention
Policy, so I'm just wondering when the Coast Guard will issue a
proposed rule for safety management systems for passenger and
small passenger vessels?
Admiral Arguin. Congressman, so the process to evaluate
comments and to generate a rule is complex and can take a
while. Especially when you get a number of comments that you
need to adjudicate. We are continuing to work through those.
But I would say that we have implemented a number of other
measures since the Conception fire that have reduced risk for
those particular types of platforms. So, we're actively working
to get that safety management system rulemaking finalized. But
I think large across the board, the small passenger fleet is a
safer fleet today.
Mr. Garcia. I know that we hear the Conception families. Of
course, there's just a lot of hurt and interest in getting that
resolved. The NPRM says possibly later this year we'll get some
type of report or additional implementation, do you think that
date is going to stick, Admiral?
Admiral Arguin. Sir, I'm not a betting man. I would say
that the challenges of getting a rulemaking are not something
that we are slowed down by, but we're continuing to press
forward to try and get a rulemaking on the street as soon as
possible.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you very much, sir. Appreciate that.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, gentlemen, from California.
Mr. Garcia, let me say that the importance to restore heavy
manufacturing back to the United States that's critical to our
National security, is something that both sides fully are in
agreement with. We don't agree on too many things, but on that
we do.
So, again, I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the Members for their questions. The Members of
the subcommittee may have some additional questions for the
witnesses, and we would ask the witnesses to respond to these
in writing. Pursuant to Committee Rule VII(D), the hearing
record will be held open for 10 days. Without objection, this
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
