- WORLDWIDE THREATS TO THE HOMELAND

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WORLDWIDE THREATS TO THE HOMELAND

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

NOVEMBER 15, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-38
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-460 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Mark E. Green, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................     8

Witnesses

Hon. Alejandro N. Mayorkas, Secretary, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    10
Prepared Statement.............................................    12
Mr. Christopher A. Wray, Director, Federal Bureau of
Investigation, U.S. Department of Justice:
Oral Statement.................................................    20
Prepared Statement.............................................    22
Ms. Christine Abizaid, Director, National Counterterrorism
Center, Office of the Director of National Intelligence:
Oral Statement.................................................    31
Prepared Statement.............................................    32

For the Record

The Honorable Dale W. Strong, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Alabama:
Article, CNN, August 30, 2023..................................    86
The Honorable Nick LaLota, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York:
Social Media Post..............................................    96

Appendix

Question From Honorable August Pfluger for Honorable Alejandro N.
Mayorkas.......................................................   107
Questions From Honorable Mike Ezell for Honorable Alejandro N.
Mayor- kas.....................................................   107
Questions From Honorable August Pfluger for Christopher A. Wray..   108
Questions From Honorable Marjorie Taylor Greene for Christopher
A. Wray........................................................   108
Questions From Honorable Mike Ezell for Christopher A. Wray......   108

WORLDWIDE THREATS TO THE HOMELAND

----------

Wednesday, November 15, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:02 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mark Green
[Chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Green, McCaul, Higgins, Guest,
Bishop, Gimenez, Pfluger, Garbarino, Greene, Gonzales, LaLota,
Ezell, D'Esposito, Lee, Luttrell, Strong, Brecheen, Crane,
Thompson, Payne, Swalwell, Correa, Carter, Thanedar, Magaziner,
Ivey, Goldman, Garcia, Ramirez, Menendez, Clarke, and Titus.
Also present: Representative Cammack.
Chairman Green. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order. Without objection, the Chair may declare the
committee in recess at any point. Without objection, the
gentlewoman from Florida, Mrs. Cammack, is permitted to sit on
the dais and ask questions to the witness. The purpose of this
hearing is to receive testimony on the full-scale scope and
pace of threats posed to the homeland. I now recognize myself
for an opening statement.
Twenty-two years have passed since September 11. Since
then, the nature of the threats we face has evolved, and the
security challenges are becoming more dynamic each day. I don't
say this lightly. This is one of the most dangerous times in
the history of the United States. Some of the greatest threats
include an open and lawless Southwest Border. Ask any border
sheriff, or for that matter, the mayor of New York City, the
rising threat of terrorism, rogue nation-state actors and
criminal elements seeking to do us harm, and efforts by foreign
adversaries like the Chinese Communist Party to target our
critical infrastructure. Of course, we also have the wars in
Israel and Ukraine, and rising Chinese aggression in the Taiwan
Strait and the South China Sea.
To overcome these significant challenges, we must take a
clear-eyed and holistic look at these threats. First, we are
facing an unprecedented crisis at our Southwest Border. In just
3 years, the administration has systematically dismantled our
Nation's border security and created the worst border crisis in
American history. While my friends on the left defend these
actions, though now maybe less so than they did at the start,
it is clear that this crisis is not the result of budget cuts,
changes in Border Patrol resources, or changes in the
immigration laws passed by Congress. What has changed was the
cancellation of effective policies that had secured our
borders. The Biden administration ended proven policies like
Remain in Mexico, asylum cooperative agreements, and
construction of new border wall systems. As a result, people
tested the system, were released into the country, called home,
and millions more came. A lot like a college town bar that
doesn't card, before long, they have a line out the door.
Worse, as acknowledged by AG Garland, Attorney General
Garland, the drug cartels have taken advantage of this policy
shift and executed a strategy pushing mass waves of people to
tie up Border Patrol and then bypass them with thousands of
pounds of fentanyl, killing Americans at an unprecedented rate.
Worse, as acknowledged by AG General, Attorney General Garland,
the drug cartels have taken advantage of this policy shift and
executed a strategy that is basically resulting in mass human
trafficking.
Under Secretary Mayorkas, we just saw a record-breaking
year for illegal immigration. CBP reported 2.47 million alien
encounters along the Southwest Border in fiscal year 2023.
Since taking office, Secretary Mayorkas has overseen more than
6.5 million Southwest Border encounters, 7.8 million Nation-
wide encounters, and more than 1.8 million known gotaways. All
records. To put this into perspective, the number of illegal
immigrants who have entered our country since President Biden
took office is greater than the population of 33 of our
Nation's States. I will repeat that, more than 33 out of our 50
States. Furthermore, under Secretary Mayorkas, violent Mexican
cartels are making record profits. In fact, the New York Times
reported that cartels earned around $500 million a year in 2018
on human smuggling. Today, they earn an estimated $13 billion.
The failure of this administration's border policies has
created a humanitarian and national security crisis, as
transnational criminal organizations prey on vulnerable
migrants and sneak across violent felons and individuals on the
terrorist watch list. Yet, Secretary Mayorkas has continued to
mislead Congress and the American people, claiming that this is
what a secure border looks like.
Second, malicious activity by nation-state actors and
terrorism poses a direct threat to the United States homeland.
Without question, the homeland is less safe under this
President. The catastrophic Afghanistan withdrawal 2 years ago
signaled weakness and a lack of leadership to the world. Our
Nation's adversaries have been emboldened to attack our allies
and our friends and are undermining our security here at home.
Significant threats to our cities and our local communities are
only growing.
As each of you recently testified before the Senate
Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs, foreign
terrorist organizations, including those supported by Tehran,
have gained a sense of momentum following Hamas' brutal
terrorist attack against Israel last month. These terrorist
organizations continue to call for attacks against the United
States at home and abroad. This includes al-Qaeda, which, as
Director Wray has pointed out, has issued its most specific
call to attack the United States in the last 5 years.
As our adversaries seek to further destabilize the Middle
East, we must confront how these threats directly impact our
own homeland security. According to DHS, 294 aliens whose name
appear on the terrorist watch list, were stopped trying to
cross our Southwest Border between ports of entry since fiscal
year 2021. Compare that with 11 individuals stopped in the 4
years before fiscal year 2017 through 2020. Think about that
for a moment. It is intuitive. Why would these individuals who
under the previous President only had 11 attempts to cross and
were caught, suddenly feel like they could try and succeed?
Policy changes.
In the last 2 years, CBP encountered over 6,000 special-
interest aliens from Afghanistan--1,600 from Pakistan, 659 from
Iran, and 123 from Iraq between ports of entry. Additionally,
DHS documents obtained by this committee show that more than
20,000 Russians, nearly 230 Afghans, and more than 1,800 Uzbeks
have been released into the country via the misguided CBP One
app mass parole program with minimal or no vetting. These are
just the ones we know about. How many other individuals posing
a national security threat have been among the 1.8 million
known gotaways? No one knows, and that is terrifying.
Our committee has been engaged with DHS, the FBI, NCTC to
ensure resources are appropriately allocated to counter these
threats from terrorism. That said, more must be done. We are
still waiting on sufficient information on the Biden
administration's handling of the heightened national security
risks posed by a massive number of aliens with terrorist ties
illegally crossing the Southwest Border. We will not be
deterred. We demand DHS's full compliance and without delay.
Compliance that I might add, is dictated by the Constitution.
Third, antisemitism is rising, and threats against
communities of faith in the United States are reaching historic
levels. Antisemitic attacks have risen sharply in the United
States since October 7. Foreign terrorist organizations like
ISIS have called on its extremist supporters to target Jewish
communities in the United States and Europe. The free world
pledged never again nearly 80 years ago. Now it is time we
stand firm and united against this evil. We must not let these
antisemitic attacks and the increasingly hateful rhetoric
become a harbinger of something worse to come. We must do all
we can to protect houses of worship and vulnerable communities
from such targeted violence.
Fourth, cyber attacks continue to undermine our homeland
security. The cyber threats we face from malicious nation-
states and cyber criminals are increasingly complex. This
summer, the Federal Government experienced multiple incidences,
including right before the Secretary of Commerce's visit to
China. Our critical infrastructure is also under attack. This
year's annual threat assessment of the United States
intelligence community highlighted the threat that adversarial
cyber actors pose to our critical infrastructure owners and
operators. DHS, CISA, and the FBI have a crucial role to play
in supporting these owners and operators to defend against and
respond to these threats.
Finally, we must address the challenge posed by the CCP.
Against the backdrop of all these threats lie the specter of a
regime that continues to challenge the United States
economically, technologically, diplomatically, and militarily.
Through its relentless espionage, the CCP is stealing U.S.
intellectual property, trade secrets, and other sensitive data
of Americans and American companies. Over the past year alone,
the CCP has increased its espionage efforts against the
homeland in a variety of ways. These include the CCP's
surveillance balloon, collecting intelligence on sensitive
sites, and Chinese nationals posing as tourists to access our
military installations and other sensitive sites, and Chinese
nationals who have crossed our Southern Border at unprecedented
levels. Twenty-four thousand apprehensions of Chinese nationals
at the Southwest Border in fiscal year 2023 alone, a 1,100
percent increase from last year. It doesn't take a rocket
scientist to see there is intentionality there.
If recent reports are correct, the CCP also operates dozens
of overseas police stations which aid their transnational
repression effort by intimidating and threatening Chinese
dissidents abroad. DHS and the FBI must ensure that
transnational repression tactics and schemes by foreign
governments cannot continue on American soil. We stand ready to
help.
The CCP has also made strides in infiltrating our Nation's
education system. It should concern every American that
billions of dollars from the CCP are flowing into our K through
12 classrooms and institutions of higher education. This is a
systematic effort by the CCP to expand its influence within
America's classrooms and promote its authoritarian and anti-
American agenda.
So, what is the Homeland Security Committee doing about
these threats? Well, first, in May, we passed H.R. 2, the
Secure the Border Act, the most comprehensive border security
legislation in decades. We have addressed cyber threats head-on
through a whole-of-Nation approach. We have passed legislation
encountering responsible use--encouraging responsible use of
open-source software in the Federal Government and building
DHS's cyber work force. I have convened a group of committees
across Congress to discuss and develop solutions to this
problem that implicate multiple committees of jurisdiction.
Just last week, this committee advanced Congressman Pfluger's
legislation to prohibit DHS funds from flowing into
universities that host Confucius institutes and Chinese
entities of concern. Further, we passed Congressman Guest's
common-sense legislation to counter the CCP's brazen espionage
and theft of U.S. innovation by barring DHS from purchasing
drones from the PRC or other foreign adversaries.
We have held multiple hearings to examine the evolving
threat of terrorism more than 2 decades after September 11 and
their implications on the homeland, including a recent hearing
where we received confirmation of the immediate and significant
threat the Iranian regime poses to the United States homeland.
This committee has also demanded information on individuals
from Uzbekistan and other countries who used a smuggler with
ties to ISIS to enter the United States through our Southwest
Border. We also demanded information on DHS's screening and
vetting of Afghan evacuees in the wake of our catastrophic
withdrawal. Most recently, we have requested documents and
information from both DHS and the FBI on terrorist threats at
the Southwest Border. The Department and FBI's delays and lack
of responsiveness have become an unacceptable pattern.
Make no mistake, we will continue to use every tool at our
disposal to secure these answers for the American people. I
look forward to a productive conversation about the current
threats to our homeland and the actions being taken to prevent
them. I thank our witnesses for being here, and I look forward
to your testimony.
[The statement of Chairman Green follows:]
Statement of Chairman Mark Green
Twenty-two years have passed since September 11. Since then, the
nature of the threats we face has evolved, and the security challenges
are becoming more dynamic each day. I do not say this lightly; this is
one of the most dangerous times in the history of the United States.
Some of the greatest threats include: an open and lawless Southwest
Border, ask any Texas Sherriff or for that matter the mayor of NYC; the
rising threat of terrorism; rogue nation-state actors and criminal
elements seeking to do us harm; and efforts by foreign adversaries like
the Chinese Communist Party to target our critical infrastructure. Of
course, we also have the wars in Israel and Ukraine, and rising Chinese
aggression in the Taiwan Strait and South China Sea. To overcome these
significant challenges, we must take a clear-eyed and holistic look at
these threats.
First, we are facing an unprecedented crisis at the Southwest
Border. In just 3 years, the Biden administration has systematically
dismantled our Nation's border security and created the worst border
crisis in American history. While my friends on the left defend these
actions--though now maybe less so than at the start--it is clear that
this crisis is not the result of budget cuts, changes in Border Patrol
resources, or changes to the immigration laws passed by Congress. What
changed was the cancelation of effective policies that had secured our
borders--the Biden administration ended proven policies like Remain in
Mexico, asylum cooperative agreements, and construction of new border
wall system. As a result, people tested the system, were released into
the country, called home, and millions more came. A lot like a college
town bar that doesn't card. Before long, they have a line out the door.
Worse, as acknowledged by AG Garland, the drug cartels have taken
advantage of this policy shift, and executed a strategy pushing mass
waves of people to tie up Border Patrol and then bypassed with
thousands of pounds of fentanyl killing Americans at an unprecedented
rate. Under Secretary Mayorkas, we just saw a record-breaking year for
illegal immigration. CBP reported 2.47 million alien encounters along
the Southwest Border in fiscal year 2023. Since taking office,
Secretary Mayorkas has overseen more than 6.5 million Southwest Border
encounters, 7.8 million Nation-wide encounters, and more than 1.8
million known gotaways--all records. To put this in perspective: The
number of illegal immigrants who entered our country since President
Biden took office is greater than the population of 33 of our States.
I'll repeat that: more than 33 out of our 50 States. Furthermore, under
Secretary Mayorkas, violent Mexican cartels are making record profits.
In fact, the New York Times reported that cartels earned around $500
million a year in 2018 on human smuggling. Today, they earn an
estimated $13 billion a year. The failure of this administration's
border policies has created a humanitarian and national security crisis
as transnational criminal organizations prey on vulnerable migrants and
sneak across violent felons and individuals on the terrorist watch
list. And yet, Secretary Mayorkas has continued to mislead Congress and
the American people, claiming that this is what a secure border looks
like.
Second, malicious activity by nation-state actors and terrorism
poses a direct threat to the U.S. homeland. Without question, the
homeland is less safe under President Biden. The catastrophic
Afghanistan withdrawal 2 years ago signaled weakness and a lack of
leadership to the world. Our Nation's adversaries have been emboldened
to attack our allies and our friends and are undermining our security
here at home. Significant threats to our cities and local communities
are only growing. As each of you recently testified before the Senate
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, foreign
terrorist organizations, including those supported by Tehran, have
gained a sense of momentum following Hamas's brutal terrorist attack
against Israel last month. These terrorist organizations continue to
call for attacks against the United States at home and abroad. This
includes al-Qaeda, which as Director Wray has pointed out, has issued
its most specific call to attack the United States in the last 5 years.
As our adversaries seek to further destabilize the Middle East, we must
confront how these threats directly impact our own homeland security.
According to DHS, 294 aliens whose names appear on the terrorist watch
list were stopped trying to cross our Southwest Border between ports of
entry since fiscal year 2021. Compare that with the 11 individuals
stopped in the 4 years between fiscal year 2017-2020. Think about that
for a moment. Its intuitive. Why would these individuals, who under the
previous President only 11 attempted to cross and were caught, suddenly
feel like they could try and succeed? Policy changes.
In the last 2 years, CBP encountered over 6,000 Special Interest
Aliens from Afghanistan, 1,600 from Pakistan, 659 from Iran, and 123
from Iraq between ports of entry. Additionally, DHS documents obtained
by this committee show that more than 20,000 Russians, nearly 230
Afghans, and more than 1,800 Uzbeks have been released into the country
via the misguided CBP One mass-parole program, with minimal or no
vetting. And these are just the ones we know about. How many other
individuals posing a national security threat have been among the 1.8
million known gotaways? No one knows, and that is terrifying. Our
committee has been engaged with DHS, the FBI, and NCTC to ensure
resources are appropriately allocated to counter the threats from
terrorism. That said, more must be done. We are still awaiting
sufficient information on the Biden administration's handling of the
heightened national security risks posed by a massive number of aliens
with terrorist ties illegally crossing the Southwest Border. We will
not be deterred. We demand DHS's full compliance without delay.
Compliance I might add that is dictated by the Constitution you took
and oath to uphold.
Third, antisemitism is rising and threats against communities of
faith in the United States are reaching historic levels. Antisemitic
attacks have risen sharply in the United States since October 7.
Foreign terrorist organizations like ISIS have called on its extremist
supporters to target Jewish communities in the United States and
Europe. The Free World pledged ``Never Again'' nearly 80 years ago. Now
is the time we stand firm and united against this evil. We must not let
these antisemitic attacks and the increasingly hateful rhetoric become
a harbinger of something worse to come. We must do all we can to
protect houses of worship and vulnerable communities from such targeted
violence. Fourth, cyber attacks continue to undermine our homeland
security. The cyber threats we face from malicious nation-states and
cyber criminals are increasingly complex. This summer, the Federal
Government experienced multiple incidents, including right before the
Secretary of Commerce's visit to China. Our critical infrastructure is
also under attack. This year's Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S.
intelligence community highlighted the threat that adversarial cyber
actors pose to our critical infrastructure owners and operators. DHS,
CISA, and the FBI have a crucial role to play in supporting these
owners and operators to defend against and respond to these threats.
Finally, we must address the challenge posed by the CCP. Against
the backdrop of all these threats lie the specter of a regime that
continues to challenge the United States economically, technologically,
diplomatically, and militarily. Through its relentless espionage, the
CCP is stealing U.S. intellectual property, trade secrets, and other
sensitive data of Americans and American companies. Over the past year
alone, the CCP has increased its espionage efforts against the homeland
in a variety of ways. These include the CCP's surveillance balloon
collecting intelligence on sensitive sites, and Chinese nationals
posing as tourists to access our military bases and other sensitive
sites. Border Patrol has recorded more than 24,000 apprehensions of
Chinese nationals at the Southwest Border in fiscal year 2023, a 1,100
percent increase from last year. It doesn't take a rocket scientist to
see there is intentionality here. If recent reports are correct, the
CCP also operates dozens of overseas police stations which aid their
transnational repression effort by intimidating and threatening Chinese
dissidents abroad. DHS and the FBI must ensure that transnational
repression tactics and schemes by foreign governments cannot continue
on American soil. We stand ready to help achieve this goal. The CCP has
also made strides in infiltrating our Nation's education system. It
should concern every American that billions of dollars from the CCP are
flowing into our K-12 classrooms and institutions of higher education.
This is a systemic effort by the CCP to expand its influence within
America's classrooms and promote its authoritarian, anti-American
agenda.
So, what is the Homeland Security Committee doing about these
threats? For one, in May, we passed H.R. 2, the Secure the Border Act
of 2023--the most comprehensive border security legislation in decades.
We have addressed cyber threats head-on through a whole-of-Nation
approach. We have passed legislation encouraging responsible use of
open-source software in the Federal Government and building DHS's cyber
workforce. I have convened a group of committees across Congress to
discuss and develop solutions to this problem that implicate multiple
committees' jurisdictions. Just last week, this committee advanced
Congressman Pfluger's legislation to prohibit DI-IS funds from flowing
to universities that host Confucius Institutes and Chinese Entities of
Concern. Further, we passed Congressman Guest's common-sense
legislation to counter the CCP's brazen espionage and theft of U.S.
innovation by barring DHS from purchasing drones from the PRC or other
foreign adversaries. We have held multiple hearings to examine the
evolving threat of terrorism more than two decades after September 11
and their implications on the homeland, including a recent hearing
where we received confirmation of the immediate and significant threat
the Iranian regime poses to U.S. homeland security. This committee has
also demanded information on individuals from Uzbekistan and other
countries who used a smuggler with ties to ISIS to enter the United
States through our Southwest Border. We've also demanded information on
DHS's screening and vetting of Afghan evacuees in the wake our
catastrophic withdrawal. Most recently, we have requested documents and
information from DHS and the FBI on terrorist threats at the Southwest
Border. The Department and FBI's constant delays and lack of
responsiveness has become an unacceptable pattern. Make no mistake, we
will continue to use every tool at our disposal to secure these
answers--for the American people. I look forward to a productive
conversation about the current threats to our homeland and the actions
being taken to prevent them. I thank our witnesses for being here and I
look forward to your testimony.

Chairman Green. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Thompson, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning and
welcome to our witnesses. Secretary Mayorkas, Director Wray,
and Director Abizaid, we welcome you. With one notable
exception during the prior administration, you and your
predecessors have regularly come before this committee to
discuss security threats facing the homeland and how your
Department and agencies are keeping our country safe. Thank you
for being here today and for your service. Please convey our
thanks to the dedicated public servants who work for you and
for all of us every day.
This Worldwide Threats hearing takes place with a war going
on in the Middle East, persistent threats from foreign
terrorist organizations, and domestic violent extremists, and
surging antisemitism and Islamophobia. We are seeing more
sophisticated cyber attacks, unprecedented global migration,
and have a Presidential election less than a year away. The
list of issues critical to the homeland goes on. My Democratic
colleagues and I plan to ask you about these issues, and we
stand ready and willing, as always, to work with you to address
these challenges on behalf of the American people.
Unfortunately, my Republican colleagues have a different
agenda today, and we need to be clear about what their agenda
really means from the outset of this hearing. Republicans are
directing politically-motivated attacks at administration
witnesses and they are doing so to distract from Republicans'
own failures at governing, their infighting, and their support
for a Republican Presidential candidate who is himself a threat
to democracy.
That is what some people in Washington do rather than take
responsibility for their own failures. To be sure, Republicans
have failed at running the House of Representatives. They
ousted their own Speaker, paralyzing the House and bringing the
legislative process to a standstill for weeks as they fought
among themselves. They can't manage to pass bills to fund the
Government. Instead, they have abruptly pulled spending bills
from the House floor and have gone from near-shutdown to near-
shutdown, despite the harm it caused to our government, our
economy, and our security.
They appear on TV to rant about border security, and they
issue bogus so-called reports replete with false statements and
racist rhetoric about the border. Others complain about
bookstores refusing to sell their propaganda. But when it comes
to actually paying for border security personnel and resources
or passing legitimate border security legislation, they are
AWOL.
They talk tough about strengthening our cyber defenses, but
then vote to slash funding for the agency charged with that
important mission. They revere their Presidential candidate,
who admires dictators and despots, calling them capable,
competent, and smart, who recently referred to his political
opponents as vermin and threatened to use the Justice
Department against them, who talks about erecting ``detention
camps'' on United States soil.
Republicans don't want to own up to it or deal with any of
that. So rather than getting their own house in order, they
direct baseless attacks at the administration and Secretary
Mayorkas in particular. We know their extreme MAGA members are
desperate to impeach someone, anyone at all. They are on a
crusade to impeach the Secretary, although there is zero
justification for it. Unlike the Trump administration, the
Biden administration has followed the law on border security
and immigration, claiming asylum at the border is lawful. If my
Republican colleagues don't like the law, well, they are in the
Majority--try to change it.
The prior administration also refused to provide
information sought by Congress in more than 100 Congressional
inquiries. But this administration has been and continues to be
responsive to Congress. It is my understanding today's hearing
is Secretary Mayorkas's 27th time testifying before Congress
since being confirmed as Secretary. Under his leadership, DHS
has responded to more than 1,400 Congressional letters and
produced more than 11,000 pages of documents to this committee
alone.
Secretary Mayorkas is carrying out his responsibilities as
Secretary of Homeland Security but Republicans don't like this
administration's policies. Cabinet secretaries shouldn't be
impeached over policy differences. That is not what the
Constitution says. That is not what the founders intended. They
certainly shouldn't be impeached to distract from Republican
failures or to appease the extreme MAGA element that has
overtaken their party. Rather than this impeachment
distraction, we should be focused on how Congress and the
administration can work together to secure the homeland. That
is what this committee has done since its inception. That is
what we were sent here to do, and that is what the American
people expect of us. It is a shame my Republican colleagues are
working their own agenda. Instead, this committee, and this
Congress, and our homeland suffers because of it. Mr. Chairman,
I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
November 15, 2023
Good morning and welcome to our witnesses, Secretary Mayorkas,
Director Wray, and Director Abizaid. With one notable exception during
the prior administration, you and your predecessors have regularly come
before this committee to discuss security threats facing the homeland
and how your Department and agencies are keeping our country safe.
Thank you for being here today and for your service. And please convey
our thanks to the dedicated public servants who work for you, and for
all of us, every day.
This worldwide threats hearing takes place with a war going on in
the Middle East, persistent threats from foreign terrorist
organizations and domestic violent extremists, and surging antisemitism
and Islamophobia. We are seeing more sophisticated cyber attacks,
unprecedented global migration, and have a Presidential election less
than a year away. The list of issues critical to the homeland goes on.
My Democratic colleagues and I plan to ask you about these issues,
and we stand ready and willing, as always, to work with you to address
these challenges on behalf of the American people. Unfortunately, my
Republican colleagues have a different agenda today, and we need to be
clear about what their agenda really means from the outset of the
hearing.
Republicans are directing politically-motivated attacks at these
administration witnesses, and they are doing so to distract from
Republicans' own failures at governing, their infighting, and their
support for a Republican Presidential candidate who is, himself, a
threat to democracy.
That's what some people in Washington do rather than taking
responsibility for their own failures--and to be sure, Republicans have
failed at running the House of Representatives. They ousted their own
Speaker, paralyzing the House and bringing the legislative process to a
standstill for weeks as they fought amongst themselves.
They can't manage to pass bills to fund the Government. Instead,
they have abruptly pulled spending bills from the House floor and have
gone from near-shutdown to near-shutdown, despite the harm it causes to
our Government, our economy, and our security.
They appear on TV to rant about border security, and they issue
bogus, so-called ``reports'' replete with false statements and racist
rhetoric about the border. Others complain about bookstores refusing to
sell their propaganda. But when it comes to actually paying for border
security personnel and resources or passing legitimate border security
legislation, they're AWOL.
They talk tough about strengthening our cyber defenses but then
vote to slash funding for the agency charged with that important
mission.
They revere their Presidential candidate, who admires dictators and
despots, calling them ``capable'', ``competent'', and ``smart.'' Who
recently referred to his political opponents as ``vermin'' and
threatened to use the Justice Department against them. Who talks about
erecting ``detention camps'' on U.S. soil.
Republicans don't want to own up to, or deal with, any of that. So,
rather than getting their own House in order, they direct baseless
attacks at the administration, and Secretary Mayorkas in particular. We
know their extreme MAGA members are desperate to impeach someone,
anyone at all. They are on a crusade to impeach the Secretary although
there's zero justification for it. Unlike the Trump administration, the
Biden administration has followed the law on border security and
immigration. Claiming asylum at the border is lawful. If my Republican
colleagues don't like the law, well, they're in the Majority--try to
change it.
The prior administration also refused to provide information sought
by Congress in more than 100 Congressional inquiries, but this
administration has been and continues to be responsive to Congress.
It is my understanding today's hearing is Secretary Mayorkas' 27th
time testifying before Congress since being confirmed as Secretary.
Under his leadership, DHS has responded to more than 1,400
Congressional letters and produced more than 11,000 pages of documents
to this committee alone. Secretary Mayorkas is carrying out his
responsibilities as Secretary of Homeland Security, but Republicans
don't like this administration's policies.
Cabinet Secretaries shouldn't be impeached over policy differences.
That's not what the Constitution says. That's not what the Founders
intended. They certainly shouldn't be impeached to distract from
Republican failures or to appease the extreme MAGA element that has
overtaken their party. Rather than this impeachment distraction, we
should be focused on how Congress and the administration can work
together to secure the homeland. That's what this committee has done
since its inception. That's what we were sent here to do, and that's
what the American people expect of us.
It's a shame my Republican colleagues are working their own agenda
instead because this committee, this Congress, and our homeland
security suffer for it.

Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. Other Members of the
committee are reminded that opening statements may be submitted
for the record. I am pleased to have an important panel of
witnesses before us today. I ask that our witnesses please rise
and raise their right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Green. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative. Thank you. You may be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses. The
Honorable Alejandro Mayorkas was sworn in as Secretary of the
Department of Homeland Security by President Biden on February
2, 2021. Mr. Mayorkas has had a 30-year career as a law
enforcement official and a lawyer in private sector. From 2013
to 2016, he served as the deputy secretary of the Department of
Homeland Security and as the director of U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services from 2009 to 2013. The Honorable
Christopher Wray became the eighth director of the FBI on
August 2, 2017. Mr. Wray started his law enforcement career in
1997, serving in the Department of Justice as an assistant U.S.
attorney for the Northern District of Georgia. The Honorable
Christine Abizaid was sworn in as the director of the National
Counterterrorism Center on June 29, 2021. She is the eighth
Senate-confirmed director and the first woman to lead the
United States Counterterrorism enterprise. Previously, she
served as the deputy assistant secretary of defense for
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Central Asia. I thank all the
witnesses for being here today. I now recognize Secretary
Mayorkas for 5 minutes to summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ALEJANDRO N. MAYORKAS, SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Secretary Mayorkas. Chairman Green, Ranking Member
Thompson, distinguished Members of this committee, in
September, the Department of Homeland Security published the
2024 Homeland Threat Assessment, laying out the most direct,
pressing threats to our security. Already, in the weeks since
the assessment was published, the world has changed. Hamas
terrorists horrifically attacked thousands of innocent men,
women, and children in Israel on October 7, brutally murdering,
wounding, and taking hostages of all ages. In the days and
weeks since, we have responded to an increase in threats
against Jewish, Muslim, and Arab American communities and
institutions across our country. Hate directed at Jewish
students, communities, and institutions add to a preexisting
increase in the level of antisemitism in the United States and
around the world.
As the last month has shown, the threat environment our
Department is charged with confronting has evolved and expanded
constantly in the 20 years since our founding after 9/11.
Today, individuals radicalized to violence can terrorize using
a vehicle or a firearm. A transnational criminal organization
needs only to conceal 2.2 pounds of fentanyl in a commercial
truck or passenger car crossing through our land port of entry
to kill as many as half a million people. Lone actors in
nation-states such as Russia, Iran, North Korea, and the
People's Republic of China can use computer code to steal
sensitive personal information, shut down critical
infrastructure, and extort millions in ransom payments.
Compromising deepfake images can exploit and ruin the life of a
young person. Extreme heat, wildfires, and devastating
hurricanes are increasing in frequency and severity, and our
Department's founding rationale, the threat posed by foreign
terrorists using weapons of mass destruction remains.
The 260,000 men and women of the Department of Homeland
Security work every day to mitigate these threats, and many
more. I am immensely proud to be here today on their behalf to
discuss the work they do, the challenges they face, and most
importantly, the support they require from Congress to do their
jobs. Thank you for the opportunity to do so.
I would like to focus today on two such means of critical,
urgent support. First, Congress must now not allow key DHS
authorities to lapse. Our Department's authority to implement
the Chemical Facility Antiterrorism Standards expired on July
28. That means the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency is barred from inspecting over 3,000 high-risk chemical
facilities, including one in Shepherd, Texas, where an
explosion last week forced nearby communities to shelter in
place for hours. We are also barred from identifying who is
accessing them and whether they are stockpiling dangerous
chemicals. Historically, more than a third of inspections
identify at least one gaffe in a facility's security.
Our counter-drone authority will expire on Saturday,
challenging, among other missions, the Secret Service's ability
to protect the President and Vice President, and Customs and
Border Protection's ability to patrol the Southwest Border and
intercept cartel drones faring drugs and other contraband
through the air.
Our Department's Office of Countering Weapons of Mass
Destruction Authority will expire on December 21. That would
hinder our ability to detect biological and illicit nuclear
material threats and safeguard against the use of AI in the
development of biological weapons, as President Biden charged
us with doing last month in his Executive Order on artificial
intelligence. Finally, key elements of our Intelligence
Collection Authority under Section 702 of the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act will expire on December 31.
Expiration would leave our country vulnerable to attacks
supported by American citizens, and it would cripple our
ability to identify and secure American citizens who are the
targets of such attacks. Renewing each of these four
authorities is common sense, bipartisan, and critical to our
national security. This is not a moment to let our guard down.
Second, we need Congress to allocate sufficient resources
to enable our Nation's front-line officers to carry out their
difficult jobs and keep the American people safe. Last month,
our administration requested critical supplemental Homeland
Security funding that would help us do just that. This funding
package would allow us to more effectively combat the scourge
of fentanyl, stem the impacts of historic migration, and
accelerate work authorization for eligible noncitizens. This
funding will, in short, make a critical difference in our
Department's operational capacity and in our national security.
Ensuring the safety of the American people is a national
imperative and a governmental obligation. I look forward to
partnering with Congress to deliver for the men and women who
keep our country safe. I look forward to working with you to
address the threats and challenges America faces today and in
the years to come. Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Mayorkas follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Alejandro N. Mayorkas
November 15, 2023
Distinguished Members of this committee: I am proud to submit this
testimony on behalf of the 260,000 people across our Nation and around
the world who make up the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). The
people of DHS are our most important and vital resource. Serving
alongside them is the greatest honor of my life and supporting them and
their critical work has been my top priority since taking office.
In September, DHS published the 2024 Homeland Threat Assessment,
which focuses on the most direct, pressing threats to our homeland over
the next year--public safety, border and immigration, critical
infrastructure, and economic security. Together, we are enabling our
workforce and our partners to effectively prevent, prepare for, and
respond to the increasingly diverse and complex threats and challenges
facing our country.
Already, in the weeks since the assessment publication, the world
has changed after Hamas terrorists viciously attacked thousands of
innocent men, women, and children in Israel on October 7, 2023,
brutally murdering, wounding, and taking hostages of all ages. As the
conflict continues, we have seen an increase in reports of threats
against Jewish, Muslim, and Arab-American communities and institutions.
Hate directed at Jewish students, communities, and institutions add to
a preexisting increase in antisemitism in the United States and around
the world.
Lone offenders, motivated by a range of violent ideologies, pose
the most likely threat. We urge the public to stay vigilant and to
promptly report suspicious activity to local law enforcement. The
Department is closely monitoring unfolding events and will continue to
engage in information sharing with our homeland security partners at
home and abroad. We, along with our partners at all levels of
government, will continue to help communities prepare for and respond
to a range of public safety challenges and are working tirelessly on
this mission, which has never been more important.
Again, I welcome this opportunity to discuss the overarching
threats facing the homeland as well as the tools necessary to address
those challenges.
combating terrorism and targeted violence
Since this Department's inception, the threat landscape our
Department is charged with confronting continues to evolve. Although
the terrorism threat in the United States has remained heightened
throughout 2023, Hamas's attack on Israel, along with other recent
events, have sharpened the focus of potential attacks on targeted
individuals and institutions perceived as symbolic of or tied to the
conflict. These tensions, coupled with the wide-spread sharing of
graphic and disturbing content related to this conflict, increase the
prospects for violence in the United States. In 2024, we expect the
threat of violence from violent extremists radicalized in the United
States will remain high, marked by lone offenders or small group
attacks that occur with little to no warning. DHS remains agile and
vigilant in addressing all terrorism-related threats to the homeland.
Foreign Terrorist Threats
Foreign terrorist groups like al-Qaeda and ISIS are rebuilding
overseas, and they maintain worldwide networks of supporters that could
target the homeland. Among state actors, we expect Iran, the principal
funder of Hezbollah and Hamas, to remain the primary state sponsor of
terrorism and continue its efforts to advance plots against individuals
in the United States. Foreign terrorists continue to engage with
supporters on-line to solicit funds, create and share media, and
encourage attacks in the United States and Europe while their
affiliates in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East prioritize local goals.
In Afghanistan, ISIS's regional branch, ISIS-Khorasan, continues to
harbor intent to conduct external operations and maintains English-
language media releases that aim to globalize the group's local
grievances among Western audiences.
DHS works closely with our law enforcement, national security, and
intelligence community (IC) partners to continually improve our ability
to identify individuals who pose a national security or public safety
threat and who seek to travel to the United States or receive an
immigration benefit. DHS screens and vets every individual encountered
at or between ports of entry, and if an individual is determined to
pose a potential threat to national security or public safety, we
either deny admission, detain, remove, or refer them to other Federal
agencies for further vetting and prosecution as appropriate. We
continue to build partnerships with foreign governments that strengthen
our vetting capabilities through increased information sharing. Under
the International Biometric Information Sharing (IBIS) Program, DHS has
partnered with the Department of State to build the capacity of
partners in the Western Hemisphere to collect and screen biometric
information--including against DHS holdings--to more effectively manage
irregular migration. DHS has also added a new requirement to the Visa
Waiver Program (VWP) to require participating countries to enter into
an Enhanced Border Security Partnership (EBSP) by the end of 2026.
Under EBSP, DHS will be able to send a biometric search to VWP partners
to authenticate the identity of travelers and to detect whether
individual travelers represent a possible threat to the security or
welfare of the United States.
DHS's mission is to protect the country against all threats to
homeland security regardless of origin, and the Office of Intelligence
and Analysis (I&A) exists to provide intelligence supporting that
mission, including through effective, appropriately tailored collection
capabilities, including with respect to U.S. persons associated with or
targeted by threats to homeland security. I&A uses these capabilities,
analyzing and sharing information it receives through its collection
from a variety of sources, including from voluntary interviews and
publicly-available sources, to inform intelligence and analysis,
security decisions, policy development, and law enforcement.
Specifically, I&A helps to ensure that State, local, Tribal,
territorial, campus (SLTTC) and private-sector entities can better
protect themselves against threats by providing timely and accurate
intelligence to the broadest audience at the lowest possible
classification level. DHS, the IC, SLTTC, and private-sector partners
rely on I&A's contributions and unique authorities to share this
information. DHS will continue to leverage our deployed intelligence
professionals to ensure the timely sharing of information and
intelligence with DHS components and SLTTC partners, in accordance with
applicable law and privacy, civil rights, civil liberties, and
intelligence oversight policies. These activities, as well as the
information that I&A collects about the fentanyl trade, human
smuggling, non-traditional intelligence threat actors, and other
serious threats to the homeland, yield valuable insights to our DHS and
IC partners with related missions.
Violent Extremism and Targeted Violence
Over the past year, domestic violent extremists (DVEs) and home-
grown violent extremists (HVEs) inspired by foreign terrorist
organizations have engaged in violence in reaction to sociopolitical
events. These actors will continue to be inspired and motivated by a
mix of conspiracy theories; personalized grievances; and racial,
ethnic, religious, and anti-Government ideologies, often shared on-
line. The threat of a ``lone wolf'' actor attempting to exploit the
conflict between Israel and Hamas and incited to violence by an
ideology of hate is of particular concern. Foreign terrorist
organization and lone offender reactions based on perceptions of U.S.
support to Israel could further escalate the threat to Jewish, Muslim,
and Arab-American communities in the United States and to U.S.
Government officials. As the conflict endures, graphic visuals will
likely continue to circulate on-line and garner significant media
attention, potentially acting as a catalyst for various violent actors
who have shared and continue to share this kind of material.
Over the last year, DVEs and criminal actors with unclear or mixed
motivations have increasingly called for carrying out physical attacks
against critical infrastructure, particularly the energy sector. DVEs
see such attacks as a means to advance their ideologies and achieve
their sociopolitical goals. DVEs, particularly racially motivated
violent extremists, have been promoting accelerationism--an ideology
that seeks to destabilize society and trigger a race war. They have
encouraged mobilization against critical functions, including attacks
against the energy, communications, and public health sectors.
Notably, since 2022, there has been a dramatic spike in bomb
threats, impacting over 30 percent of Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), inciting fear and panic and resulting in campus
evacuations and lockdowns across the Nation. DHS has leveraged subject-
matter expertise and innovation from across the Department to respond
and support our communities. For example, DHS created and delivered
trainings, products, and resources specific to the threat. The
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency's (CISA) Office for
Bombing Prevention (OBP) provided in-person on-campus training Nation-
wide and hosted 27 virtual courses, ultimately training over 1,250
participants, and providing over 1,500 bomb threat planning and
response products.
DHS is committed to providing resources to communities to prevent
and respond to incidents of terrorism and targeted violence. We
announced $2 billion in preparedness grant funding for this fiscal
year, including $305 million for the Nonprofit Security Grant Program
(NSGP) to support nonprofit organizations' preparedness activities and
enhance broader State and local preparedness efforts. DHS also invested
$70 million over the past 4 years in communities across the United
States to help prevent acts of targeted violence and terrorism through
the Targeted Violence and Terrorism Prevention (TVTP) Grant Program.
Managed by the DHS Center for Prevention Programs and Partnerships
(CP3) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), this program
provides funding for SLTTC governments, nonprofits, and institutions of
higher education to establish or enhance capabilities to prevent
targeted violence and terrorism. In September 2023, DHS announced 34
TVTP grant awards to entities in 22 States, totaling $20 million for
fiscal year 2023. These awards fulfill the grant program's focus on
prioritizing the prevention of domestic violent extremist acts, while
respecting individuals' privacy, civil rights, and civil liberties.
nation-state threats
The United States faces evolving and increasingly complex threats
from nation-state adversaries, including the People's Republic of China
(PRC), Russia, Iran, and North Korea. In addition to traditional
espionage and intelligence collection, nation-state adversaries likely
will continue to conduct malign influence campaigns aimed at
undermining trust in U.S. Government institutions, social cohesion, and
democratic processes. The proliferation and accessibility of emergent
cyber and artificial intelligence (AI) tools will likely help these
actors bolster their malign information campaigns by enabling the
creation of higher quality low-cost, synthetic text, image, and audio-
based content.
To augment many of their efforts in the public sphere, the PRC,
Iran, and Russia likely will continue to pursue transnational
repression activity in the homeland, undermining U.S. laws, norms, and
individuals' rights. Adversaries have targeted individuals in the
United States whom they perceive as threats to their regimes, including
ethnic and religious minorities, political dissidents, and journalists.
Agents of these regimes have been known to use in other countries, and
in some circumstances in the United States, physical assaults, threats,
harassment, defamation, the manipulation of international law
enforcement personnel and processes to suppress oppositional voices,
and in limited circumstances, forced disappearances and even
assassination. The PRC and Iran likely will remain the most aggressive
actors within the United States.
cyber threats
Our interconnectedness and the technology that enables it--the
cyber ecosystem--expose us to dynamic and evolving threats that are not
contained by borders or limited to centralized actors, and that can
impact governments, the private sector, civil society, and every
individual. Hostile regimes like Russia, the PRC, Iran, and North
Korea, as well as cyber criminals around the world, continually grow
more sophisticated, steal our data and intellectual property, extort
ransoms, and threaten our cyber systems. Accordingly, cyber threats
from foreign governments and transnational criminals remain among the
most prominent threats facing our Nation. In recent years, ransomware
incidents have become increasingly prevalent among U.S. State, local,
Tribal, and territorial governments and critical infrastructure
entities, disrupting services.
Malicious cyber activity targeting the United States has increased
since Russia's full invasion of Ukraine, a trend we expect to continue
throughout the duration of the conflict. Within the past 3 years, we
have seen numerous cybersecurity incidents impacting organizations of
all sizes and disrupting critical services, from the Russian
government's compromise of the SolarWinds supply chain to the wide-
spread vulnerabilities generated by open-source software like Log4j. We
believe there is significant under-reporting of ransomware and other
cybersecurity incidents, and we assess that ransomware attacks
targeting U.S. networks will increase in the near- and long-terms.
Cyber criminals have developed effective business models to increase
their financial gain, likelihood of success, and anonymity.
To respond to evolving cyber threats and increase our Nation's
cybersecurity and resilience, DHS has established several vehicles. The
Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative (JCDC) leads the development and
supports the execution of joint cyber defense plans with partners at
all levels of government and the private sector to prevent and reduce
the impacts of cyber intrusions and to ensure a unified response when
they occur.
The Cyber Safety Review Board (CSRB) is a public-private advisory
board dedicated to after-action reviews of significant cyber incidents.
The Board released its second report in August 2023 on the activities
associated with the Lapsus$ group focused on malicious targeting of
cloud computing environments and approaches to strengthen identity
management and authentication in the cloud. The Board is now initiating
its third review of the Microsoft Exchange on-line intrusions.
Through the Cyber Incident Reporting Council (CIRC), DHS delivered
several actionable recommendations to harmonize cyber incident
reporting requirements, including establishing model definitions, time
lines, and triggers for reportable cyber incidents. It also created a
model cyber incident reporting form that Federal agencies can adopt and
streamlined the reporting and sharing of information about cyber
incidents. The CIRC will work with agencies across the Government to
implement these recommendations.
The Department is committed to keeping Americans safe from the
devastating effects of cyber crimes and protecting the Nation's
critical infrastructure from attacks is a core departmental mission.
border security
The Department continues to implement a border security strategy
focused on enforcement, the expansion of lawful pathways, and
agreements with regional partners. The plan has increased the number of
law enforcement personnel along the border and expedited removals of
noncitizens without a legal basis to remain in the United States thanks
to enhanced enforcement processes and historic international
agreements. Since May 12, 2023, we have removed or returned over
336,000 individuals, including more than 50,000 individual family unit
members. This compares to 225,000 removals and enforcement returns
during the same period in 2019, which was the comparable pre-pandemic
and pre-Title 42 period. At the same time, we have implemented the
largest expansion of lawful pathways in decades. Progress has been
made, but more funding is required to manage the unprecedented flow of
hemispheric migration and to increase our efforts to combat the
Transnational Criminal Organizations (TCOs) ruthlessly trafficking
fentanyl and other deadly illicit drugs.
Last month, the Department submitted a supplemental funding request
to Congress for $8.7 billion that would fund: additional personnel and
investigative capabilities to prevent cartels from moving fentanyl into
the country; additional resources for Customs and Border Protection
(CBP), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), and U.S. Citizenship
and Immigration Services (USCIS) to cover projected shortfalls, enhance
enforcement and processing efficiencies, and hire additional personnel;
and additional support for communities and non-profits receiving
migrants through the Shelter and Services Program (SSP). The Department
urges Congress to provide this supplemental funding to equip the men
and women of DHS with the resources and support they need to achieve
our safety and security mission.
Transnational Criminal Organizations
TCOs continue to pose a threat to the United States, particularly
U.S. public health, as well as our economic and national security. Over
the past 10 years, they have grown in size, scale, sophistication, and
their deadly impact. The increased supply of fentanyl and changes in
its production during the last year have increased the lethality of an
already deadly drug, a trend likely to persist in 2024. Drug
traffickers in Mexico and the United States are using various additives
and mixing fentanyl into counterfeit prescription pills, leading to
overdoses. Given this trend, we expect fentanyl to remain the leading
cause of narcotics-related deaths in the United States. The illegal
narcotics trade also harms our communities by supporting violent
criminal enterprises, money laundering, and corruption that undermines
the rule of law.
TCOs that specialize in human smuggling increasingly exploit and
financially benefit from the continued growth in global migration
trends. In April 2022, DHS launched a first-of-its-kind effort,
unprecedented in scale, to disrupt and dismantle human smuggling
networks. To date, this campaign has resulted in the arrest of over
18,000 smugglers, more than 10,000 disruption actions, and more than
$60 million seized. This has led to more than 2,000 indictments and
more than 1,500 convictions in partnership with U.S. attorneys. U.S.
Border Patrol (USBP) has also referred close to 10,000 individuals for
prosecution.
Counternarcotics
DHS employs a multi-layered approach to mitigating and countering
narcotics trafficking and threats of all types using our extensive
liaison networks, domestic and foreign partnerships, personnel, and
technology deployments such as Non-Intrusive Inspection (NII)
capabilities. The increased production and trafficking of synthetic
opioids from Mexico have prompted the interagency to implement a whole-
of-Government approach, including a number of DHS components and
efforts, to combat these threats. These efforts have resulted in the
seizure of more fentanyl in the past 2 years than in the prior 5 years
combined: nearly 3.5 million pounds of fentanyl and methamphetamine
precursor chemicals since fiscal year 2021.
To further increase our counternarcotics efforts, DHS recently
launched targeted enforcement campaigns to combat illicit narcotics,
particularly fentanyl. Based on the success of Operation Blue Lotus
earlier this year, which seized more than 4,700 pounds of fentanyl and
yielded over 250 arrests by CBP and Homeland Security Investigations
(HSI), DHS launched further campaigns focused on border and interior
facilities to further disrupt and degrade the flow and supply chains
that feed the production of fentanyl and other synthetic drugs through
coordinated enforcement, investigative, interdiction, and scientific
identification efforts. Under Operation Blue Lotus 2.0, CBP and HSI
made 155 Federal and State arrests, seized 1,680 pounds of fentanyl,
5,000 pounds of fentanyl precursors, and 10,194 pounds of other
precursors between June-July 2023. Operation Artemis efforts have led
to well over 500 seizures, including more than 460 pill press-related
items; 13,000 pounds of fentanyl precursor chemicals; and more than
11,200 pounds of other narcotics between June-September 2023. In August
2023, HSI transitioned to a long-term counter-fentanyl posture,
Operation Orion, which leverages HSI authorities and tools to target
dark web vendors and other cyber-enabled actors that engage in fentanyl
distribution via the internet and increase targeting in strategic field
locations. HSI is also attacking the illicit supply chain beyond the
border, launching over 135 investigations, leading to 110 criminal
arrests and 229 seizures, including the arrests of six high-level TCO
members, and the disruption of five clandestine synthetic drug labs in
Mexico.
The U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) leads maritime interdictions of
narcotics in the Western Hemisphere, partnering with nations in South
and Central America to combat the flow of narcotics before they reach
U.S. shores. USCG intelligence personnel and Coast Guard Investigative
Service Special Agents are fully integrated across the Department and
at the Joint Interagency Task Force (JIATF) South, allowing for maximum
counterdrug coordination across the hemisphere. In fiscal year 2023,
the USCG seized approximately 126 metric tons of cocaine, 51,000 pounds
of marijuana, and 20 metric tons of other narcotics, including
methamphetamines, heroin, and hashish.
human trafficking and child sexual exploitation
Combating the abhorrent crimes of human trafficking and child
sexual exploitation and abuse (CSEA) are top priorities for the
Department. These crimes target the most vulnerable among us, offend
our most basic values, and threaten our national security and public
safety. According to the United Nations' International Labor
Organization, human traffickers victimize an estimated 27.6 million
people worldwide, with 77 percent subjected to forced labor and 23
percent in sex trafficking. The United States is no exception.
Almost every office and agency in the Department plays a role in
our counter-human trafficking mission. The DHS Center for Countering
Human Trafficking (CCHT), which was codified by the Countering Human
Trafficking Act of 2021, integrates the counter-trafficking efforts of
16 DHS component agencies and offices to advance counter-human
trafficking law enforcement operations, protect victims, and enhance
prevention efforts by aligning DHS's capabilities and expertise. DHS
efforts encompass criminal investigations, victim assistance,
identifying and reporting human trafficking, external outreach,
intelligence, and training. By integrating these many functions, the
CCHT enhances every aspect of DHS's counter-human trafficking work. HSI
leads criminal investigations into sex trafficking and forced labor,
making 2,610 human trafficking-related arrests during fiscal year 2023,
including 1,045 indictments and leading to 518 convictions.
The Department is also redoubling efforts to combat on-line CSEA,
which has increased dramatically in scope and severity in recent years.
New forms of CSEA have also emerged and grown exponentially, including
the live-streaming of child sexual abuse, child sexual abuse material
(CSAM) developed by AI, and sophisticated financial sextortion and
grooming schemes.
In response, we are strengthening our HSI Cyber Crimes Center (C3),
including the Child Exploitation Investigations Unit (CEIU), a global
leader in counter-CSEA law enforcement operations. The CEIU Victim
Identification Program (VIP) utilizes state-of-the-art technologies
combined with traditional investigative techniques to identify and
rescue child victims throughout the world. Since its establishment in
2011, the VIP has identified and/or rescued more than 11,000 child
victims of sexual exploitation. CEIU's Operation Predator targets child
sexual predators on both the open web and dark web, and in fiscal year
2023 led to the arrest of 4,044 perpetrators for crimes involving child
sexual abuse. During this same period, the CEIU Angel Watch Center
issued 4,814 notifications regarding international travel by convicted
child sex offenders, resulting in more than 1,050 denials of entry by
foreign nations.
We also know that we must better educate Americans and work with
partners around the world to spread awareness to prevent these crimes
before they happen. In the coming months, DHS will launch Know2Protect,
which will be the Federal Government's first national public awareness
campaign to educate and empower children, teens, parents, trusted
adults, and policy makers to prevent and combat on-line child sexual
exploitation and abuses. The campaign will highlight the Department's
existing programs, including HSI's iGuardian program and the U.S.
Secret Service's Childhood Smart, in which agents work directly with
communities to provide education sessions and resources to combat these
crimes and prevent more American children from becoming victims.
extreme weather events and climate change resilience
The impacts of climate change pose an acute and systemic threat to
the safety, security, and prosperity of the United States, and have
already led to changes in the environment, such as rising ocean
temperatures, shrinking sea ice, rising sea levels, and ocean
acidification. Our changing climate acts as a force multiplier, turning
more storms, floods, and fires into events that threaten the well-being
of people across our Nation. As our climate continues to warm, the
United States will experience more climate-related disasters such as
heat waves, droughts, wildfires, coastal storms, and inland flooding.
Under the Biden-Harris administration, DHS is engaged in climate change
adaptation and mitigation efforts to make the Department and the Nation
more prepared, more secure, and more resilient.
In February 2023, DHS became a member of the United States Global
Change Research Program (USGCRP). As the first new member of the
interagency USGCRP body in nearly two decades, DHS joined as its 14th
member. USGCRP's membership consists of agencies that conduct global
change research and use it to carry out their mission, creating
opportunities for decision makers to communicate information needs
directly to scientists and for scientists to support informed decision
making.
On September 6, 2023, FEMA announced the first 483 Community
Disaster Resilience Zones in all 50 States and the District of
Columbia. FEMA used the National Risk Index and other tools to identify
the census tracts across the country at the highest risk from natural
hazards and those most in need. A Community Disaster Resilience Zone
designation offers opportunities for public-private partnerships
including governments, non-profits, philanthropy, insurance, and
private businesses to collaborate on innovative resilience investment
strategies, leveraging the up to 13:1 return on investment for
mitigation and resilience projects.
DHS has also made available more than $1.8 billion for the fiscal
year 2023 Building Resilient Infrastructure and Communities (BRIC) and
Flood Mitigation Assistance (FMA) grant programs, which seek to help
SLTT governments address high-level future risks to natural disasters
such as extreme heat, wildfires, drought, hurricanes, earthquakes, and
increased flooding to foster greater community resilience and reduce
disaster suffering.
emerging threats and opportunities for mission advancement
Advances in AI capabilities can offer tremendous benefits to our
society. However, its misuse can also lead to real security challenges.
We are committed to DHS leading in this space to both mitigate the
harms and harness the benefits of AI. In the past year alone, DHS has
shown the way in the responsible use of AI to secure the homeland and
in defending against the malicious use of this transformational
technology, but we have much more to do. As we move forward, we will
ensure that our use of AI is rigorously tested to avoid bias and
disparate impact and is clearly explainable to the people we serve.
Last month, the President issued an Executive Order (EO) to promote
the safe, secure, and trustworthy development and use of AI. The EO
directs DHS to take a lead role in ensuring the safe, secure, and
responsible use and development of AI. DHS will manage AI in critical
infrastructure and cyber space, promote the adoption of AI safety
standards globally, reduce the risks that AI can be used to create
weapons of mass destruction, combat AI-related intellectual property
theft, and help to attract and retain skilled talent. The EO follows
DHS's innovative work deploying AI responsibly to advance its missions
for the benefit of the American people.
DHS recently established the Department's first AI Task Force to
drive the responsible use of AI in specific applications to advance our
critical homeland security missions. The Task Force is working to
enhance the integrity of our supply chains and the broader trade
environment by deploying AI to more ably screen cargo, identify the
importation of goods produced with forced labor, and manage risk. It is
also charged with using AI to better detect fentanyl shipments,
identify and interdict the flow of precursor chemicals around the
world, and target for disruption key nodes in criminal networks.
I also tasked our Homeland Security Advisory Council to study the
intersection of AI and homeland security. In September, the Council
delivered findings that will help guide our use of AI and defense
against its malicious deployment. The Council also delivered
recommendations on keeping pace with technological advances while
incentivizing responsible and impactful use of AI for the Department,
to enhance and improve our ability to meet our mission in an ethical,
informed, and responsible manner.
In September, DHS became the first Department to issue
comprehensive face recognition guidance to ensure strong guardrails to
protect American liberties. The guidance ensures that all uses of face
recognition and face capture technologies will be thoroughly tested to
ensure there is no bias or disparate impact in accordance with national
standards. DHS will review all existing uses of this technology and
conduct periodic testing and evaluation of all systems to meet
performance goals. Furthermore, the directive requires that U.S.
citizens be afforded the right to opt-out of face recognition for
specific, non-law enforcement uses, and it prohibits face recognition
from being used as the sole basis of any law or civil enforcement-
related action while establishing a process for Department oversight
offices, including the Privacy Office, the Office for Civil Rights and
Civil Liberties (CRCL), and the Office of the Chief Information
Officer, to review all new uses of face recognition and face capture
technologies.
equipping the department with the necessary tools
Countering Unmanned Aerial Systems
Unmanned Aerial Systems (UASs), or drones, offer tremendous
benefits to our economy and society, but their misuse poses real
security challenges. DHS has successfully exercised its current
counter-UAS (C-UAS) authority in protective operations at mass
gatherings, Special Event Assessment Rating (SEAR) events, and National
Special Security Events (NSSEs), including the 2022 World Series, the
Indianapolis 500, the United Nations General Assembly, the Democratic
and Republican National Conventions, the State of the Union address,
the MLB All Star Game, the New York City Marathon, and the Boston
Marathon. At all times, DHS engages in these activities consistent with
applicable law and in a manner that protects individuals' privacy,
civil rights, and civil liberties.
DHS's current C-UAS authority is set to expire on November 18,
2023. Ensuring that existing authorities do not lapse is vital to our
mission, including protecting the President and Vice President,
patrolling certain designated areas along the Southwest Border,
securing certain Federal facilities and assets, and safeguarding the
public. Any lapse in DHS's current C-UAS authority would entail serious
risks for our homeland security, as DHS would have to cease or curtail
existing C-UAS operations. Congressional action is required for a long-
term extension and expansion of C-UAS authority, and to prevent any
lapse in C-UAS authority on November 18, 2023.
To ensure the Department can continue its C-UAS activities,
including protecting the 2026 World Cup events, both the Department and
the administration remain committed to a multi-year extension as well
as an expansion of existing authorities. The Department and
administration appreciate Congress considering and acting on S. 1631
and H.R. 4333, because both bills would address the need for long-term
authority, while closing vulnerabilities by expansion of DHS's C-UAS
authority. Specifically, the Department and the administration look
forward to working with Congress, including this committee, to expand
C-UAS authority to address critical gaps in the current law, such as
insufficient protection for U.S. airports and the inability of DHS to
partner on C-UAS activities with SLTT enforcement officials or critical
infrastructure owners or operators. These two bills, S. 1631 and H.R.
4333, if enacted, would provide the needed extension of C-UAS authority
and close real gaps in our ability to protect the homeland.
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction
Although terrorist capabilities to conduct large-scale attacks have
been degraded by U.S. counterterrorism operations and policies,
terrorists remain interested in acquiring and using weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) in attacks against U.S. interests and the homeland.
Congress established the DHS Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction
Office (CWMD) in 2018 to elevate, consolidate, and streamline DHS
efforts to protect the homeland from WMD and chemical, biological,
radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) threats. CWMD serves as the DHS nexus
for WMD and CBRN coordination, which includes providing direct support
to both our Government and industry partners. Of significant concern is
DHS's ability to continue the mission to counter WMDs after the
authorization for CWMD terminates on December 21, 2023. DHS's tools to
accomplish this mission are at risk.
The CWMD Office has primary authority and responsibility within DHS
to protect the homeland against CBRN threats by interpreting national
strategies and developing departmental strategic guidance; monitoring
and reporting on related threats; generating and distributing related
risk assessments; and researching, developing, acquiring, and deploying
operationally effective solutions, such as equipment, training, and
exercises, in support of SLTT communities and Departmental components.
CWMD strengthens DHS-wide and Federal interagency coordination and
provides direct financial and operational support Nation-wide to SLTT
partners who serve as first responders. Additionally, as part of the
President's EO on AI, CWMD was tasked with helping to evaluate and
mitigate the potential for AI to be used to develop WMDs, such as
through AI-enabled misuse of synthetic nucleic acids to create
biological weapons. If CWMD authorization is allowed to expire, not
only will DHS not be able to support these AI efforts, but over $130
million in annual grants will cease to support State and local first
responders for full-time biological detection, illicit nuclear material
detection, training, and exercises. CWMD will also cease important CBRN
research to improve security standards and equipment for SLTTs and DHS,
including threat detection and prevention at large events.
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) is the Nation's
first regulatory program focused specifically on security at high-risk
chemical facilities. Managed by CISA, the CFATS program identifies and
regulates high-risk facilities to ensure security measures are in place
to reduce the risk that certain dangerous chemicals can be weaponized
by terrorists. An attack on one of these U.S. sites could be as lethal
as a nuclear blast. On July 28, 2023, DHS authorities to implement the
CFATS expired, and the program ceased to operate. With the expiration
of the program, DHS can no longer reassure the more than 3,200
communities surrounding chemical facilities at high risk of terrorist
attack that everything is being done to ensure those chemicals are
protected.
As of today, we have no longer been authorized to conduct over 450
inspections, when historically more than a third of inspections
identify at least one gap in a facility's security. We have lost
crucial visibility, with likely more than 100 facilities having newly-
acquired chemicals without reporting them, resulting in the inability
of CISA to conduct risk assessments of these facilities. Cybersecurity
and physical security measures at these sites are being allowed to
lapse, and Government planners and first responders are forced to rely
on out-of-date information about what civilian industry chemical stores
exist in their areas of responsibility.
It is critical to the DHS mission and the safety of the homeland
that Congress reauthorize the Department's C-UAS authority, the CFATS
program, and the CWMD Office without delay. These programs are vital to
protecting our communities against drones, WMDs, and other related CBRN
threats.
Intelligence and Analysis Authorities
It is also imperative that Congress protect two important
intelligence collection authorities that are currently under debate.
The first is Section 702 under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Act, which will expire unless Congress reauthorizes it by the end of
this year. Section 702 allows our intelligence community to conduct the
overseas electronic surveillance that produces much of our Nation's
most critical intelligence about our foreign adversaries and their
plans and intentions. It would significantly diminish our national
security if that authority were allowed to expire.
It is similarly important that Congress resist the proposed
language in the Senate's version of the Intelligence Authorization Act
that would curtail the authority of our Office of Intelligence &
Analysis (I&A) to collect intelligence bearing on our homeland
security. This provision would significantly limit the ability of our
I&A collection professionals to generate the intelligence they use to
warn our Federal, State, local, territorial, Tribal and private-sector
partners about the threats facing them and the homeland.
Both of these authorities are critical to our homeland security.
While Congress should certainly consider any reasonable additions to
the comprehensive regime of privacy and civil liberties safeguards
under which they operate, it must keep both authorities in place and
available to the intelligence community. These authorities have
produced intelligence over the years that has been vital to our
homeland security, and that intelligence is all the more vital now in
light of the threat environment we are facing in the aftermath of the
Hamas attacks in Israel.
conclusion
I am grateful to this committee for your continued support of DHS,
both from a resource perspective and for the provision of key
authorities that allow the Department to adapt to an ever-changing
threat landscape. I look forward to our continued work together and to
answering your questions.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Secretary Mayorkas. I now
recognize Director Wray for 5 minutes to summarize his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER A. WRAY, DIRECTOR, FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Mr. Wray. Thank you and good morning, Chairman Green,
Ranking Member Thompson, Members of the committee. It's been
more than 5 weeks since Hamas terrorists carried out their
brutal attacks against innocent Israelis, dozens of American
citizens, and others from around the world. Our collective
efforts remain on supporting our partners overseas and seeking
the safe return of the hostages. But this hearing, while
focused on threats to our homeland, is well-timed given the
dangerous implications the fluid situation in the Middle East
has for our homeland security.
In a year where the terrorism threat was already elevated,
the on-going war in the Middle East has raised the threat of an
attack against Americans in the United States to a whole other
level. Since October 7, we've seen a rogue gallery of foreign
terrorist organizations call for attacks against Americans and
our allies. Hezbollah expressed its support and praise for
Hamas and threatened to attack U.S. interests in the Middle
East. Al-Qaeda issued its most specific call to attack the
United States in the past 5 years. Al-Qaeda in the Arabian
Peninsula called on jihadists to attack Americans and Jewish
people everywhere. ISIS urged its followers to target Jewish
communities in the United States and Europe.
Given those calls for action, our most immediate concern is
that individuals or small groups will draw twisted inspiration
from the events in the Middle East to carry out attacks here at
home. That includes home-grown violent extremists inspired by a
foreign terrorist organization and domestic violent extremists
targeting Jewish Americans or other faith communities like
Muslim Americans.
Across the country, the FBI has been aggressively
countering violence by extremists citing the on-going conflict
as inspiration. In Houston, we arrested a guy who'd been
studying bomb making and posted about killing Jewish people.
Outside Chicago, we've got a Federal hate crime investigation
into the killing of a 6-year-old Muslim boy. At Cornell
University, we arrested a man who threatened to kill members of
that university's Jewish community. In Los Angeles, we arrested
a man for threatening the CEO and other members of the Anti-
Defamation League. I could go on.
On top of the so-called lone actor threat, we cannot and do
not discount the possibility that Hamas or another foreign
terrorist organization may exploit the current conflict to
conduct attacks here on our own soil. We have kept our sights
on Hamas and have multiple investigations into individuals
affiliated with that foreign terrorist organization. While
historically our Hamas cases have identified individuals here
who are facilitating and financing terrorism overseas, we
continue to scrutinize our intelligence to assess how that
threat may be evolving.
But it's not just Hamas. As I highlighted for this
committee in my testimony last year, Iran, the world's largest
state sponsor of terrorism, has directly or by hiring
criminals, mounted assassination attempts against dissidents
and high-ranking current and former U.S. officials, including
right here on American soil. Or take Hezbollah, Iran's primary
strategic partner, which has a history of raising money and
seeking to obtain weapons here in the United States. FBI
arrests in recent years also indicate that Hezbollah has tried
to cede operatives, establish infrastructure, and engage in
spying here domestically, raising our concern that they may be
contingency planning for future operations in the United
States.
While we are not currently tracking a specific plot, given
that disturbing history, we are keeping a close eye on what
impact recent events may have on those terrorist groups'
intentions here in the United States and how those intentions
might evolve. Now, I want to be clear. While this is certainly
a time for heightened vigilance, it is by no means a time for
panic. Americans should continue to be alert and careful, but
they shouldn't stop going about their daily lives. All across
the country, the FBI's men and women are working with urgency
and purpose to confront the elevated threat. That means working
closely with our Federal, State, and local partners on our FBI-
led joint terrorism task forces, taking an even closer look at
existing investigations, and canvassing sources to increase
awareness across the board, and doing all we can, working with
our partners to protect houses of worship here in the United
States. Bottom line, we are going to continue to do everything
in our power to protect the American people and support our
partners in Israel.
Now, protecting Americans from the threat of terrorism is
and remains our No. 1 priority. But as you all know, the range
of threats that we battle each and every day is enormous. From
cyber attacks to economic espionage to violent crime and
narcotics trafficking and everything in between, the problems
we tackle aren't getting any easier. But we have continued to
work to outpace our adversaries. We disrupted over 40 percent
more cyber operations last year and arrested over 60 percent
more cyber criminals than the year before. We've got easily
2,000 active investigations across all 56 field offices into
China's relentless efforts to steal our innovation and
intellectual property. Over the past 2 years alone, we've
seized enough fentanyl to kill 270 million Americans. That's
more than 80 percent of all Americans.
Just this month, working with our partners, FBI Boston
seized nearly 8 million doses of fentanyl and methamphetamine-
laced pills and powder, including nearly 20 pounds of fentanyl-
laced pills that had been pressed to look like heart-shaped
candy. That's one of the largest single seizures in New England
history and demonstrates the deadly reach of the cartels
trafficking dangerous drugs to every corner of our Nation.
I am incredibly proud of the 38,000 skilled and dedicated
professionals of the FBI who tackle all these complex
challenges. I think it is our shared responsibility to make
sure that they've got the tools they need to keep all of us
safe. Indispensable in that toolkit against foreign adversaries
are the FBI's FISA 702 authorities. I am happy to talk about
all the things the FBI has done over the past couple of years
to make sure we're good stewards of our 702 authorities. But I
can tell you it would be absolutely devastating if the next
time an adversary like Iran or China launches a major cyber
attack, we don't see it coming because 702 was allowed to
lapse. Or with the fast-moving situation in the Middle East,
just imagine if some foreign terrorist organization overseas
shifts its intentions and directs an operative here who'd been
contingency planning to carry out an attack in our own
backyard. Imagine if we're not able to disrupt that threat
because the FBI 702 authorities have been so watered down.
I want to close by thanking you for your continued support
of the FBI's men and women who work tirelessly and selflessly
to protect all Americans. Thank you for having me here today. I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wray follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christopher A. Wray
November 15, 2023
Good morning, Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members
of the committee. Today, I am honored to be here, representing the
people of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (``FBI''), who tackle
some of the most complex and most grave threats we face every day with
perseverance, professionalism, and integrity--sometimes at the greatest
of costs. I am extremely proud of their service and commitment to the
FBI's mission and to ensuring the safety and security of communities
throughout our Nation. On their behalf, I would like to express my
appreciation for the support you have given them in the past and ask
for your continued support in the future.
Despite the many challenges our FBI workforce has faced, I am
immensely proud of their dedication to protecting the American people
and upholding the Constitution. Our country continues to face
challenges, yet, through it all, the women and men of the FBI stand at
the ready to tackle those challenges. The list of diverse threats we
face underscores the complexity and breadth of the FBI's mission: to
protect the American people and to uphold the Constitution of the
United States. I am prepared to discuss with you what the FBI is doing
to address these threats and what the FBI is doing to ensure our people
adhere to the highest of standards while it conducts its mission.
key threats and challenges
Our Nation continues to face a multitude of serious and evolving
threats ranging from home-grown violent extremists (``HVEs'') to
hostile foreign intelligence services and operatives, from
sophisticated cyber-based attacks to internet facilitated sexual
exploitation of children, from violent gangs and criminal organizations
to public corruption and corporate fraud. Keeping pace with these
threats is a significant challenge for the FBI. As an organization, we
must be able to stay current with constantly-evolving technologies. Our
adversaries take advantage of modern technology, including the internet
and social media, to facilitate illegal activities, recruit followers,
encourage terrorist attacks and other illicit actions, and disperse
information on building improvised explosive devices and other means to
attack the United States. The breadth of these threats and challenges
are as complex as any time in our history. And the consequences of not
responding to and countering threats and challenges have never been
greater.
The FBI is establishing strong capabilities and capacities to
assess threats, share intelligence, and leverage key technologies. We
are hiring some of the best to serve as special agents, intelligence
analysts, and professional staff. We have built, and are continuously
enhancing, a workforce that possesses the skills and knowledge to deal
with the complex threats and challenges we face today and tomorrow. We
are building a leadership team that views change and transformation as
a positive tool for keeping the FBI focused on the key threats facing
our Nation.
Today's FBI is a national security and law enforcement organization
that uses, collects, and shares intelligence in everything we do. Each
FBI employee understands that, to defeat the key threats facing our
Nation, we must constantly strive to be more efficient and more
effective. Just as our adversaries continue to evolve, so, too, must
the FBI. We live in a time of persistent terrorist, nation-state, and
criminal threats to our national security, our economy, and indeed our
communities.
national security
Terrorism Threats
As we saw earlier this month with the devastating attack in Israel,
terrorist actors are still very intent on using violence and brutality
to spread their ideologies. Protecting the American people from
terrorism remains the FBI's No. 1 priority. The threat from terrorism
is as persistent and complex as ever. We are in an environment where
the threats from international terrorism, domestic terrorism, and
state-sponsored terrorism are all simultaneously elevated.
The greatest terrorism threat to our homeland is posed by lone
actors or small cells of individuals who typically radicalize to
violence on-line, and who primarily use easily accessible weapons to
attack soft targets. We see the lone offender threat with both Domestic
Violent Extremists (``DVEs'') and HVEs, two distinct threats, both of
which are located primarily in the United States and typically
radicalize and mobilize to violence on their own. DVEs are individuals
based and operating primarily within the United States or its
territories without direction or inspiration from a foreign terrorist
group or other foreign power who seek to further political or social
goals through unlawful acts of force or violence. In comparison, HVEs
are individuals of any citizenship who have lived and/or operated
primarily in the United States or its territories, who advocate, are
engaged in, or are preparing to engage in ideologically-motivated
terrorist activities in furtherance of political or social objectives
promoted by a foreign terrorist organization but are acting
independently of direction by a foreign terrorist organization
(``FTO'').
Domestic and Homegrown Violent Extremists are often motivated and
inspired by a mix of social or political, ideological, and personal
grievances against their targets, and more recently have focused on
accessible targets to include civilians, law enforcement and the
military, symbols or members of the U.S. Government, houses of worship,
retail locations, and mass public gatherings. Lone actors present a
particular challenge to law enforcement and intelligence agencies.
These actors are difficult to identify, investigate, and disrupt before
they take violent action, especially because of the insular nature of
their radicalization and mobilization to violence and limited
discussions with others regarding their plans.
The top domestic terrorism threat we face continues to be from DVEs
we categorize as Racially or Ethnically Motivated Violent Extremists
(``RMVEs'') and Anti-Government or Anti-Authority Violent Extremists
(``AGAAVEs''). The number of FBI domestic terrorism investigations has
more than doubled since the spring of 2020. As of September 2023, the
FBI was conducting approximately 2,700 investigations within the
domestic terrorism program. As of September 2023, the FBI was also
conducting approximately 4,000 investigations within its international
terrorism program.
The FBI uses all tools available at its disposal to combat domestic
terrorism. These efforts represent a critical part of the National
Strategy for Countering Domestic Terrorism, which was released in June
2021. The Strategy sets forth a comprehensive, whole-of-Government
approach to address the many facets of the domestic terrorism threat.
The FBI assesses HVEs as the greatest, most immediate international
terrorism threat to the homeland. HVEs are people located and
radicalized to violence primarily in the United States, who are not
receiving individualized direction from FTOs but are inspired by FTOs,
including the self-proclaimed Islamic State of Iraq and ash-Sham
(``ISIS'') and al-Qaeda and their affiliates, to commit violence. An
HVE's lack of a direct connection with an FTO, ability to rapidly
mobilize without detection, and use of encrypted communications pose
significant challenges to our ability to proactively identify and
disrupt potential violent attacks.
While we work to assist our Israeli colleagues and understand the
global implications of the on-going conflict in Israel, we are paying
heightened attention to how the events abroad could directly affect and
inspire people to commit violence here in the homeland. Terrorist
organizations worldwide, as well as individuals attracted to violence,
have praised HAMAS's horrific attack on Israeli civilians. We have seen
violent extremists across ideologies seeking to target Jewish and
Muslim people and institutions through physical assaults, bomb threats,
and on-line calls for mass casualty attacks. Our top concern stems from
lone offenders inspired by--or reacting to--the on-going Israel-HAMAS
conflict, as they pose the most likely threat to Americans, especially
Jewish, Muslim, and Arab-American communities in the United States. We
have seen an increase in reported threats to Jewish and Muslim people,
institutions, and houses of worship here in the United States and are
moving quickly to mitigate them.
As of right now, we have no information to indicate that HAMAS has
the intent or capability to conduct operations inside the United
States, though we cannot, and do not, discount that possibility, but we
are especially concerned about the possibility of HAMAS supporters
engaging in violence on the group's behalf. As always, we are concerned
with any foreign terrorist organization who may exploit the attacks in
Israel as a tool to mobilize their followers around the world. In
recent years, there have been several events and incidents in the
United States that were purportedly motivated, at least in part, by the
conflict between Israel and HAMAS. These have included the targeting of
individuals, houses of worship, and institutions associated with the
Jewish and Muslim faiths with acts of physical assault, vandalism, or
harassment. Anti-Semitism and anti-Islamic sentiment permeate many
violent extremist ideologies and serves as a primary driver for attacks
by a diverse set of violent extremists who pose a persistent threat to
Jewish and Muslim communities and institutions in the United States and
abroad. Foreign terrorist organizations have exploited previous
conflicts between Israel and HAMAS via media outlets and on-line
communications to call on their supporters located in the United States
to conduct attacks. Some violent extremists have used times of
heightened tensions to incite violence against religious minorities,
targeting both Jewish and Muslim Americans.
The FBI remains concerned about the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan
and that the intent of FTOs, such as ISIS and al-Qaeda and their
affiliates, is to carry out or inspire large-scale attacks in the
United States.
Despite its loss of physical territory in Iraq and Syria, ISIS
remains relentless in its campaign of violence against the United
States and our partners--both here at home and overseas. ISIS and its
supporters continue to aggressively promote its hate-fueled rhetoric
and attract like-minded violent extremists with a willingness to
conduct attacks against the United States and our interests abroad.
ISIS's successful use of social media and messaging applications to
attract individuals is of continued concern to us. Like other foreign
terrorist groups, ISIS advocates for lone offender attacks in the
United States and Western countries via videos and other English
language propaganda that have specifically advocated for attacks
against civilians, the military, law enforcement, and intelligence
community personnel.
Al-Qaeda also maintains its desire to conduct and to inspire large-
scale attacks. Because continued pressure has degraded some of the
group's senior leadership, we assess that, in the near term, al-Qaeda
is more likely to continue to focus on cultivating its international
affiliates and supporting small-scale, readily achievable attacks in
regions such as East and West Africa. Nevertheless, propaganda from al-
Qaeda leaders continues to seek individuals inspired to conduct their
own attacks in the United States and other Western nations.
Iran and its global proxies and partners, including Iraqi Shia
militant groups, attack and plot against the United States and our
allies throughout the Middle East. Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps-Qods Force (``IRGC-QF'') has too provided support to militant
resistance groups and terrorist organizations. And Iran has supported
Lebanese Hizballah and other terrorist groups. Hizballah has sent
operatives to build terrorist infrastructures worldwide. The arrests of
individuals in the United States allegedly linked to Hizballah's main
overseas terrorist arm, and their intelligence-collection and
procurement efforts, demonstrate Hizballah's interest in long-term
contingency planning activities here in the homeland. Hizballah
Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah also has threatened retaliation for
the death of IRGC-QF Commander Qassem Soleimani. This willingness to
seek retaliation against the United States was reflected in charges the
Department brought in 2022 against a member of the IRGC, working on
behalf of the Qods Force, who was plotting to murder a former national
security advisor.
While the terrorism threat continues to evolve, the FBI's resolve
to counter that threat remains constant. We continually adapt and rely
heavily on the strength of our Federal, State, local, Tribal,
territorial, and international partnerships to combat all terrorist
threats to the United States and our interests. To that end, we use all
available lawful investigative techniques and methods to combat these
threats while continuing to collect, analyze, and share intelligence
concerning the threats posed by violent extremists who desire to harm
Americans and U.S. interests. We will continue to share information and
encourage the sharing of information among our numerous partners via
our Joint Terrorism Task Forces across the country, and our legal
attache offices around the world.
In addition to fighting terrorism, countering the proliferation of
weapons-of-mass-destruction materials, technologies, and expertise,
preventing their use by any actor, and securing nuclear and radioactive
materials of concern are also top national security priority missions
for the FBI. The FBI considers preventing, mitigating, investigating,
and responding to weapons of mass destruction (``WMD'') terrorism a
``no-fail'' mission because a WMD attack could result in substantial
injuries, illness, or loss of lives, while yielding significant social,
economic, political, and other national security consequences. In
collaboration with Federal, State, local, Tribal, territorial, and
other partners, the FBI integrates complementary efforts to counter WMD
terrorism. An example of this collaboration is the FBI-led Weapons of
Mass Destruction Strategic Group. This interagency crisis action team
spans more than 15 departments and agencies to coordinate the Federal
Government's response to WMD threats and incidents. Alongside the FBI,
the Department of Homeland Security maintains the largest footprint on
the Strategic Group.
Cyber
Cyber criminal syndicates and nation-states continue to innovate,
using unique techniques to compromise our networks and maximize the
reach and impact of their operations. Those techniques include selling
malware as a service or targeting vendors to access scores of victims
by hacking just one provider.
These criminals and nation-states believe that they can compromise
our networks, steal our property, extort us, and hold our critical
infrastructure at risk without incurring any risk themselves. In the
last few years, we have seen the People's Republic of China (``PRC''),
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (``DPRK''), and Russia use
cyber operations to target U.S. research. We have seen the PRC working
to obtain controlled dual-use technology, while developing an arsenal
of advanced cyber capabilities that could be used against other
countries in the event of a real-world conflict. And we have seen the
disruptive impact a serious supply chain compromise can have through
the SolarWinds-related intrusions, conducted by the Russian Foreign
Intelligence Service. As these adversaries become more sophisticated,
we are increasingly concerned about our ability to detect specific
cyber operations against U.S. organizations. One of the most worrisome
facets is their focus on compromising U.S. critical infrastructure,
especially during a crisis.
Making things more difficult, there is often no bright line that
separates where nation-state activity ends and cyber criminal activity
begins. Some cyber criminals contract or sell services to nation-
states; some nation-state actors moonlight as cyber criminals to fund
personal activities; and nation-states are increasingly using tools
typically used by criminal actors, such as ransomware.
So, as dangerous as nation-states are, we do not have the luxury of
focusing on them alone. In the past year, we also have seen cyber
criminals target hospitals, medical centers, educational institutions,
and other critical infrastructure for theft or ransomware, causing
massive disruption to our daily lives. Incidents affecting medical
centers have led to the interruption of computer networks and systems
that put patients' lives at an increased risk.
We have also seen the rise of an ecosystem of services dedicated to
supporting cyber crime in exchange for cryptocurrency. Criminals now
have new tools to engage in destructive behavior--for example,
deploying ransomware to paralyze entire hospitals, police departments,
and businesses--as well as new means to better conceal their tracks. It
is not that individual malicious cyber actors have necessarily become
much more sophisticated, but that they can now more easily rent
sophisticated capabilities.
We must make it harder and more painful for malicious cyber actors
and criminals to carry on their malicious activities. Using its role as
the lead Federal agency for threat response, the FBI works seamlessly
with domestic and international partners to defend their networks,
attribute malicious activity, sanction bad behavior, and take the fight
to our adversaries overseas. We must impose consequences on cyber
adversaries, and use our collective law enforcement and intelligence
capabilities to do so through joint and enabled operations sequenced
for maximum impact. We must continue to work with the Department of
State and other key agencies to ensure that our foreign partners are
able and willing to cooperate in our efforts to disrupt perpetrators of
cyber crime.
An example of this approach is the coordinated international
operation announced in April 2023 against Genesis Market, a criminal
on-line marketplace offering access to data stolen from over 1.5
million compromised computers around the world containing over 80
million account access credentials. Genesis Market was also a prolific
initial access broker in the cyber crime world, providing criminals a
user-friendly database to search for stolen credentials and more easily
infiltrate victims' computers and accounts. As part of this operation,
law enforcement seized 11 domain names used to support Genesis Market's
infrastructure pursuant to a warrant authorized by the U.S. District
Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin. A total of 22
international agencies and 44 FBI field offices worked with the FBI
Milwaukee Field Office investigating the case. And on April 5, the U.S.
Department of the Treasury announced sanctions against Genesis Market.
In total, along with our colleagues at the Department of Justice
(``DOJ''), we took over 1,000 actions against cyber adversaries in
2022, including arrests, criminal charges, convictions, dismantlements,
and disruptions. We enabled many more actions through our dedicated
partnerships with the private sector, with foreign partners, and with
Federal, State, and local entities. We also provided thousands of
individualized threat warnings and disseminated 70 public threat
advisories by way of Joint Cybersecurity Advisories, FBI Liaison Alert
System (``FLASH'') reports, Private Industry Notifications (``PINs''),
and Public Service Announcements (``PSAs'')--many of which were jointly
authored with other U.S. agencies and international partners.
Along with our partners in the interagency, the FBI has devoted
significant energy and resources to partnerships with the private
sector. We are working hard to push important threat information to
network defenders, but we have also been making it as easy as possible
for the private sector to share important information with us. For
example, we are emphasizing to the private sector how we keep our
presence unobtrusive in the wake of an incident, as well as how we
protect identities and other information that the private sector shares
with us. We are still committed to providing useful feedback and
improving coordination with our Government partners so that we are
speaking with one voice. But, we need the private sector to do its
part, too. We need the private sector to come forward to warn us and
our partners when they see malicious cyber activity. We also need the
private sector to work with us when we warn them that they are being
targeted. Significant cyber incidents--SolarWinds, Cyclops Blink, the
Colonial pipeline incident--only emphasize what we have been saying for
a long time: the Government cannot protect against cyber threats on its
own. We need a whole-of-society approach that matches the scope of the
danger. There is no other option for defending a country where nearly
all of our critical infrastructure, personal data, intellectual
property, and network infrastructure sits in private hands.
In summary, the FBI is engaged in myriad efforts to combat cyber
threats, from improving threat identification and information sharing
inside and outside of the Government to developing and retaining new
talent, to examining the way we operate to disrupt and defeat these
threats. We take all potential threats to public and private sector
systems seriously, and will continue to investigate and hold
accountable those who pose a threat in cyber space.
Foreign Intelligence Threats
Top Threats
Nations such as the PRC, Russia, and Iran are becoming more
aggressive and more capable than ever before. These nations seek to
undermine our core democratic, economic, and scientific institutions,
and they employ a growing range of tactics. Defending American
institutions and values against these threats is a national security
imperative and a priority for the FBI.
With that, the greatest long-term threat to our Nation's ideas,
innovation, and economic security is the foreign intelligence and
economic espionage threat from the PRC. By extension, it is also a
threat to our national security. The PRC government aspires to reshape
the international rules-based system to its benefit. Often, with little
regard for international norms and laws.
When it comes to economic espionage, the PRC uses every means at
its disposal, blending cyber, human intelligence, diplomacy, corporate
transactions, and other pressure on U.S. companies operating in the
PRC, to steal our companies' innovations. These efforts are consistent
with the PRC government's expressed goals to become an international
power, modernize its military, and create innovation-driven economic
growth.
To pursue this goal, the PRC uses human intelligence officers, co-
optees, and corrupt corporate insiders, as well as sophisticated cyber
intrusions, pressure on U.S. companies in China, shell-game corporate
transactions, and joint-venture ``partnerships'' that are anything but
a true partnership. There is nothing traditional about the scale of
their theft. It is unprecedented. American workers and companies are
facing a greater, more complex danger than they have dealt with before.
Stolen innovation means stolen jobs, stolen opportunities for American
workers, and stolen national power.
National Counterintelligence Task Force (``NCITF'')
As the lead U.S. counterintelligence agency, the FBI is responsible
for detecting and lawfully countering the actions of foreign
intelligence services and organizations as they seek to adversely
affect U.S. national interests. Recognizing the need to coordinate
similar efforts across agencies, the FBI established the NCITF in 2019
to create a whole-of-Government approach to counterintelligence. The
FBI established this national-level task force in the National Capital
Region to coordinate, facilitate, and focus these multi-agency
counterintelligence operations, and to programmatically support local
Counterintelligence Task Force (``CITF'') operations. Combining the
authorities and operational capabilities of the U.S. intelligence
community, non-title-50 departments and agencies, law enforcement
agencies around the country, and local CITFs in each FBI field office,
the NCITF coordinates and leads whole-of-Government efforts to defeat
hostile intelligence activities targeting the United States.
The Department of Defense (``DOD'') has been a key partner in the
NCITF since its founding. While the FBI has had long-term collaborative
relationships with DOD entities such as the Air Force Office of Special
Investigations, Naval Criminal Investigative Service, and Army
Counterintelligence, the NCITF has allowed us to enhance our
collaboration for greater impact. We plan to emphasize this whole-of-
Government approach as a powerful formula to mitigate the modern
counterintelligence threat.
Transnational Repression and Other Counterintelligence
Threats
In recent years, we have seen a rise in efforts by authoritarian
regimes to interfere with freedom of expression and punish dissidents
abroad. These acts of repression cross national borders, often reaching
into the United States. Governments such as the PRC, the Russian
Federation, and the government of Iran stalk, intimidate, and harass
ex-patriots or dissidents who speak against the regime from the United
States.
Transnational repression can occur in different forms, including
assaults and attempted kidnapping. Governments use transnational
repression tactics to silence the voices of their citizens, U.S.
residents, or others living abroad who are critical of their regimes.
This sort of repressive behavior is antithetical to our values. People
from all over the world are drawn to the United States by the promise
of living in a free and open society that adheres to the rule of law.
To ensure that this promise remains a reality, we must continue to use
all of our tools to block authoritarian regimes that seek to extend
their tactics of repression beyond their shores.
In addition, our Nation is confronting multifaceted foreign threats
seeking both to influence our national policies and public opinion and
to harm our national dialog and debate. The FBI and our interagency
partners remain focused on foreign malign influence operations,
including subversive, undeclared, coercive, and criminal actions used
by foreign governments in their attempts to sway U.S. citizens'
preferences and perspectives, shift U.S. policies, increase discord in
the United States, and undermine the American people's confidence in
our democratic institutions and processes.
Foreign malign influence is not a new problem, but the
interconnectedness of the modern world, combined with the anonymity of
the internet, have changed the nature of the threat. The FBI is the
lead Federal agency responsible for investigating foreign malign
influence threats. Several years ago, we established the Foreign
Influence Task Force (``FITF'') to identify and counteract foreign
malign influence operations targeting the United States. The FITF is
led by our Counterintelligence Division, and comprises agents,
analysts, and professional staff from the Counterintelligence, Cyber,
Counterterrorism, and Criminal Investigative divisions. It is
specifically charged with identifying and combating foreign malign
influence operations targeting democratic institutions inside the
United States.
The domestic counterintelligence environment is more complex than
ever. We face a persistent and pervasive national security threat from
foreign adversaries, particularly the governments of China and Russia,
and Iran, who conduct sophisticated intelligence operations using
coercion, subversion, malign influence, cyber and economic espionage,
traditional spying, and non-traditional human intelligence collection.
Together, they pose a continuous threat to U.S. national security and
our economy by targeting strategic technologies, industries, sectors,
and critical infrastructure. Historically, these asymmetric national
security threats involved foreign intelligence service officers seeking
U.S. Government and U.S. intelligence community information. Now,
however, the FBI has observed foreign adversaries employing a wide
range of nontraditional collection techniques, including the use of
human collectors not affiliated with intelligence services, foreign
investment in critical U.S. sectors, and infiltration of U.S. supply
chains. The FBI continues to adjust our counterintelligence priorities
to address this evolution.
criminal threats
The United States faces many criminal threats, including financial
and health care fraud, transnational and regional organized criminal
enterprises, crimes against children and human trafficking, violent
threats against election personnel, and public corruption. Criminal
organizations--domestic and international--and individual criminal
activity represent a significant threat to security and safety in
communities across the Nation.
Violent Crime
Violent crimes and gang activities exact a high toll on individuals
and communities. Many of today's gangs are sophisticated and well-
organized. They use violence to control neighborhoods and boost their
illegal money-making activities, which include robbery, human
trafficking, drug and gun trafficking, fraud, extortion, and
prostitution rings. These gangs do not limit their illegal activities
to single jurisdictions or communities. The FBI is vital to this fight
in big cities and small towns throughout the Nation because we are able
to cross jurisdictions and investigate wherever the evidence leads.
Every day, FBI special agents partner with Federal, State, local,
territorial, and Tribal officers and deputies on joint task forces and
on individual investigations. FBI joint task forces--Violent Crime Safe
Streets, Violent Gang Safe Streets, and Safe Trails--focus on
identifying and targeting major groups operating as criminal
enterprises. Much of the FBI criminal intelligence is derived from our
State, local, territorial, and Tribal law enforcement partners, who
know their communities inside and out. Joint task forces benefit from
FBI surveillance assets, and our sources track these gangs to identify
emerging trends. Through these multi-subject and multi-jurisdictional
investigations, the FBI concentrates its efforts on high-level groups
engaged in criminal conspiracies and patterns of racketeering. This
investigative model enables us to target senior gang leadership and
develop enterprise-based prosecutions.
By way of example, the FBI has dedicated tremendous resources to
combat the threat of violence posed by MS-13. The atypical nature of
this gang has required a multi-pronged approach. We work through our
task forces here in the United States, while simultaneously gathering
intelligence and aiding our international law enforcement partners. We
do this through the FBI's Transnational Anti-Gang Task Forces.
Established in El Salvador in 2007 through the FBI's National Gang Task
Force, Legal Attache San Salvador, and the United States Department of
State, each Anti-Gang Task Force is responsible for the investigation
of, primarily, MS-13 operations in the northern triangle of Central
America and the United States. This program combines the expertise,
resources, and jurisdiction of participating agencies to investigate
and counter transnational criminal gang activity in Central America and
the United States. There are now Transnational Anti-Gang Task Forces in
El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. Through these combined efforts,
the FBI has achieved substantial success in countering the MS-13 threat
across Central America and the United States.
Transnational Organized Crime (``TOC'')
More than a decade ago, organized crime was characterized by
hierarchical organizations, or families, that exerted influence over
criminal activities in neighborhoods, cities, or States. But organized
crime has changed dramatically. Today, international criminal
enterprises run multinational, multibillion-dollar schemes from start
to finish. Modern-day criminal enterprises are flat, fluid networks
with global reach. While still engaged in many of the ``traditional''
organized crime activities of loan-sharking, extortion, and murder,
modern criminal enterprises are also involved in trafficking
counterfeit prescription drugs containing fentanyl, targeting stock
market fraud and manipulation, cyber-facilitated bank fraud and
embezzlement, illicit drug trafficking, identity theft, human
trafficking, money laundering, alien smuggling, public corruption,
weapons trafficking, kidnapping, and other illegal activities.
TOC networks exploit legitimate institutions for critical financial
and business services that enable the storage or transfer of illicit
proceeds. Preventing and combating transnational organized crime
demands a concentrated effort by the FBI and Federal, State, local,
Tribal, territorial, and international partners.
As part of our efforts to combat the TOC threat, the FBI is focused
on the cartels trafficking narcotics across our border. The FBI has 328
pending investigations linked to cartel leadership and 78 of those
investigations are along the Southern Border. Additionally, the FBI
actively participates in 17 Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task
Forces (``OCDETF'') across the United States, investigating major drug
trafficking, money laundering, and other high-priority transnational
organized crime networks. On top of that, we are pursuing health care
fraud investigations against medical professionals and pill mills
through our prescription drug initiative, investigating the gangs and
criminal groups responsible for distributing substances like fentanyl
through our Safe Streets Task Forces, and disrupting and dismantling
Darknet marketplaces that facilitate the sale of counterfeit
prescription opioids and other illicit drugs through our Joint Criminal
Opioid Darknet Enforcement team.
While the FBI continues to share intelligence about criminal groups
with our partners and combines resources and expertise to gain a full
understanding of each group, the threat of transnational crime remains
a significant and growing threat to national and international security
with implications for public safety, public health, democratic
institutions, and economic stability across the globe. TOC groups
increasingly exploit jurisdictional boundaries to conduct their
criminal activities overseas. Furthermore, they are diversifying their
use of the Darknet and emerging technologies to engage in illegal
activity, such as trafficking illicit drugs and contraband across
international borders and into the United States.
crimes against children and human trafficking
Every year, thousands of children become victims of crimes, whether
it is through kidnappings, violent attacks, sexual abuse, human
trafficking, or on-line predators. The FBI is uniquely positioned to
provide a rapid, proactive, and comprehensive response. We help
identify, locate, and recover child victims. Our strong relationships
with Federal, State, local, territorial, Tribal, and international law
enforcement partners also help to identify, prioritize, investigate,
and deter individuals and criminal networks from exploiting children.
But the FBI's ability to learn about and investigate child sexual
exploitation is being threatened by the proliferation of sites on the
Darknet. For example, currently, there are at least 30 child sexual
abuse material sites operating openly and notoriously on the Darknet.
Some of these exploitative sites are exclusively dedicated to the
sexual abuse of infants and toddlers. The sites often expand rapidly,
with one site obtaining as many as 200,000 new members within its first
few weeks of operation.
Another growing area of concern involving the sexual exploitation
of children is the explosion in incidents of children and teens being
coerced into sending explicit images on-line and extorted for money.
Known as financial sextortion, in 2022, law enforcement received over
13,000 reports of this type of crime, resulting in at least 12,600
victims here and abroad, and more than 20 suicides. A large percentage
of these sextortion schemes originate outside the United States,
primarily in West African countries such as Nigeria and Ivory Coast.
The FBI continues to collaborate with other law enforcement partners
and the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children to mitigate
this criminal activity and provide the public with informational alerts
and victim resources regarding these crimes.
The FBI has several programs in place to arrest child predators and
to recover missing and endangered children. To this end, the FBI funds
or participates in a variety of endeavors, including our Innocence Lost
National Initiative, Innocent Images National Initiative, Operation
Cross Country, Child Abduction Rapid Deployment Team, Victim Services,
over 80 Child Exploitation and Human Trafficking Task Forces, over 74
International Violent Crimes Against Children Task Force officers, as
well as numerous community outreach programs to educate parents and
children about safety measures they can follow. Through improved
communications, the FBI is able to collaborate with partners throughout
the world quickly, playing an integral role in crime prevention.
The Child Abduction Rapid Deployment Team is a rapid-response team
with experienced investigators strategically located across the country
to quickly respond to child abductions. Investigators provide a full
array of investigative and technical resources during the most critical
time following the abduction of a child, such as the collection and
analysis of DNA, impression, and trace evidence, the processing of
digital forensic evidence, and interviewing expertise.
The FBI also focuses efforts to stop human trafficking of both
children and adults. The FBI works collaboratively with law enforcement
partners to disrupt all forms of human trafficking through Human
Trafficking Task Forces Nation-wide. One way the FBI combats this
pernicious crime problem is through investigations such as Operation
Cross Country. Over a 2-week period in 2023, the FBI, along with other
Federal, State, local, and Tribal partners, executed approximately 350
operations to recover survivors of human trafficking and disrupt
traffickers. These operations identified and located 59 minor victims
of child sex trafficking, child sexual exploitation, or related State
offenses and located 59 actively missing children. Furthermore, the FBI
and its partners located 141 adults who were identified as potential
victims of sexual exploitation, human trafficking, or related State
offenses. In addition to identifying and recovering missing children
and potential victims, the law enforcement activity conducted during
Operation Cross Country led to the identification or arrest of 126
suspects implicated in potential child sexual exploitation, human
trafficking, or related State or Federal offenses.
Although many victims of human trafficking recovered by the FBI are
adult U.S. citizens, the FBI and its partners recognize that foreign
nationals, children, and other vulnerable populations are
disproportionately harmed by both sex and labor trafficking. We take a
victim-centered, trauma-informed approach to investigating these cases
and strive to ensure the needs of victims are fully addressed at all
stages. To accomplish this, the FBI works in conjunction with other law
enforcement agencies and victim specialists on the Federal, State,
local, and Tribal levels, as well as with a variety of vetted non-
governmental organizations. Even after the arrest and conviction of
human traffickers, the FBI often continues to work with partner
agencies and organizations to assist victims and survivors in moving
beyond their exploitation.
reauthorization of section 702 of the foreign intelligence surveillance
act
Before closing, I would be remiss if I did not underscore an urgent
legislative matter directly relevant to our discussion today. As the
committee knows, at the end of December, Section 702 and other
provisions of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) will
expire unless renewed.
Loss of this vital provision, or its reauthorization in a narrowed
form, would raise profound risks. For the FBI in particular, either
outcome could mean substantially impairing, or in some cases entirely
eliminating, our ability to find and disrupt many of the most serious
security threats I described earlier in my statement.
I am especially concerned about one frequently-discussed proposal,
which would require the Government to obtain a warrant or court order
from a judge before personnel could conduct a ``U.S. person query'' of
information previously obtained through use of Section 702. A warrant
requirement would amount to a de facto ban, because query applications
either would not meet the legal standard to win court approval; or
because, when the standard could be met, it would be so only after the
expenditure of scarce resources, the submission and review of a lengthy
legal filing, and the passage of significant time--which, in the world
of rapidly-evolving threats, the Government often does not have. That
would be a significant blow to the FBI, which relies on this long-
standing, lawful capability afforded by Section 702 to rapidly uncover
previously hidden threats and connections, and to take swift steps to
protect the homeland when needed.
To be sure, no one more deeply shares Members' concerns regarding
past FBI compliance violations related to FISA, including the rules for
querying Section 702 collection using U.S. person identifiers, than I
do. These violations never should have happened and preventing
recurrence is a matter of utmost priority. The FBI took these episodes
seriously and responded rigorously, already yielding significant
results in dramatically reducing the number of ``U.S. person queries''
by the FBI of the Section 702 database and in substantially improving
its compliance rate. Moreover, as we publicly announced in June, the
FBI is implementing further measures both to keep improving our
compliance and to hold our personnel accountable for misuse of Section
702 and other FISA provisions, including through an escalating scheme
for employee accountability, including discipline and culminating in
possible dismissal.
Together with other leaders of the intelligence community and the
Department of Justice, I remain committed to working with this
committee and others in Congress, on potential reforms to Section 702
that would not diminish its critical intelligence value. There are many
options for meaningfully enhancing privacy, oversight, and
accountability, while fully preserving Section 702's efficacy. Doing
that will be critical to fulfilling the FBI's continuing mission of
identifying and stopping national security threats within the U.S.
homeland.
conclusion
The strength of any organization is its people. The threats we face
as a Nation have never been greater or more diverse, and the
expectations placed on the FBI have never been higher. Our fellow
citizens look to the FBI to protect the United States from those
threats, and, every day, the men and women of the FBI continue to meet
and exceed those expectations. I want to thank them for their dedicated
service.
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I am happy
to answer your questions.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Director Wray. I now recognize
Director Abizaid for 5 minutes to summarize her opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTINE ABIZAID, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
COUNTERTERRORISM CENTER, OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR
OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

Ms. Abizaid. Thank you, Chairman Green, Ranking Member
Thompson, and Members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today.
This hearing is especially timely as we continue to monitor
the response of global terrorist actors in the wake of Hamas's
tragic and brutal 7 October terrorist attack. The attack
affected Americans directly, including over 32 who were killed
and those who were taken hostage. While Hamas itself continues
to focus its operational activity in the immediate region,
Hamas's attack and the conflict that it has precipitated has
reverberated across the globe among an ideologically diverse
array of threat actors. Whether it be members of al-Qaeda or
ISIS, individuals inspired, including those motivated by a
racial or ethnic animus, or groups considered to be a part of
the Iranian aligned axis of resistance, terrorists and violent
extremists are exploiting multiple core grievances to fuel
violence.
Among these grievances are the renewed salience of the
Israeli Palestinian issue, the already-heightened atmosphere of
antisemitism globally, and narratives that call for violence as
a result, and a refocused attention on U.S. military
involvement in the region and our relationship with Israel. All
of these are amplified by graphic images and emotive content
shared over social media in a way intended to drive groups and
individuals to political violence.
Here in the United States homeland, our current heightened
threat posture is driven primarily by our concern that
individuals may increasingly mobilize for attacks, particularly
against Jewish, Arab, and Muslim communities. This is
consistent with our years-long assessment that those inspired
to terrorism, rather than those directly linked to hierarchical
organizations, are the most likely to carry out a successful
attack on U.S. soil. Outside of the United States, we are
monitoring the activities of foreign-based groups, particularly
ISIS and al-Qaeda, which view the United States as their
primary enemy and have publicly called for attacks in the wake
of October 7. Their ability to orchestrate attacks from their
core operating arenas has been diminished by years of
counterterrorism pressure. But while these groups have
disaggregated and become more focused in their local regions in
recent years, they have a presence across a wide swath of
territory from West Africa to South Asia, and we are on the
lookout for any attempts by their members to leverage this
crisis to rebuild and refocus against the United States.
Iran and its proxies, including Lebanese Hezbollah, Iraqi
Shia militants, they are a major concern principally for their
ability to generate attacks in the Middle East, including those
that have significant escalatory consequences. While we have no
intelligence to indicate Iran or its proxies had foreknowledge
of Hamas's October 7 attack, we remain focused on Iranian and
Iranian-linked activity in support of Hamas and directed
against U.S. interests since the outbreak of the conflict. Thus
far, Iranian-aligned militant groups have conducted over 50
attacks against U.S. forces in Iraq and Syria using rockets and
unmanned aerial systems. This is in addition to several
instances of Israel-focused attacks, missiles and UAS, attacks
by the Yemen-based Houthis, and the daily paramilitary attacks
on Israel by Hezbollah, which also happens to be a globally-
capable terrorist organization.
Even as the United States comes under attack, we assess
Iran and Hezbollah are trying to walk a very fine line in the
region, avoiding overt actions that risk opening them up to a
more direct conflict with Israel or the United States while
still exacting calls by enabling anti-U.S. and anti-Israel
attacks.
Iran's current regional activities come on top of an
already aggressive global posture over the last several years,
including attempted attacks in the United States aimed at
Iranian dissidents or in retaliation against former U.S.
Government officials that it deems responsible for the 2020
death of Quds Force commander Qasem Soleimani.
It is clear that even in today's heightened threat
environment, significant CT pressure brought to bear against
terrorist groups over the last 2 decades, along with
investments in effective CT defenses here at home, has resulted
in an overall diminished directed terrorist threat to the
United States homeland. However, as evidenced by the events of
the past 6 weeks, the threat landscape is highly dynamic. Our
country must preserve its CT fundamentals to ensure constant
vigilance.
Among these fundamentals is the intelligence collection
enabled by Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Act, which provides key indications and warning on terrorist
plans and intentions and supports international terrorist
disruptions. I respectfully urge Congress to reauthorize this
vital authority, not only for its CT benefits, but for the
benefits it brings across a range of national security
challenges.
At the National Counterterrorism Center, we are part of a
whole-of-Government CT architecture that is foundational to our
national security. Though built with 9/11 as its backdrop, this
architecture has proven adaptive to today's environment and
capable of addressing an inherently unpredictable range of
terrorist adversaries. For those who serve as part of this CT
community, I would like to end with a thank you. Your years of
dedication to the CT mission has done so much to protect this
country from terrorism. The United States has relied upon you
time and again, and today is no exception. With that, I welcome
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Abizaid follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christine Abizaid
November 15, 2023
Good morning, Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members
of the committee. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the overall
terrorism landscape, the threat posed to the homeland and U.S. persons
and interests overseas, and the state of the U.S. counterterrorism (CT)
enterprise.
I want to begin by addressing the recent attacks by HAMAS and the
terrorism implications of the on-going events, especially within the
context of the threat to the homeland.
We continue to closely monitor, evaluate, and take appropriate
actions with respect to potential threats to the United States in the
wake of the 7 October HAMAS attacks against Israel and the resulting
regional tensions. We are sharing relevant information with our
Federal, State, local, and international law enforcement, intelligence,
defense, and homeland security partners to ensure they are prepared for
any threats. More broadly, we are monitoring the actions of a range of
terrorist actors for key signs of terrorist escalation, including from
Iran-aligned proxies in the region; al-Qaeda and ISIS branches and
affiliates from West Africa to Southeast Asia; and other terrorist
organizations or lone actors who may seek to exploit the conflict. We
are committed to analyzing, tracking, and enabling the disruption of
threats targeting Americans abroad, and Jewish, Muslim, and Arab
communities within the United States. Since 7 October, there have been
increased threats to these communities worldwide, and some attacks and
violent exploitation of protests, primarily driven by overall
heightened tensions and individuals engaging in violent extremist
attacks. My colleagues will address other threats by individuals
mobilizing to violence driven at least in part by the current conflict.
The cascading effects of HAMAS's brutal and highly complex attacks
inside of Israel underscore the need for vigilance against a diverse
array of terrorist actors who retain the capability and intent to
conduct operations against the United States and our interests. Today's
Middle East conflict and the potential implications thereof hits
center-mass for a national CT effort that otherwise had been tracking
an overall reduced threat emanating from ISIS and al-Qaeda in the
region and was adjusting to a more discrete, though geographically
dispersed, terrorist threat.
How this conflict unfolds in the coming days, weeks, and months--
and the degree to which it may help renew otherwise declining terrorist
actors across the globe--will require careful monitoring. In the mean
time, the United States must be careful to preserve the capabilities to
address an inherently unpredictable range of terrorist adversaries and
enable agile responses to emerging threats and crises, even as we
confront a myriad of other national security challenges that play out
both overseas and in the United States.
terrorist trends of concern
NCTC's approach to evaluating the terrorist threat to the United
States factors in the current capability and intent of various
terrorist actors and the conditions under which they operate. These
categories of terrorists and threat actors generally align as violent
Sunni extremist groups such as ISIS and al-Qaeda; Iran and Iranian-
aligned terrorist groups such as Lebanese Hizballah, some militant
groups in Iraq and Syria, the Yemen-based Huthis, HAMAS, and
Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ); and Homegrown Violent Extremists
(HVEs) and other lone actors such as Racially or Ethnically Motivated
Violent Extremists (RMVEs) with a foreign nexus.
CT pressure by the United States and foreign partners during the
last 15 years has been critical in degrading the capabilities of the
most concerning threats, particularly by disrupting experienced leaders
and operatives and exerting sustained pressure against key networks.
Consistent with the last 2 years of testimony to this committee, we
assess the most likely threat in the United States is from lone actors,
whether inspired by violent Sunni extremist narratives, racially- or
ethnically-motivated drivers to violence, or other politically-
motivated violence. This is not to say that the threat from organized
foreign terrorist groups is gone. Indeed, despite success at deterring
sophisticated, hierarchically-directed terrorist attacks in the
homeland since 2001, as of 2022, terrorism threat reporting remained at
roughly the same level as in 2010, when al-Qaeda was at its relative
peak, before the death of Usama bin Ladin and rise of ISIS. Today's
current conflict will undoubtedly fuel even more threat reporting.
As we evaluate that reporting beyond the dynamic of the Israel-
HAMAS conflict, three key themes characterize our leading CT
challenges: regional expansion of global terrorist networks despite
degradation of their most externally focused elements; the growing
danger from State involvement with terrorism; and, as mentioned above,
the reality that lone actors are the most likely to succeed in carrying
out terrorist attacks.
Regional Shifts by ISIS and al-Qaeda
The United States is safer today because of the suppression of the
most dangerous elements of ISIS and al-Qaeda's global networks. Thanks
in large part to American and regional partner CT operations, both
organizations have suffered significant losses of key personnel and
sustained CT pressure is constraining their efforts to rebuild in
historical operating areas. Al-Qaeda is at a low point in Afghanistan
and Pakistan, where its revival is unlikely because it has lost target
access, leadership talent, group cohesion, rank-and-file commitment,
and an accommodating local environment. Meanwhile, since early 2022,
ISIS has lost three overall leaders and more than a dozen other senior
leaders in Iraq, Syria, and Somalia--including some who had been
involved in planning attacks outside the region--as a result of
pressure from the United States and international allies, regional
governments, and local opposition forces.
These terrorist losses have been partially offset by an increased
external threat from ISIS-Khorasan in Afghanistan and the expansion of
both ISIS and al-Qaeda networks across Africa, although these remain
largely regionally focused. Thus far ISIS-Khorasan has relied primarily
on inexperienced operatives in Europe to try to advance attacks in its
name and, in Afghanistan, Taliban operations have for now prevented the
branch from seizing territory that it could use to draw in and train
foreign recruits for more sophisticated plots. That said, given
Afghanistan's history and the mix of terrorist and insurgent groups
that have long operated from its territory, a top CT priority remains
protecting against threats emerging from that country.
In North and West Africa, we are concerned that the erosion of
democratic norms and the withdrawal of some traditional partners could
further embolden terrorist groups who already pose a threat to U.S.
interests in the Sahel. Al-Shabaab in East Africa has become al-Qaeda's
largest, wealthiest, and most lethal affiliate. The Somalia-based group
has demonstrated the capability to carry out attacks across the region,
including against U.S. personnel.
In the Middle East, al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP)
remains al-Qaeda's most dedicated driver of external plotting despite
its own losses of key personnel and resources. Remaining senior members
of the Yemen-based group continue to produce media reinforcing the
cohesion of al-Qaeda's global network as well as calls for attacks
against our interests globally. How AQAP, ISIS, or other regional
groups may seek to capitalize on HAMAS' 7 October attack to recruit and
rebuild anti-West attack capabilities will be critical to assess as
tensions and violence rise as the conflict continues.
Iran as Quintessential State Sponsor of Terrorism
Our CT enterprise remains focused on the Iranian government's
persistent global activity, including in the homeland, targeting
multiple populations over the past 4 years, such as Israeli or Jewish
interests; Iranian dissidents; and U.S. officials in retaliation for
the death of IRGC-QF Commander Qasem Soleimani in 2020. Lebanese
Hizballah, a number of Iran-aligned militant groups in Iraq and Syria,
the Huthis, PIJ, and HAMAS all have long-standing relationships with
Iran and have received materiel, financial support, and training from
Iran. These groups and surrogates pose an asymmetric threat to the
United States and Israel, and the prospect of the Iranian government's
provision of more lethal and sophisticated capabilities to them remains
a serious concern.
More relevant to the homeland, we are watching for signs that Iran
could pursue additional operations here, though we assess they would be
unlikely to do so given the consequences amidst the current conflict.
Iran and its proxies do have a history of external operations; Iranian
state agents have pursued several dozen lethal plots and assassinated
at least 20 opponents across four continents since 1979, while Lebanese
Hizballah has conducted international terrorist attacks in Argentina,
Saudi Arabia, and Bulgaria. Over the last several years, Iran has
plotted against the United States, other Western interests, and Iranian
dissidents more aggressively than they have at any time since the
1980's and become increasingly explicit in threats to carry out
retaliatory attacks for the death of Iranian officials, especially
against current and former U.S. officials whom it holds primarily
responsible for Soleimani's death.
As of mid-October, Iran is allowing its partners and proxies in the
region to conduct attacks amidst the Israel-HAMAS conflict. For the
United States, this has included Shia militant rocket and unmanned
aircraft system (UAS) attacks against U.S. facilities in Syria and
Iraq, leveraging a long-standing capability. Both Iran and Lebanese
Hizballah are conducting or permitting dangerous actions that
demonstrate their increased risk tolerance within the current crisis.
So far, they appear to be avoiding dramatic actions that would
immediately escalate the contours of the current conflict or open up a
concerted second front with Israel. However, in the present regional
context, their actions and those of their proxies carry great potential
for miscalculation.
The Enduring Challenge of Violence by Lone Actors
Violent extremists who are not members of terrorist groups will
probably remain the most likely to carry out a successful attack in the
United States over the next several years. The recent resurgence of
such attacks in Europe, and the context of the on-going HAMAS-Israel
conflict reinforces our assessment. By their lack of affiliation, lone
actors are difficult to detect and disrupt. While these violent
extremists tend to leverage simple attack methods, they can have
devastating and outsized consequences, as we have experienced in the
homeland with attacks in San Bernadino, CA; Orlando, FL; El Paso, TX;
and in Buffalo, NY, to name a few.
Since 2010, violent extremists influenced by or in contact with
ISIS, al-Qaeda, and other foreign terrorist organizations have
conducted 40 attacks in the United States that have killed nearly 100
and injured more than 500 people. In 2022, there were two such attacks
in the United States, which is a decline of about 70 percent compared
to the 7 attacks in 2015--the height of ISIS's territorial control in
Iraq and Syria and English-language messaging efforts. This averages
out to a decline of almost 7 percent year-on-year during this period.
The last Foreign Terrorist Organization-inspired lethal attack was in
August 2021. However, we are on high alert for whether the current
conflict in the Middle East may prove to be a catalyst for individuals
to mobilize for attacks.
Similarly concerning is the threat posed by the interconnected,
transnational RMVE movement, particularly the foreign dimensions of
this threat and its reach into the homeland. NCTC continues to work
closely with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and our international partners to
address this particular global phenomenon.
The transnational nature of the threat is apparent from past RMVE
attackers and plotters abroad, particularly the Norwegian attacker in
2011 and the Australian attacker in New Zealand in 2019. These previous
foreign RMVEs have been particularly influential for like-minded
individuals globally, with at least 6 subsequent RMVE attackers
worldwide claiming inspiration from the writings of the Norwegian
attacker and at least 4 citing the Australian attacker, including his
use of social media to livestream his violence. Similarly instructive
is the range of attacks by or disruptions of RMVEs globally in 2022,
including in Slovakia, Brazil, the United States, the United Kingdom,
France, and Germany. These attackers are part of an international
ecosystem of individuals who share violent extremist messaging, mutual
grievances, manifestos of successful attackers, and encouragement for
lone-actor RMVE violence. The transnational RMVE movement is largely
fluid, fragmented, and lacking hierarchical structures. It is driven by
individuals and networks that share racially- and ethnically-based
perceived grievances and messaging to incite violence, frequently
framing actions around the concept of leaderless resistance.
International Terrorism Landscape Impacts Homeland
Attacks abroad inspire more than just lone attackers and RMVEs in
the homeland, and we remain concerned about keeping our borders secure
should individuals with links to transnational terrorist actors such as
ISIS, al-Qaeda, or Iranian State agents attempt to enter the United
States. Our efforts during the last two decades to build and enhance
the screening and vetting system that guards against potential
terrorist travel to the United States stands as one of our most
valuable CT tools. Improving and sustaining our ability to identify,
prevent, and disrupt such movement--whether by land, sea, or air--
remains a critical priority in an era of increased global travel and
migration.
NCTC's support to the U.S. Government's screening and vetting
enterprise plays a critical role in refugee and immigration processing
by identifying any connections to international terrorism. We review
about 30 million new travel and immigration applications annually--in
addition to over 120 million continuous reviews--to enable DHS and the
Department of State to prevent terrorist travel to the United States.
We also work closely with our intelligence community colleagues to
uncover, assess, and support actions to disrupt intersections between
international terrorist and travel facilitation networks that could
become potential threat vulnerabilities. While we have no credible or
corroborated information to suggest that terrorist groups are currently
trying to use such travel for operations, we know that terrorist actors
have in the past considered or attempted different travel routes which
reinforces our work to safeguard the United States.
preserving nctc's critical mission and flexibility within an evolving
national security environment
Over the past 20+ years, the U.S. Government has developed a highly
integrated, innovative, and effective CT enterprise that continues to
adapt to the changing threat. CT practitioners work behind the scenes
every day to ensure that interconnected CT operations and programs are
effectively used against the highest-priority threats, employing a wide
range of tools to do so, including identity intelligence, diplomatic
security, sanctions, law enforcement investigations, direct-action
operations, and partner capacity-building efforts.
As a critical part of that integrated community, NCTC fulfills its
key missions, as directed by the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism
Prevention Act of 2004. NCTC serves as the primary organization in the
U.S. Government to analyze and integrate international terrorism
information; conduct strategic operational planning for
counterterrorism activities and integrate all instruments of national
power; ensure all agencies have access to and receive needed support to
execute their counterterrorism plans; and serve as the central and
shared knowledge bank on known and suspected international terrorists
and international terrorist groups.
NCTC sits at the intersection between foreign and domestic
intelligence demands, and works to track threats across that divide in
a way that is both effective against the threat and protects Americans'
privacy and civil liberties. As an example of our critical intelligence
fusion role, in 2007, NCTC established the Regional Representatives
program to station analysts in the field charged with sharing timely
and relevant intelligence, conducting training, providing finished
intelligence products, and offering by-request support to the FBI, DHS,
and their partners for CT operations. These Regional Representatives in
select locations enable front-line support to DHS and FBI, as well as
other Federal, State, local, and private-sector partners, and use the
deep expertise, unique accesses, and connectivity of NCTC to serve as
force multipliers against an array of international terrorist threats.
NCTC is one part of the incredible confluence of capability housed
in more than a dozen U.S. agencies that make up the CT enterprise. Our
whole-of-Government CT architecture must work across the spectrum of
the threat landscape to quickly identify new threats and overcome
enduring challenges that might allow space for terrorists to advance
attacks. Our role in continuously evaluating and assessing the
worldwide terrorist threat enables the CT community to focus its
efforts on keeping the United States safe from the myriad terrorist
threats we face.
Vital to our CT efforts are intelligence collection tools,
especially Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act,
which provides key indications, warnings, and international terrorist
disruptions to the entire CT enterprise, and has done so since its
inception in 2008. We regularly leverage the essential authority of
Section 702 to provide insight on foreign terrorists and their networks
overseas. NCTC's Section 702 program focuses on reviewing
communications by known and suspected terrorists, conducting
international terrorist network development, and garnering insight into
international terrorist operations. One of the most important questions
for NCTC to determine is whether international terrorists could gain
access to and pose a threat to the homeland. Section 702 is essential
for our ability to do that, and without it, the United States and the
world will be less safe.
It is clear that the significant CT pressure brought to bear
against terrorist groups over the last two decades, along with
investment in effective CT defenses here at home, has resulted in a
diminished threat to the United States homeland. As evidenced by the
events of the past month, however, our country must preserve CT
fundamentals--such as collection, warning, analysis, disruption,
information sharing, and key partnerships--to ensure constant
vigilance.
I would like to end with thanks to the professionals of the
intelligence, diplomatic, military, and law enforcement communities,
whose dedication to the CT mission has done so much to protect this
country from persistent terrorist adversaries. It is a community the
United States has relied upon time and again, and today is no
exception. I am honored to be part of the CT enterprise and to work on
behalf of the American people.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Director Abizaid. Members will
be recognized by order of seniority for their 5 minutes of
questioning. An additional round of questioning may be called
after all the Members have been recognized. I want to also
acknowledge the many Members on this committee, on both sides
of the aisle, who have been fighting the terrorist attack and
their service in the United States military. So those who are
veterans here who have been doing that, and those in the
Government service doing that before you came to Congress,
thank you for your service. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes of questioning.
Chairman Green. Director Wray, since January 2021,
approximately 1.8 million illegal alien gotaways have evaded
Border Patrol and entered our country. This doesn't even
account for the unknown gotaways which former Border Patrol
Chief Raul Ortiz testified before this committee could be about
20 percent of that number, meaning the real number of gotaways
is well over 2 million. Can the FBI guarantee the American
people that known or suspected terrorists, including any from
Hamas or other terror groups, are not amongst those gotaways?
Mr. Wray. Well, certainly the group of people that you're
talking about are a source of great concern for us. That's why
we are aggressively using all 56 of our joint terrorism task
forces.
Chairman Green. But there is really no way for you to
guarantee that Hamas isn't in those.
Mr. Wray. Well, again, as you say, there's the unknown
unknown and the known unknown.
Chairman Green. Right.
Mr. Wray. But what I can tell you is that our 56 joint
terrorism task forces are working their tails off to make sure
that they suss out and identify potential terrorist suspects,
whether they're on the watch list or not.
Chairman Green. Do you think that number, that increased
number increases the threat to the American citizens?
Mr. Wray. I think any time you have a group of people in
the United States that we don't know nearly enough about, that
is a source of concern for us from a perspective in our lane of
protecting Americans here inside----
Chairman Green. So, wording it maybe another way, if it
were lower, if that number were lower and the border wasn't as
open as it is, and we would be safer?
Mr. Wray. I think greater fidelity about who's coming in
this country and how they're getting in is essential----
Chairman Green. Yes.
Mr. Wray [continuing]. To making sure we protect Americans
from all sorts of threats, including a potential terrorist
attack.
Chairman Green. Yes, I do, too. Director Wray, since taking
office, we have had, with the policies that are implemented at
the border, 6.5 million Southwest Border encounters and a total
of 7.8 million Nation-wide. Does it concern the FBI that the
policies of this administration and the Department of Homeland
Security are allowing this unprecedented number of unknown and
unvetted people into the country? I know it is a rewording of
the previous question but go ahead and answer.
Mr. Wray. Well, again, I want to stay in my lane. When it
comes to physical security, border security, I want to defer to
Department of Homeland Security on that.
Chairman Green. But that----
Mr. Wray. I----
Chairman Green [continuing]. That increased number is
increasing the challenge before you and the FBI, right?
Mr. Wray. But certainly I can tell you that we have seen an
increase in the number of so-called KSTs attempting to cross in
the last 5 years. We are concerned not just about the people
who are watch-listed----
Chairman Green. Well, why do you----
Mr. Wray [continuing]. But about those who could have
gotten in some other way and about whom you may not have
sufficient information at the time they came in to identify
them as a source of concern.
Chairman Green. Those individuals, that watch list that we
talk about, why do you think in the 4 years before this, there
were only 11, and suddenly there are 294 in the past few years?
Why do you think that is so?
Mr. Wray. I can't really speak to, you know, to that issue.
It's not in my lane. I can tell you that the threats that come
from the other side of the border are very much consuming all
56 of our field offices, not just in the border States. That's
why I made the point first there were a couple of other----
Chairman Green. I agree.
Mr. Wray. Sure, yes.
Chairman Green. If I heard you correctly, what you just
said is every State in the country is a border State now. Is
that what you just said?
Mr. Wray. Well, I didn't put it quite that way.
Chairman Green. I mean the threats to every State.
Mr. Wray. But the threats that come from the other side of
the border are affecting every State.
Chairman Green. Absolutely----
Mr. Wray. Yes.
Chairman Green [continuing]. One hundred percent. We can
ask the Governor of Massachusetts. She is screaming at the top
of her lungs about the situation at the Southwest Border.
Your boss, the Attorney General, came in and said to us
that it was very clear the cartel strategy was to take
advantage of the current policies, overwhelm the crossing
sites, and then use the, you know, Border Patrol agents being
overwhelmed by that group to then bypass. Do you have any
reason to disagree with him that that is the cartel strategy?
Mr. Wray. I wouldn't have any reason to disagree with the
Attorney General on that.
Chairman Green. Do you find it interesting that within 2
months after that, Secretary Mayorkas came in and said he was
unaware of that cartel strategy? Do you find that interesting?
Mr. Wray. I am not familiar with Secretary Mayorkas's
testimony.
Chairman Green. That testimony.
Mr. Wray. No, sir.
Chairman Green. Yes. He came into us and told us that he
was totally unaware of that testimony, that that was the cartel
strategy. Despite your boss and the Senate clearly recognizing
that it is.
Let me just say this in the few seconds I have left. I
would like to ask each of you to take back to the people who
work for you that despite our political differences on this
dais, we deeply appreciate the men and women who are manning
their posts and doing the best they can for this country. As
someone who went down range and, you know, was in a helicopter
that had bullet holes ripping through the bottom, you know,
bullets ripping through the bottom of it, I understand the
courage that it takes to do the jobs that you and your people
do. So, I want to make sure I ask each of you, despite our
political differences, to take this message back. We are deeply
appreciative of the men and women who man their posts for this
country's safety. With that, I yield to the Ranking Member.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. Let me paraphrase what
the Chairman just said. While we praise our men and women, when
the opportunity comes to put the money where the praises are,
Democrats on this committee have consistently supported the
funding of DHS's budget. We have consistently funded the FBI's
budget and our intelligence-gathering agencies because we
understand that those men and women who put their lives on the
line deserve all the resources.
Now taking from that, we have not, on the Democratic side,
ever voted against one of your budgets. We understand it. We
can differ on the policy, but we don't differ on the fact that
you need the investment. There are some Members of this
committee who have even advocated defunding the FBI. Now, I
can't in my wildest dreams imagine if we had an impotent FBI,
where that would put us. Director Wray, if those advocates who
wanted to defund the FBI in this country, can you give us a
snapshot of what that defunding would mean for the security of
the homeland?
Mr. Wray. Well, I mean, the FBI, in the last year, for
example, has arrested over 18,000 violent criminals. That's
about 50 per day. So, defunding the FBI would mean that many
more violent criminals out on the streets terrorizing
neighborhoods. We have, as I said in my opening statement,
about 2,000 active investigations into Chinese economic
espionage. Restricting our funding would be a gift to the
Chinese Communist Party. The FBI has about 380 investigations
into cartel leadership. Lifting our funding means more power to
the cartels.
The FBI has investigations into 100 different ransomware
variants, and each one of those has scores of victims. Limiting
our funding means more hacks, more intrusions, more damage to
critical infrastructure. China alone has the biggest hacking
program in the world by far. They're not slowing down. They're
not restricting their funding.
So, from our perspective, it's not just about the
hardworking career professionals of the FBI and their families
and their kids that would be affected. More importantly, it's
State and local law enforcement who are counting on us more and
more. More importantly than that, the American people that
we're trying to protect from gangs, the Chinese Government,
cyber hackers, cartels, child predators, et cetera.
Mr. Thompson. Ms. Abizaid, can you say what a resource
deficit would mean for your agency?
Ms. Abizaid. Yes. Thank you very much. I mean, the National
Counterterrorism Center has a couple of important missions.
We're the primary center for the U.S. Government to analyze and
assess the foreign terrorist threat. We work on screening and
vetting of individuals that are trying to enter the country. We
support DHS and FBI in that mission with the intelligence
database of known and suspected terrorists. We do a lot of work
across State, local, Tribal, territorial, and Federal
authorities to do the kind of information sharing that's
absolutely essential, especially in a dynamic threat
environment like we have today, to keep everyone informed and
armed with the information they need to protect against exactly
the kinds of threats that we've outlined here for you today.
So, decreased funding for the National Counterterrorism
Center, decreased funding for any piece of the overall CT
architecture that works collaboratively together has an impact
on our ability to stay ready against the terrorist threat.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. Secretary Mayorkas, there is a
supplemental proposal being put forth by the administration.
Can you share with us what that means for DHS?
Secretary Mayorkas. Ranking Member Thompson, that
supplemental is dedicated to our critical mission of securing
our border and also battling the scourge of fentanyl. Those
funds are needed for personnel, technology, facilities, and
additional support resources critically needed to advance our
mission. We are under-resourced and have been perennially.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize the
gentleman from Texas, the Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs
Committee, Mr. McCaul.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, let me
say my thanks to all three of you, your employees who work so
hard to protect this country. Having served at the Department
of Justice for many years and the chief of counterterrorism and
national security, I think you don't hear that very often these
days. Also, I agree with you, director, that 702 FISA is a
critical element to securing and protecting Americans. I will
fight very hard to get that reauthorized.
Moving forward, Director Wray, we have had over, about 7.5
million encounters at the Southern Border. We have had 7,000
special interest aliens. We have had nearly 200 on the terror
watch list. When I chaired this committee, that was the first,
and when I got the briefings, the first question I ever asked
was, how many SIAs, how many on the terror watch list? Two
hundred is alarming to me. Does that give you concern?
Mr. Wray. Certainly, the numbers give us concern. I think
it's important, though, in some ways to realize that numbers
alone don't even really tell the problem. We've all seen how
much damage just a small number of foreign terrorists could
cause. I mean, sometimes people, as crazy as it sounds, tend to
forget that it was 19 people who killed 3,000 people on 9/11.
Mr. McCaul. That was the next point I was going to make. It
only took 19 to create 9/11. That is alarming. I just got back
from Israel. I saw the Hamas videos. It is very disturbing. I
know you have testified previously that Hamas could either
inspire attacks or maybe get into the country. The problem is
we don't know who these 200 people are. To your point, how many
others got in that we don't even know about. Why won't either
you or the Secretary provide us with the full, complete,
accurate information, as I used to get when I was Chair of this
committee, who are these 200 individuals? Who are they? Is
Hamas on the list? We know the SIAs include countries like
Iran, Lebanon, and Iraq. That gives me great pause. Will you
provide that to this committee?
Mr. Wray. Well, we will certainly continue to engage with
the committee in closed session with numbers and information.
As you know from your past experience with this issue, for one
thing, the numbers themselves change literally moment to
moment. So, it's important for us to be careful to be accurate
and timely with the information we've got, but then I think the
second----
Mr. McCaul. You know, and it could be in a Classified
setting. That is how they used to do it when I was Chair of
this committee. I don't have that information. My Governor in
the State of Texas who has to deal with this problem on a daily
basis, cannot get this information. You know, I understand
before 9/11, we had walls up, you know, sharing information,
connecting the dots, but this is, you know, 2023. I mean, it
seems to me we should be able to share that information.
Mr. Wray. Well, I'm happy to have my staff follow up. I
know we've had a lot of engagements with the Hill over
different numbers and populations of individuals, and so I
guess I'd have to circle back to figure out exactly what
happened here and what hasn't.
Mr. McCaul. I would like, as an American and a Texan, I
would kind-of like to know personally. Mr. Secretary, you know,
there was an Austin SWAT officer killed in my home town who was
on the terror watch list. The SWAT officer murdered by someone
on the terror watch list, and the family involved was Mohammed
Nasser. Do you have any information about this?
Secretary Mayorkas. Mr. Chairman, we would be pleased to
provide you with whatever information we have in the
appropriate setting.
Mr. McCaul. Please do. Let me just say 18 U.S.C. Section
2(a) states whoever commits an offense against the United
States or aids, and abets, counsels, command, induces, or
procures its commission, is punishable as the principal. Human
trafficking, a criminal enterprise in this country now, with
people with no legal status, an entire population 7 times over,
to be killed by fentanyl, 12 billion total, 300,000 people dead
due to fentanyl. Sir, I would argue that you have been aiding
and abetting the deaths and the criminal enterprise that has
occurred in this Nation. I see my time. Well, I got 15 seconds.
Chairman Green. No, you don't.
Mr. McCaul. Oh, I am 15 seconds over.
Chairman Green. You are over.
Mr. McCaul. I would still like to go on, but I think I have
made my point.
Chairman Green. It is going the other way. The gentleman
yields. I now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Payne, for his 5 minutes questioning.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, just for
informational purposes, you know, there are Americans on a
terror watch list as well. So, you know, I would suggest we
take in all the information with respect to that. I want to
thank the witnesses for making themselves available today.
Director Wray, in 2021, more than 26,000 Americans lost
their lives by homicide, close to 21,000 of which were
committed with a firearm. The same year, 61 of 73 law
enforcement officers who died from felonious assault were
killed by firearms. While we are seeing more States,
specifically reliably Republican-voting States adopt more
permissive gun laws, we are also seeing a rise in anti-
Government violent extremists targeting law enforcement. How
dangerous is it to be in law enforcement right now under these
circumstances, and how do we rectify the threat to the men and
women of law enforcement?
Mr. Wray. Well, certainly this is a dangerous time for law
enforcement. As you mentioned, 2021 was the deadliest year for
law enforcement, I think, since 9/11. This year, the pace is
awfully close to what 2021 is. I say that with a level of
personal familiarity with it. In 2021, we had two of our agents
killed in Florida attempting to execute a search related to a
child exploitation case, and a task force officer of ours in
Indiana gunned down right outside of our offices. Every time,
one of the things I decided I was going to do when I took this
job now, 6\1/2\ years ago, was every time an officer is shot
and killed in the line of duty anywhere in the country, I call
the chief or the sheriff myself and talk to him and express my
condolences on behalf of the FBI. I have a little write-up on
the family, a photo of the fallen officer, and I have made
something like 350 of those calls.
You know, being in law enforcement is dangerous enough.
What it shouldn't be is wearing a badge making you a target. We
are seeing way too much of that in today's America.
Mr. Payne. OK. Let's see. Can you explain why 60 percent of
guns used in violent crimes in New Jersey, the State I
represent and have lived in all my life, come from
Pennsylvania, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Georgia, and Florida? What do those States have in common that
make them dangerous exporters of criminal firearms?
Mr. Wray. I'm not sure I could speak to the specific
circumstances of each of those States. Certainly, straw
purchases and gun trafficking is an ingredient that drives the
violent crime problem that we have in this country. It's one of
many things that drives that problem.
Mr. Payne. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I would like to yield
the final minute of my time to Mr. Goldman. I thank the
gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Goldman. I thank the gentleman for yielding. I asked to
yield just to respond to something that my distinguished
colleague from Texas just said, who I know has served for a
long time as a Federal prosecutor, as have I, and as has
Secretary Mayorkas. I think it is incredibly dangerous to
accuse Secretary Mayorkas of aiding and abetting crimes. As you
well know, you need to have the intent to do that. It is clear
that whether you disagree or not with Secretary Mayorkas's
approach to dealing with the border, that to accuse him of
aiding and abetting crime is very serious and is, I think,
unwarranted in this situation.
Mr. McCaul. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Goldman. Yes.
Mr. McCaul. Look, I live in a border State, you don't. I
have dealt with this issue for 25 years. I have never seen it
this bad. It is his dereliction of duty that has created this
problem in the United States. Seven million people, how are we
going to deal with that? No legal status, human trafficking,
fentanyl. Look, we will disagree on this one, but I have to say
that the change of policy has created this problem, and he
knows better. He was U.S. attorney in Los Angeles, like you
were. He knows better.
Mr. Goldman. Will you yield for 1 second?
Mr. McCaul. I yield back.
Chairman Green. Actually, the time has expired, so if
someone else wants to yield to these gentlemen, you certainly
may do that. But the time has expired, and we would like to
continue on so that everyone gets their opportunity. But I do
appreciate the dialog.
I believe now we are with Mr. Higgins, the gentleman from
Louisiana. Sir, you are recognized for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
ultimately as we consider threats to the homeland, in our
annual hearing on that topic with leading members of the
Executive branch before us, it is important to reflect upon the
simple fact that ultimately Americans are quite capable of
defending our own soil, our own cultures, and communities
against foreign invasion or against armed oppression from
within. However, it is far more threatening to our republic if
our own Government facilitates criminal invasion. It is
incredibly threatening to our citizenry if our Government's
highest levels of law enforcement coordinate organized
campaigns of weaponized oppression, harassment, investigation,
arrest, and prosecution, and imprisonment of free Americans.
That, Mr. Chairman, is the primary threat our homeland indeed
faces today.
Secretary Mayorkas, I have noted you as a worthy adversary,
sir, for 2\1/2\ years. But my issue is not with you today. I am
done with you. I have completed my investigative work. It is
quite extensive. I have filed my articles of impeachment
against you. I have provided my investigative work to the
appropriate committee. So, let me just say that my articles
have been filed, and my time with you is done.
Director Wray, last year, you might recall, sir, our
exchange regarding the FBI's involvement on January 6 and
prior. I am happy to jog your memory. To quote, according to
the record, I asked you, ``did you have confidential human
sources dressed as Trump supporters positioned inside the
Capitol on January 6, prior to the doors being open?'' You
responded, and I quote again, ``I have to be very careful of
what I say.'' To which I said, it should be a no. Can you not
tell the American people no, we did not have confidential human
sources dressed as Trump supporters positioned inside the
Capitol on January 6?
A year has passed. We sit here again a year later. We, the
people still do not have a definitive answer from you or anyone
else in the Biden administration regarding the FBI presence and
participation in the months leading up to the November
election, and in the weeks and days prior to January 6, and on
January 6 here in the District of Columbia. We can't get a
straight answer, although we have a tremendous amount of
evidence harvested and reviewed over the course of the last
year, which you will see.
In September, Steven D'Antuono, formerly in charge of the
FBI's field office in Washington, DC, testified to the House
Judiciary Committee that he was aware that FBI informants would
attend the Stop the Steal rally thrown on January 6. You
confirm that the FBI had confidential human sources at the Stop
the Steal rally on January 6 here in the District of Columbia,
sir?
Mr. Wray. Congressman, as we've discussed before, I am not
going to get into where we have or have not used confidential
human sources. But what I can tell you----
Mr. Higgins. OK. We will move on.
Mr. Wray [continuing]. You asked for a definitive answer--
--
Mr. Higgins. We will move on. It is my time.
Mr. Wray. Yes.
Mr. Higgins. You said no, you are not going to answer. That
is cool, we are watching.
Mr. Wray. Mr. Chairman, may I----
Mr. Higgins. Your moment----
Mr. Wray [continuing]. Answer the question?
Mr. Higgins. Your moment will come. This is my time.
Earlier this year, an FBI informant who is reported to have,
quote, his, quote, under oath, ``marched to the U.S. Capitol
with fellow Proud Boys members on January 6.'' He said he was
communicating with his FBI handler while people were entering
the U.S. Capitol. Can you confirm that the FBI had that sort of
engagement with your own agents embedded with into the crowd on
January 6?
Mr. Wray. If you are asking whether the violence at the
Capitol on January 6 was part of some operation orchestrated by
FBI sources and/or agents, the answer is emphatically not----
Mr. Higgins. You are saying no?
Mr. Wray. No.
Mr. Higgins. You are saying no, OK.
Mr. Wray. Not violence orchestrated by----
Mr. Higgins. Let's move on.
Mr. Wray [continuing]. FBI sources or agents.
Mr. Higgins. Are you familiar with, you know what a ghost
vehicle is, director? The director of the FBI certainly should.
You know what a ghost bus is?
Mr. Wray. A ghost bus?
Mr. Higgins. Ghost bus.
Mr. Wray. I am not sure I've used that term before.
Mr. Higgins. OK. Well, it is pretty common in law
enforcement. It is a vehicle that is used for secret purposes.
It is painted over. These two buses in the middle here, they
were the first to arrive at Union Station on January 6, 0500. I
have all this evidence. I am showing you the tip of this
iceberg.
Mr. Ivey. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Higgins. These two buses----
Mr. Ivey. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. Are painted completely white.
Mr. Ivey. Point of order.
Chairman Green. Point of order, sure.
Mr. Ivey. Just run over the time.
Chairman Green. I understand. But you will recall that Ms.
Jackson Lee's been allowed to go 2 minutes before. I have been
very fair in letting people finish their questioning throughout
my tenure as Chairman, and I will continue to be fair on that
regard. But I will make a note to the Members, if you could
stay as close within your time as possible, we have a lot of
people that want to ask these gentlemen questions. So, with
that, the gentleman yields.
But your point, I have been very fair in this, Mr. Ivey,
with everybody on this side of the aisle, just as much as----
Mr. Ivey. I don't think I accused you of being unfair, Mr.
Chairman. Just a point of order.
Chairman Green. You are making a point. OK. Thank you. I
now recognize Mr. Correa----
Mr. Higgins. May I close this statement, Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Green. No, I think your time is expired, Mr.
Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. I note that other Members across the aisle
have been granted time, and I object to my question being
closed. This is a very significant hearing, Mr. Chairman. These
buses are nefarious in nature and were filled with FBI
informants dressed as Trump supporters----
Chairman Green. You----
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. And deployed into our Capitol on
January 6.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Higgins. Your day is coming, Mr. Wray.
Chairman Green. You made your point, Mr. Higgins. I now
recognize Mr. Correa of California----
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman----
Chairman Green [continuing]. For his 5 minutes questioning.
Mr. Thompson. You are the Chairman, but----
Chairman Green. The gentleman could yield to you, Mr.
Ranking Member, if he wants. You have been recognized, Mr.
Correa.
Mr. Correa. I will yield to----
Chairman Green. OK.
Mr. Thompson. Just----
Mr. Correa [continuing]. The Ranking Member.
Mr. Thompson. The rules of the committee says that once the
Chair calls the time, it is done. So, I mean, those are the
rules of the committee.
Chairman Green. Thanks for pointing that out, Mr. Ranking
Member. I think he yields to you, Mr. Correa.
Mr. Correa. Chairman, I want to thank you very much for
holding this hearing. I especially want to thank the witnesses
today in front of us. Mr. Mayorkas, Mr. Wray, and Ms. Abizaid,
you have got a difficult task in this country today. The title
of this committee is Worldwide Threats of the Homeland
Security. You know, first of all, you have got the challenge of
finding a needle in a haystack.
Domestic terrorism, I have got a chart here from the ADL
that shows the number of incidences, national level. You have
got to play defense here in the United States, as well as
defense overseas. I agree with my colleague, Mr. Mike McCaul,
that things have never been so bad. We are right, we are coming
out of COVID right now. We have got countries, essentially
failed economies, failed democracies around the world,
worldwide refugee movement.
On top of that I understand, Mr. Wray, that you essentially
declared possible heightened state of alert for the country. Is
that correct? Something of this sort that we just got to watch
the things that are going on right now?
Mr. Wray. I've testified and I feel very strongly that we
are in a heightened threat environment.
Mr. Correa. I couldn't agree with you more. We have got,
you know, two wars going on, at least areas of conflict around
the world. I am here really to ask, how can we help you do your
job better? I am not going to be here to ask for an impeachment
or hold you accountable. I am here to make sure that you are
able to hold the line 100 percent.
We can't afford to have another Uvalde in our country. We
can't afford to have another 9/11. So, I am here really to
listen to what it is, what resources do you need to do your
job? I am going to start out with Mr. Mayorkas. Do you need
more or less analysts? You know, this is a big job. How do you
find a needle in a haystack? Do you need more analysts or less
at the Homeland Security? Can that help?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we have submitted a
request for supplemental funding. We need additional personnel,
resources to include facilities, technology, the men and women
of the Department----
Mr. Correa. And we need technology, sir, we need good
intel. We need to make sure that we are able to work with our
allies, our law enforcement, State, local, Federal
coordination. That is why Homeland Security was created,
because of the silos that existed before 9/11. Coordinate good
intel to make sure you are able to do your job.
CBP One, do you get information off of that? Do you let
people just into the country, or do you take their information?
What kind of data do you require for CBP to work?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, CBP One is a process that
we employ that enables us to screen and vet individuals before
they arrive at the border to enable us to make a determination
whether or not they should be allowed in.
Mr. Correa. Do you ask for biometric information? What is
it exactly that you collect there to make sure that the folks
that are applying are essentially vetted?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we confirm identity and we
screen and vet them to make sure that they do not pose either a
public safety threat or a threat to our national security.
Mr. Correa. Thank you. Director Wray, what is it that we
can do as Congress to help you make sure that you do your job
better? Make sure that you 100 percent, nobody scores on us?
Mr. Wray. Well, Congressman, I appreciate the question.
Certainly, the budget request that we've submitted, both in the
2024 budget itself, but also the supplemental, are all things
we desperately need. Second, reauthorize 702 in a form where we
can actually use it to protect Americans here from foreign
threats. Third, Secretary Mayorkas highlighted, which I think
can't be highlighted enough, the need to reauthorize the
counter-UAS authority, which is going to expire at the end of
this week if something isn't done. That is authority that if
it's gone, no one, not DHS, not FBI, no one here can protect
Americans from that threat. So, those are a few of the things
that would be very important from the FBI's perspective.
Mr. Correa. Let me say that I appreciate the three of you
being here today, because we need to make sure that the public
out there on Main Street understands the good work you are
doing. It may be controversial, but that is part of the
democratic system, but you are doing a good job protecting our
families back home. I just want to make sure people understand
that we need to work as a team to make sure the job gets done.
Ma'am, any thoughts on what resources you need to do your job?
Ms. Abizaid. I would associate myself with my colleagues'
comments here. FISA 702 authority is absolutely essential for
the counterterrorism mission. To your point about working as a
team, the counterterrorism architecture that we've built across
the intelligence community, law enforcement community, defense,
diplomatic, and homeland security, professional community,
needs to be sustained and sustaining that at the levels we
requested. It would be incredibly helpful.
Mr. Correa. Thank you. Mr. Chair, I yield.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize the
Vice Chair of the committee, the gentleman from Mississippi,
Mr. Guest, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To all our panelists,
thank you for being here today, particularly in the threat
environment that we face. Director Wray, you state in your
report that the threats we face as a Nation have never been
greater. I agree completely with that.
Secretary Mayorkas, you also talk about the threats in your
report, where you say terrorist threats in the United States
remained heightened. Hamas attacks on Israel, along with other
events, have sharpened the focus of potential attacks. You go
on later to say the increased prospects for violence, you talk
about the increased prospects for violence in the United
States. So, at a time in which we face increased threats
domestically, where we see internationally, events continue to
seem to spiral out of control, I want to talk specifically
about the events that are transpiring along our Southwest
Border.
Mr. Secretary Mayorkas, I have behind me a chart that has
the encounters of CBP. This was taken off of the CBP website
and just kind-of want to walk through some of the information
contained there. Based upon the research that I have done, it
appears since the President took office, since you became the
chairman of Homeland Security, that there has been roughly 7.4
million encounters along our Southwest Border. If you were to
put all those people in one geographic area, that would
represent the seventh-largest State in the United States
between Arizona and Tennessee.
We see that the last month prior to you taking office that
there were 95,000 encounters along the Southwest Border. We see
that the numbers reported here by your Department, September
2023, the last reporting numbers show that that number has
spiked now to 341 percent, an increase of almost 250 percent.
We know that as part of the problem, the President
appointed the Vice President to be the border czar to help try
to stop the flow of illegal immigration from Mexico and Central
America. That appointment was made in March 2021. In March
2021, the end of the month, there was reported 192 encounters.
Now we know, again, the number of encounters are over 341,000.
So, under her watch, as border czar, we see that the increase
is 75 percent.
So, the numbers have grown exponentially under your and the
Vice President's leadership. One of my questions to you is, do
you look at the daily encounter numbers that are put out by
your Department? Is that something, a statistic that you look
at on a regular basis?
Secretary Mayorkas. Vice Chairman Guest it is, in fact. The
numbers about which you speak are reflective not only of a
challenge at our Southwest Border, but rather a challenge of
migration throughout our entire hemisphere and around the
world.
Mr. Guest. I understand that. So, you do look at the
numbers. You do look at the daily reporting numbers. I want to
harken back to an interview in 2019 at that time with current--
excuse me--former Secretary of Homeland Security Jay Johnson,
during the Trump administration, as we were seeing 4,000
immigrants a day coming across the border at that time. The
former director of Homeland Security, in an interview with
MSNBC, said that, and he said, my staff would tell you that if
the number of daily apprehensions was under 1,000 the day
before, that was a relative good number, and if it was above
1,000, it was a relative bad number, and I was going to be in a
bad mood that day. He also went on to say on Thursday, and
again, this was in March 2019 when Donald Trump was President,
there were 4,000 apprehensions. I know that if 1,000 overwhelms
the system, I can't begin to imagine what 4,000 a day truly
looks like. We are in a crisis.
So, my question to you, if Secretary Johnson said 1,000
immigrants a day when he was in the position that you sit, if
that was a bad day, and if 4,000 a day was a crisis, what is a
bad day for you, Secretary Mayorkas? Because we see now that
the numbers have exploded. There are no longer 1,000 a day.
They are not even 4,000 a day when this article was written.
They are over 11,000 a day. So, in the last 20 seconds, what
number to you represents a bad day when we see the number of
apprehensions increase dramatically? So, I will give you the
remainder of my time to answer the question and I will yield
back.
Secretary Mayorkas. Vice Chairman Guest we do not minimize
the significance of the challenge at the Southwest Border, and
we are intensely focused on it.
Mr. Guest. Is there a number? Would you like to give a
number? I asked for a number. That was my question. What number
to you represents a bad day? Are you refusing to answer the
question?
Secretary Mayorkas. Vice Chairman Guest, as I said, we do
not minimize the significance of the challenge at the Southwest
Border.
Mr. Guest. That wasn't my question, Mr. Mayorkas. I asked a
simple question, give me a number. You are filibustering and
you are refusing to answer the question. What is that number?
Secretary Mayorkas. I have answered your question, Vice
Chairman.
Mr. Guest. No, you haven't, Mr. Mayorkas. You have not
answered the question.
Mr. Ivey. I can do, I can do hand signals, at this point,
right?
Mr. Guest. Mr. Ivey, if you let him answer the question, or
maybe if you would like to answer for him, because clearly, he
does not intend to answer my question.
Mr. Ivey. I think it is, you know, you have taken----
Mr. Guest. Is it not a fair question?
Mr. Ivey. I am just saying you are over your time, that is
all.
Chairman Green. We don't need any more points about over
the time, OK? As I just said to you, I think it was just last
week I let Mr. Correa vote after we had gaveled out. I am
gracious here, and I will be gracious to both sides of the
aisle.
Mr. Guest. Mr. Chairman, I would ask you----
Chairman Green. So, I don't want any more interruptions
about time being expired, please. Thank you.
Mr. Guest. Mr. Chairman, I would ask you----
Chairman Green. You----
Mr. Guest [continuing]. To direct the witness----
Chairman Green. The----
Mr. Guest [continuing]. To answer the question.
Chairman Green. Do you have a number?
Secretary Mayorkas. I have answered it to the best of my
ability, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. Clearly. I now recognize----
Mr. Ivey. Well, Mr. Chairman, if----
Chairman Green [continuing]. Mr. Carter.
Mr. Ivey. Mr. Chairman, if I might?
Chairman Green. Point of order?
Mr. Ivey. I am just asking, are you basically suspending
that rule or what is----
Chairman Green. Look, I have since the beginning, and this
is the last time I am going to answer this question today, Mr.
Ivey, allowed people to continue a question train of thought
that extends outside their time. I have done that on both sides
of the aisle. I am not going to articulate or waste any more of
these gentlemen and this gentlelady's time defining the policy
as I have executed it since the beginning of my chairmanship.
Mr. Ivey. Well----
Chairman Green. I think now the next person we will
recognize----
Mr. Ivey [continuing]. Let me say this Mr. Chairman----
Chairman Green [continuing]. You are not recognized, Mr.
Ivey.
Mr. Ivey. Well, I am sorry, but if----
Chairman Green. You are not recognized. You are not
recognized.
Mr. Ivey. You are not following the rules that we voted
on----
Chairman Green. Point of order.
Mr. Ivey [continuing]. And accepted at the beginning.
Chairman Green. The Ranking Member is recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman, we adopted a set of rules and
I----
Chairman Green. OK.
Mr. Thompson [continuing]. Try not to get involved.
Chairman Green. Yes, go ahead.
Mr. Thompson. I have to explain my point of order.
Chairman Green. Go ahead.
Mr. Thompson. The rules clearly specify everything that is
being raised.
Chairman Green. I have never, once Mr. Ranking Member----
Mr. Thompson. I have not----
Chairman Green [continuing]. Heard----
Mr. Thompson [continuing]. Not completed----
Chairman Green. Finish your thought.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. So, I am saying that we adopted
the rules on how we conduct business, and any time a Member
raises the question is consistent with the rules. Now, if that
becomes a problem, then I think we have to modify our rules
because that is how we operate. That is what congresses are
required to do. That is what committees are required to do. For
people to ignore the rules is inconsistent with the rule. So, I
am just saying to you, follow the rules that we adopt.
Chairman Green. We are going to continue the policy as I
have been doing it since I have been the Chairman. OK. If you
are in the midst of a thought, we are going to let you go past
your time. No. 2, I haven't heard anyone raise an issue on the
left when I have allowed people on the left to go over time.
Not once, Mr. Ivey, have you said when one of your Members has
gone over 5 minutes, the person's time is up. Fascinating to me
that you are only doing it when it is on this side of the
aisle.
Mr. Ivey. If I might have a chance----
Chairman Green. Please.
Mr. Ivey [continuing]. To be heard.
Chairman Green. Yes.
Mr. Ivey. All I am saying is that under the rules, we have
a right to raise a point of order when somebody goes over the
time. You have used your discretion to permit additional
questioning if you want to, but to say I can never raise a
point of order that is consistent with the rules, doesn't make
any sense. I mean, it is just a clear violation of the rules
that were adopted. By the way, the rules were adopted, I don't
think they were adopted unanimously. There was a Republican
decision to adopt these rules. So, these are your rules.
Chairman Green. No doubt about it. But the point I am
making is it is intriguing to me that we are consuming this
time over this issue, while I have never once heard you raise
the issue when I have allowed Ms. Jackson Lee to go 2 minutes
over.
Mr. Ivey. I have never objected----
Chairman Green. But today it is an issue in the midst of a
very important hearing.
Mr. Ivey. Anybody can raise a point of order----
Chairman Green. You are absolutely correct.
Mr. Ivey [continuing]. On the time when they want to.
Chairman Green. You are absolutely correct.
Mr. Ivey. I am not blocking anyone from doing that. But I
think I have the right.
Chairman Green. You do. You do.
Mr. Ivey. I request the right to preserve that, to raise
the point of order when there is an obvious violation.
Chairman Green. It is an excellent point. Now can we move
on? Thank you.
Mr. Ivey. As long as you give me the authority to put
that----
Chairman Green [continuing]. Mr. Bishop or no, Mr. Carter,
the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Emergency Management,
the gentleman from Louisiana is recognized.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses for joining us today. I am heartbroken by the
innocent lives that have been lost and civilians being targeted
by hateful terrorist groups like Hamas. This is outrageous and
inevitably leads to tragic consequences. Condemning these
atrocities and protecting innocent lives at all costs is
pivotal. Our discussion on worldwide threats is important for
the American people so we can further address such issues void
of partisan brinkmanship. We all must do better.
Director Wray, our Nation's HBCUs produce some of the
brightest who enter our ever-growing work force. Repeated
threats to these institutions have caused wide-spread
disruption on campuses by shutting down classes and campus
activity. Mr. Wray, could you please briefly update us on the
FBI's activity and things that you are actively doing to
monitor and combat such events in the future?
Mr. Wray. Well, thank you, Congressman. Certainly, the
threats that we saw against HBCUs were appalling. There is
absolutely no excuse for putting campuses, students, faculty,
staff in a position where they can't go about their lives at
school in fear. So, we have actively been investigating the
threats as they have come in. As you know, there was an arrest
related to some of the threats, involved a juvenile who was
responsible for a number of the threats.
I think, more importantly, we've doubled down on our
engagement with HBCUs. I've personally engaged with a number of
HBCU law enforcement heads. We have an increased partnership
with campus law enforcement over the last 2 years. That's, you
know, including in this recent threat environment, we're very
careful to include campus law enforcement in all of our law
enforcement partner calls. We have campus liaison officers, in
effect, appointed in each one of our field offices to focus
specifically on engagement with academia. So that's a big part
of it. It's not just the investigations and the analysis, but
also the outreach.
Mr. Carter. How has that been ramped up with the recent
hate speak for Muslims and Jewish brothers and sisters and
Palestinians? We see this overboiling because of what is
happening in the Middle East, spreading and boiling into the
college campus environment, as well as just our general
communities. We know that Hamas is the true threat. But because
of these risks, we are seeing this bleed over into a level of
hatred for innocent people who have nothing to do with Hamas.
Mr. Wray. Well, certainly we are in an environment where
the number of tips and threats that are being reported to us
have gone up significantly since October 7. We were already, as
I testified earlier, already in an elevated threat environment
even before October 7, and it's gone to a whole other level
since October 7.
The biggest chunk of the threats that have been reported
into us by a good margin are threats to the Jewish community,
synagogues, Jewish prominent officials, things like that. We
also have a large number of tips and leads related specifically
to Hamas and radicalization and recruitment. We do also have
some threats to Muslim Americans that have also been called in.
So, we are urgently running down every tip and lead we get and
trying to mitigate them and engaging. I think the thing that
distinguishes the post-October 7 environment even more than the
pre-October 7 environment, one of the things that distinguishes
it is how different----
Mr. Carter. Director, I don't want to cut you off.
Mr. Wray. Yes.
Mr. Carter. You have got an important job. We appreciate
the hard work that you and the men and women of your department
do. Very quickly, Secretary Mayorkas, the Countering Weapons of
Mass Destruction, CWMD Office, will sunset. You acknowledged
this in your opening remarks, if Congress does not act. I
understand that there are a few vehicles which you are working
on to ensure that CWMD continues to operate.
As you know, last night we passed a temporary measure in
the CR that will extend the sunset through February 2024. If
this is not made permanent, if we are not able to move forward
with a permanent measure, how does that impact your ability to
protect American cities and to protect our country?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, thank you very much. It is
an incredible detriment to our ability to secure the American
people. Just in the last 2 days, a local law enforcement
officer, equipped with some of the equipment that we provide to
detect radiological nuclear material, in fact, was wearing a
device that detected an abandoned material in a very unsafe
location that could have caused a tremendous amount of harm to
people in the surrounding community. This is a vital authority
that we absolutely need.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. As a point of order
and informing the committee, votes have been called. We are
going to do two more Members, Mr. Bishop and then Mr. Swalwell.
We will recess, and we will reconvene 10 minutes after the
final vote. I now recognize the Chairman of the Oversight
Subcommittee, Mr. Bishop from North Carolina, for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I listened to your
opening statements, I am floored by the fact that I perceive a
dramatic shift in the positions of each of you from the hearing
that you--from the testimony that you gave and the way you
answered questions just last November.
Director Abizaid, I want to begin with you. Last time I
asked you this, Director Abizaid, does the National
Counterterrorism Center assess a significant threat from the
historic level of uncontrolled crossing at the Southern Border?
Your answer was, we don't actually. The Judiciary Committee has
released a document that says there are confirmed 1.7 million
gotaways. Maybe one of you has a better number than that.
Millions have been processed and released to the extent that
the mayor of New York, Eric Adams, says that New York City is
being destroyed. All you are aware of those things. Director
Abizaid, do you continue to maintain that there is no material
risk of organized terrorism from this massive infiltration,
both of people minimally encountered and almost 2 million
people neither encountered or vetted whatsoever?
Ms. Abizaid. I appreciate the question, and we absolutely
recognize the kind of vulnerabilities that are associated with
border security across all of our ports of entry, across the
Southwest Border and otherwise. But I would maintain, and I
talk to my analysts about this on a regular basis, that as we
look at the global terrorism environment, as we look at foreign
terrorist organizations' intentions to try and cede operatives
into the United States, we don't have indications that are
credible or corroborated that those terrorist organizations are
trying to do that at this time.
Mr. Bishop. You are aware, are you not, ma'am, you remember
I made this comment the last time, the 9/11 Commission report
talked about the system blinking red. There were obvious risks.
Director Wray sat next to you just a few minutes ago, and you
have changed your tenor, too, Director Wray. You said that you
observed that it took only 20 to take down the World Trade
Center. So, among a million-seven coming in not interdicted by
the Federal Government or any government, why is that not an
obvious risk to you, that we could have organized terrorism?
How many cells----
Ms. Abizaid. Sir----
Mr. Bishop [continuing]. Could you create of 20 people if--
--
Ms. Abizaid. Sir, if I may----
Mr. Bishop [continuing]. They do something like that?
Ms. Abizaid [continuing]. I'd like to clarify. We
absolutely recognize the risk. In fact, if you look at the kind
of counterterrorism enterprise that we've built that's focused
on collecting overseas, that's focused on border security,
that's focused on screening, vetting, watch-listing individuals
and terrorist identities, it's absolutely a risk that we
understand and a vulnerability that we worked very hard over
the last 20 years to shore up. So, my comments relate to the
intelligence about foreign terrorist plans and intentions and--
--
Mr. Bishop. You have deployed that----
Ms. Abizaid [continuing]. And it is not----
Mr. Bishop [continuing]. You have deployed----
Ms. Abizaid [continuing]. About--it is not a statement
about what risk we think we have. We recognize----
Mr. Bishop. That is even more astonishing.
Ms. Abizaid [continuing]. The potential risks.
Mr. Bishop. I will stop you and reclaim my time because you
seem to be going on. That seems to me even more astonishing
because you have sat in this administration almost since its
beginning alongside Secretary Mayorkas, while elective policies
had been pursued to allow that to happen. Uncontrolled
immigration, processing millions of people through Border
Patrol posts and the CBP, and Border Patrol, to overwhelm those
agencies so that this unbelievably, and unprecedented,
historically unprecedented number of gotaways could come
through.
You have all given it, sucker, you have all permitted it to
happen and said nothing publicly about what you now acknowledge
to be a material risk. It seems to me we are going to see the
manifestation of that risk. Secretary Mayorkas, in your
testimony, both written and oral, today, you said the world has
changed since Hamas's attack in October. What has changed about
Hamas?
Secretary Mayorkas. Hamas has been and continues to be a
terrorist organization.
Mr. Bishop. Exactly. So does Hezbollah and so do all the
others, including al-Qaeda. Nothing has changed. You have
supervised elective policies that have allowed this level of
flow into the United States. Isn't that true?
Secretary Mayorkas. That is not true.
Mr. Bishop. Oh, you haven't done it electively. You
couldn't have changed anything to attenuate the flow. Is that
your testimony?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, our policies are directed
at securing the border.
Mr. Bishop. Can you give me a quick answer? Could you have
changed anything to attenuate the flow?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we are seeking to address
the flow every single day.
Mr. Bishop. Boy, that's amazing. You have continued to say
that sort of thing. I agree with Mr. Higgins, it doesn't
warrant much asking.
Let me ask you, Mr. Wray, we have seen now this spectacle
of hundreds of thousands of people waving Palestinian flags,
attacking the gates of the White House, vandalizing places. You
have expended, in fact, so has Mr. Mayorkas, expended
tremendous resources to stop foreign malign influence. With
millions of people coming into the country unvetted, is that at
all a foreign malign influence operation now operating in the
United States homeland?
Mr. Wray. We view it as a threat. I don't think we view it
as a foreign malign influence threat, but that's just
terminology.
Mr. Bishop. Do you know whether it is or not? In other
words, do you know whether those protests are in significant
part the product of people who have been allowed into the
country, the millions illegally?
Mr. Wray. We have not seen intelligence that would indicate
that. I do want to add, though, Congressman, when it comes to
my testimony from last year, I specifically said, and I am
looking at the transcript last year, that we had a concern from
a National security perspective, that we'd seen an increase in
the number of KSDs attempting to cross over the past 5 years. I
in fact specifically brought up the case that we brought
against an individual who tried to smuggle in foreign nationals
to assassinate George Bush.
Mr. Bishop. I would be working hard to cover my posterior--
--
Chairman Green. OK.
Mr. Bishop [continuing]. Too. You did say more than----
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time----
Mr. Bishop [continuing]. You did, but you didn't come
forward and say that what she said was completely wrong, and
you should have. I yield.
Mr. Wray. I----
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Swalwell, the Ranking Member of the Cyber Subcommittee, the
gentleman from California, for his 5 minutes questioning. We
will recess after his questioning.
Mr. Swalwell. A long-time friend of mine who works in the
intelligence community once told me, Eric, that the challenge
with our job is that we are only known for our failures, that
most Americans have no idea about the successes that we achieve
on behalf of the American people every day. Whether it is
fentanyl seizures at the border or a terrorist plot that is
disrupted, most folks don't know about it and aren't able to
thank you for it. When they do see the work, they see it in a
public hearing like today.
So, I just want to thank you. I also want to thank Director
Wray and Secretary Mayorkas for sending to my Congressional
district a couple weeks ago some of your staff from the special
agent in charge in San Francisco to the CISA office to assist
us in hosting a cybersecurity summit for our small business
community. It was very effective and helpful, and I think they
have a better sense of where they should go.
Director Wray, I wanted to ask you about the extrajudicial
killing of a Sikh leader in Canada that occurred outside a
gurdwara.
My district has one of the largest Sikh populations in the
United States. An individual, Dr. Pritpal Singh, who is the
founder of the American Sikh Caucus, lives in Fremont, which is
in my district. He has very publicly acknowledged that he was
warned by the FBI about his own safety. I just want to know
what the FBI is doing right now to protect individuals in the
Sikh community from any threats to them because of who they
worship, what they believe?
Mr. Wray. So, without talking about any investigative work
that we're doing, other than to note that part of what you're
describing involves an increase in violence and threats against
people for their views, for their beliefs. For example, the
transnational repression that we talk about so much is
certainly a variation of that. We've seen that from the Chinese
and the Iranians, for example.
But when it comes to the Sikh community here, we do have
quite a number of efforts to engage in outreach, to raise
awareness about who to call, what to be on the lookout for, to
understand what a hate crime is, for example. Because one of
the things we know about hate crimes is whether they're against
Sikhs or anybody else, is they're chronically underreported.
Part of that is for people to understand what a hate crime
looks like so they know when to reach out to law enforcement.
So, we've tried to kind-of raise awareness, and it kind-of
ties into your broader point about the intelligence community
in terms of prevention, quietly preventing things. You know,
our vision statement is ahead of the threat. If we are
successful in being ahead of the threat, of course, the threat
doesn't end up coming to fruition. It's a little bit like being
the holder for a place kicker. You can distinguish yourself if
the kick goes smoothly, but it's hard not to----
Mr. Swalwell. Right.
Mr. Wray [continuing]. Be noticed if the kick doesn't go
well.
Mr. Swalwell. At the end of the year, Section 702,
Director, expires. This is a part of the law that allows the
intelligence community and law enforcement to investigate and
stop threats, credible threats to the United States, to our
homeland, to our people from abroad. Could you conceive a
greater case of self-sabotage to create a vulnerability to the
United States than letting Section 702 lapse at the end of the
year?
Mr. Wray. I think letting 702 lapse would be short-sighted
at best and dangerous in the extreme, at worst. To be clear,
702 is what allows us to get eyes on foreign threats overseas
that pose national security threats to people here in the
homeland. As somebody who was in FBI headquarters on 9/11 and
spent an awful lot of my time in the Bush administration and
the years after that engaging with the victims and the families
of the 9/11 attacks, we should never be in a position where we
can't say we did everything constitutionally and legally in our
power to see the threats when they're coming.
That's what 702 enables us to do, and especially in this
heightened threat environment with, as I said in my opening
statement, a rogue gallery of foreign terrorist organizations
calling for attacks against us. The idea that we would
deliberately blind ourselves to information that is lawfully in
our possession just strikes me as crazy.
Mr. Swalwell. Do you believe a foreign national terrorist
suspect should be afforded the right to a warrant requirement?
Mr. Wray. No, and I don't think there is any court that
suggests otherwise. There's a lot of people throwing around the
words unconstitutional in this debate. Yet, I don't think there
is any court that has found that the way in which 702 is used
is in any way a violation of the Fourth Amendment or the
Constitution.
Mr. Swalwell. Because these are foreign nationals overseas.
Mr. Wray. Yes, correct.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. We will recess until
10 minutes after the last vote, and we will text out that exact
time once we have it. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Chairman Green. The committee will come to order. I now
recognize--we will start back in order. I think Mr. Swalwell
completed our first session this morning. We will now hear from
the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Transportation, Mr. Gimenez
from Florida, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My first question is
to Secretary Mayorkas. Secretary Mayorkas, when President Biden
first came into office, one of the first things he did is he
changed all the Trump-era policies related to the Southern
Border. Did you agree with those changes?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, he changed----
Mr. Gimenez. That is a yes or no answer, sir, please.
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman----
Mr. Gimenez. I don't have much time.
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman----
Mr. Gimenez. Do you agree with them or not?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, he changed some of the
policies, and I do agree with those changes.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. Subsequent to that, have you had a number
of conversations with the President when you are making
substantive changes or implementing new policies at the border,
have you relayed that to the President? The President, has he
said that he is in agreement with your recommendations? Or has
he made recommendations to you or actually given you an order
and said, no, I want to do this? Do you agree with everything
that all the policies that have been implemented since you have
been the Secretary of Homeland Security?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I am not going to get into
the specifics of my conversations with the President, but
please rest assured----
Mr. Gimenez. That's fair enough. I am going to reclaim my
time. Thank you very much. So, apparently, I don't know if you
talked to the President or not. Fair enough. So, either you do
things on your own or you do things in consultation with the
President, you are still part of his administration.
A lot has been said about the funding of DHS. So, in fiscal
year 2020, there were 458,000 encounters at the border. In
fiscal year 2021, there was 1,734,686 encounters at the border.
That is a 400 percent increase. There was no really significant
change in the funding. So, this whole narrative that somehow
funding is the issue, funding is not the issue. The issue is
policy. The policies that have been implemented by this
administration and your Department in particular, have led to
this catastrophic failure of our immigration in the United
States, where you have a 400 percent increase in the number of
encounters at the border with the same amount of money both in
fiscal year 2020 and 2021.
Now, in fiscal year 2022, things got even worse. There were
2.378 million encounters at the border. We also know there has
been a significant increase in the number of gotaways to the
point where almost 2 million people are in this country that we
haven't the faintest idea who they are. We don't know where
they came from. We don't know where they are and we don't know
why they are here. So again, Director Wray, does that pose a
threat to the security of the United States? The fact that
there is 2 million people here we don't know who they are or
why they are here, what they are doing here. Have you got any
worries about that?
Mr. Wray. Well, certainly the population that you're
talking about is a source of concern for us.
Mr. Gimenez. All right. One other question for you,
Director Wray. You say that the FBI, you work on detecting
threats, et cetera, to the United States and the homeland.
Exactly why are you doing that? What is the purpose of
detecting threats and mitigating threats to the homeland?
Mr. Wray. Well, our mission is to protect the American
people and uphold the Constitution.
Mr. Gimenez. Very good. Protecting the American people,
that is exactly right. Do you know how many people--you know,
the No. 1 terrorist organization that has killed the most
people in the United States, do you know what that is?
Mr. Wray. That would be al-Qaeda.
Mr. Gimenez. How many people have they killed, Americans?
Mr. Wray. Well, in the neighborhood of 3,000.
Mr. Gimenez. Three thousand. OK. Across the border, there
are the Mexican cartels. They are pumping fentanyl into the
United States. Do you know how many people they have killed?
Mr. Wray. I don't have that number but it's eye-popping.
Mr. Gimenez. It is eye-popping. So again, the failure at
the border, the failure of us taking significant action not
only to stop the flow of illegal immigrants and a lot of them
we don't even know who they are, that it poses a threat to the
United States. The actual threat of the cartels that are not
7,000 miles away, they are 20 miles away, they are 5 miles
away, on the other side of the border that are killing tens of
thousands of Americans every year, and we do nothing about it.
Nothing. They are right there. We know who they are. We know
where they are operating. We do nothing about it. That is a
dereliction of duty, Mr. Chairman.
With that, I got one more if you give me one more thing.
You know, real quick, OK? Guns, planes, missiles, personnel,
ships, boats, assassins, they all have one thing in common, Ms.
Abizaid. Do you know what that is? It is money. Money. That is
what they have in common. So, I would like to know why
Secretary Blinken signed off on a waiver for Iraq to purchase
electricity from Iran which will give them $10 billion in
revenue. That is a rhetorical question. Thank you. I yield
back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Thanedar from Michigan, the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee
on Transportation.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank Ranking Member
Thompson, both of you, for having this hearing today. I also
want to express profound thanks to the most honorable witnesses
for your valuable efforts that give the people of this great
country the safety they need to have prosperous lives. As we
discuss threats to the homeland here today, it looks like we
will more likely avert a shutdown this time. But for the second
time this year, the dysfunctional Republican Majority has
brought our Government to the brink of a shutdown after weeks
of infighting.
Funding our Government 45 days at a time has consequences.
At the Transportation Security Administration, thanks to
funding Democrats provided in the last year's omnibus spending
bill, workers are finally receiving the pay they have long
deserved. However, pay increases were only funded for the final
quarter of fiscal year 2023. So, continuing at fiscal 2023
levels instead of passing a full year spending bill will have
increasingly dire consequences for the agency.
Secretary Mayorkas, thank you for working with Congress to
provide pay raises for TSA workers. What benefits is TSA seeing
so far from pay raises? What consequences would you expect to
see if Congress does not provide funding to increase TSA's
budget for fiscal 2024?
Secretary Mayorkas. Thank you very much, Congressman, for
your concern for the men and women of TSA. I want to thank
Ranking Member Thompson for championing fair pay for that work
force for many years, and I am grateful to Congress for
achieving fair pay finally. It has made a significant
difference in the recruitment and retention of personnel who
are vital to the security of the traveling public. If we lose
that funding, we will return to recruiting and retention
challenges precisely when travel is booming once again in a
post-COVID-19 world.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Secretary. I, as a former business
owner, I understand the importance of making sure the employees
get paid fairly and they have the benefits that they need
because we are competing for these employees with the private
sector and they can always walk. We have seen a high level of
turnover in the past and that would continue and that will
endanger our safety.
But more broadly, for all the witnesses, how does
continually funding the Government by short-term continuing
resolution affect your agencies' ability to execute your
missions? I mean, I ran businesses and I never planned for a
45-day budget. Usually it is a year, 2-year long, some also
have a 5-year plan. That is how most businesses operate. How
does this short-term funding effects on how you run your
agencies and how does that affect our national security?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, very difficult to plan in
the implementation of important security-related and security-
focused initiatives when one does not know with certainty
whether the funding for those initiatives will actually come
through. I should also add a different element of this. It
creates tremendous worry and instability within the work force.
In fact, for example, our Countering Weapons of Mass
Destruction Office, I had an all-employee town hall with them
because they were uncertain about their future employment. That
is not a situation that we can afford at a time when we need to
advance the security of the American people.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
Mr. Wray. I would add to Secretary Mayorkas's comments that
the funding approach that you're describing is incredibly
disruptive to our operations. As you say, planning is an
essential part of any well-functioning organization, and it's
very, very hard to do that. I would second, the concerns about
our work force as you see more and more, you have Federal
employees who are two-Federal-employee couples, for example,
and in a lot of places, they're living paycheck to paycheck.
So, even with the law that was passed that ensures they will
eventually get paid, which is a welcome development----
Mr. Thanedar. Yes.
Mr. Wray [continuing]. In the short run, that's incredibly
stressful for people who are battling to put food on the table
and keep a roof over their family's heads.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
Ms. Abizaid. I would only add--I completely associate
myself with my colleagues' comments--I would only add that, you
know, what we've described is a pretty unpredictable global
environment right now. In the national security world, we need
sort-of a steady baseline from which we can operate and respond
to crises. So, the added stress on the work force of just being
able to understand when and where their paycheck is coming
from, I think, is one that we don't want to really put on their
shoulders.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you so much. I am over my time. So, I
yield back, Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Pfluger, the gentleman from Texas, and the Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. Director Abizaid, thank you for your service.
I am not going to have questions for you today. Mr. Chairman,
we started this hearing by listening to Secretary Mayorkas talk
about climate change as a threat to our country and obscure
policies that need reauthorization, but not yet one mention of
the Southwest Border and the 169-plus known or suspected
terrorists that have entered this country. So, I think it just
shows you where the mindset is, and the American people know
that.
Director Wray, you said in front of the Senate committee
last week, and you said again today, the reality is the
terrorism threat has been elevated throughout 2023, but the on-
going war in the Middle East has raised the threat of an attack
against Americans in the United States to a whole other level.
Do you stand by that statement?
Mr. Wray. Absolutely.
Mr. Pfluger. If somebody is listed as a special interest
alien or a KST, by the way, this is Trump-era KSTs, and this is
Mayor- kas-, Biden-era KSTs. If somebody's listed as a KST, is
that a concerning person, somebody who could do harm to the
United States?
Mr. Wray. Well, to be on the watch list as a KST means that
they've met the standard to be of concern.
Mr. Pfluger. So, they are concerning to the FBI. You are
looking for these people.
Mr. Wray. Yes.
Mr. Pfluger. Are there people that are listed in these
numbers, I think the number was 169, they may have amended that
from CBP DHS, but are there people that you are still searching
for that we don't know where they are in the United States? Of
the known apprehensions, KSTs, known or suspected terror people
match list to the terror watch list?
Mr. Wray. Well----
Mr. Pfluger. Are you still searching----
Mr. Wray [continuing]. There are----
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. For people in the United States
that we know match the terror watch list?
Mr. Wray. I am not sure I can answer that here because it's
a constantly moving target.
Mr. Pfluger. Directory, aye?
Mr. Wray. Yes.
Mr. Pfluger. Are there people that match the terror watch
list that were apprehended by CBP that the FBI and other
agencies are searching for in the United States?
Mr. Wray. There are certainly individuals who are the
subject of terrorism investigations that we are searching for.
Mr. Pfluger. Are there people----
Mr. Wray. Whether no not they're people--to me, I guess the
distinction I'm drawing is while there's obviously a lot of
focus on the watch list itself, one of the things that, and I
have tried to be clear in my testimony here this morning, one
of the areas that we are of concern is individuals who once
here, information later comes in that identifies----
Mr. Pfluger. Are there people that you don't----
Mr. Wray [continuing]. Those people we have----
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. Are there people you don't know
where they are that the FBI is searching for today?
Mr. Wray. Yes.
Mr. Pfluger. Yes or no? Yes. Secretary Mayorkas, is there a
policy at DHS that requires CBP or any other agency involved
with the vetting of individuals who match the terror watch list
that requires these individuals to be detained, does DHS have a
policy of detainment for anybody who matches the terror watch
list?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, on September 30, 2021, I
promulgated a policy that articulated quite clearly and quite
expressly that individuals who pose a threat to the public
safety of the American people----
Mr. Pfluger. Is there a policy at DHS and CBP that requires
detainment of people who match the terror watch list? This is
very simple.
Secretary Mayorkas [continuing]. That individuals who pose
a threat to public safety or national security are a priority
for enforcement. If, in fact, they pose such a----
Mr. Pfluger. Is every person that you have listed on the
terror watch list detained right now?
Secretary Mayorkas. If, in fact, they pose such a threat,
they are to be detained.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. So, why did you release people in the
United States that matched the terror watch list?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we do not release
individuals who's----
Mr. Pfluger. So, you have detained every single person who
matched the terror watch list that you apprehended at the
Southern Border?
Secretary Mayorkas. If you would----
Mr. Pfluger. One hundred percent?
Mr. Wray. If you would allow me to answer the question.
Mr. Pfluger. Please answer it quickly. I don't need a
filibuster.
Secretary Mayorkas. If we believe that the detention of an
individual is necessary to safeguard the safety of the American
people, we continue to detain them.
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Secretary, I am going to reclaim my time.
If you and any other agency label somebody as a match to the
terror watch list, do you immediately detain them?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, if you are referring to
the terrorist screening dataset, the TSDS, we make a
determination in the execution of our law enforcement
responsibilities to detain an individual if that detention is
necessary.
Mr. Pfluger. I believe that based on testimony----
Secretary Mayorkas. If that detention----
Mr. Pfluger. I believe based on your testimony and based on
Director Wray's, that there are people that you are still
searching for that you should have detained, and I want to find
out more information on it.
Furthermore, in 2023, your agency, Secretary Mayorkas,
reported that there were over 24,000 Chinese nationals who have
entered the United States illegally. That is 1,000 percent
increase from 2022. Are there people that you are searching
for, Director Wray, Secretary Mayorkas, that have entered this
country, and is there intelligence to suggest that the CCP is
trying to use or directing the flow of CCP or Chinese nationals
into the United States?
Mr. Wray. Well, certainly there are individuals who are
affiliated with the Chinese Government who are the subject of
investigations that we have here, and some of those are people
that we are searching for. Now, how they came in, whether they
came in illegally or not is a different question. I am not sure
I can speak to that here in the aggregate. But what I can tell
you is that I have been very consistent in saying that there is
no country that presents a broader, more comprehensive threat
to our economic security, our national security, our
innovation, than the Chinese Government. They use
nontraditional collectors, not just traditional intelligence
operatives, to cause that threat.
Mr. Pfluger. Secretary Mayorkas, based on Director Wray's
testimony that he believes that this threat is at a whole other
level and you are not detaining people immediately, I am very
concerned about the security of this Nation and the fact that
you have been derelict in your duty in securing and why. I
yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize, Mr. Carter. You went already? OK. I now recognize
Mr. Magaziner, the Ranking Member for Counterterrorism, the
gentleman from Rhode Island, for his 5 minutes questioning.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, to our
witnesses for your leadership, and to the men and women who
work under you to keep our Nation safe every day, you have our
gratitude. And to Ranking Member Thompson and Chairman Green as
well, for calling this hearing.
The director of national intelligence has assessed that
racially- and ethnically-motivated violent extremists present
the greatest terror threats to our country. I believe in your
opening statements, our witnesses verified that assessment
today. Racially- and ethnically-motivated violent extremists
present the greatest terror threats to our country. Yet, as I
have been listening, not one Member from the other side of the
aisle has focused any of their remarks or questions on what the
DNI and our witnesses have identified as the greatest terror
threat to our country.
So, I am going to spend my time today talking about this
and asking you about it, because we know that over the last 5
years, more Americans have been killed on our soil by racially-
motivated extremists than any other type of terror. We saw it
in El Paso, Texas, where a racially-motivated extremist killed
23 people in an attack explicitly targeting Latino and
immigrant communities. In Buffalo, New York, where a racially-
motivated extremist targeted the Black community, killing 10
people. Allen, Texas, where an extremist espousing antisemitic
and neo-Nazi ideology shot up a mall, killing 8 people. Over
the past decade, 145 Americans killed on U.S. soil in domestic
extremist attacks, primarily racially- and ethnically-
motivated.
The FBI currently has 2,700 open domestic terrorism cases,
and anti-Government extremism poses a growing threat as well.
We just learned the horrifying news that an associate of a
January 6 defendant pleaded guilty to conspiring and plotting
to murder 37 FBI employees in Chattanooga for the admitted
purpose to retaliate against Government conduct. Of course, in
the wake of the October 7 Hamas terrorist attack in Israel, we
are seeing a significant rise in antisemitic and Islamophobic
violence across the country. The Antidefamation League reports
that antisemitic incidents of harassment, vandalism, and
assault have increased by 388 percent over the same period last
year. Just this week, a Michigan man pleaded guilty to
threatening to commit a mass shooting against the Jewish
community. The Council on American Islamic Relations has
similarly reported a 216 percent increase. Of course, we are
all familiar with the tragic death of a 6-year-old Palestinian
American who was horrifically killed in a hate crime a few
weeks ago.
So, given that this has been identified as the greatest
terror threat facing our country, I would like to give each of
you an opportunity, starting with Director Wray to talk about
specifically racially- and ethnically-motivated extremism. What
is the nature of this threat, and what does the FBI need from
Congress in order to meet it?
Mr. Wray. So, first, a point of clarification. When we talk
about the greatest threat to the homeland, the greatest threat
to the homeland is lone actors or small groups typically
radicalized on-line using easily accessible weapons to attack
soft targets. That group of lone actors includes both, as you
rightly say, domestic violent extremists, as well as though and
that's the clarification, home-grown violent extremists who are
individuals here who are inspired by foreign terrorist
organizations. So, that's what we call at the highest threat
level.
Second, when it comes specifically on the domestic violent
extremism side, domestic terrorism side, it is the case that
over the last several years, the most lethal activity has been
conducted here in the homeland by racially-motivated violent
extremists in terms of the most lethality. Then there is a
second category, which you also noted in your question, which
is anti-Government, anti-authority violent extremists, which is
distinct, sometimes overlaps a little bit, but it's distinct
from the racially-motivated in terms of----
Mr. Magaziner. Is that, for example, what we saw on January
6, the anti-Government or, you know, inspired by that acts of
extremism?
Mr. Wray. That would be one variation on it.
Mr. Magaziner. Yes.
Mr. Wray. But so would the violence that we saw in the
summer of 2020. Anarchist violent extremists.
Mr. Magaziner. Yes.
Mr. Wray. It's all in the category of anti-Government,
anti-authority violent extremism. We've seen a lot of both. So,
the volume in that category is probably the greatest. The
lethality is probably the greatest on the racially-motivated
violent extremist side.
Mr. Magaziner. Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, let me share with you some
of the work we are doing to combat this threat. We are working
very closely with our Federal partners, notably the FBI. We are
working with State, local, Tribal, territorial, and campus law
enforcement, our front-line personnel. We are engaging with
communities in developing best practices for prevention models
to be able to intervene when individuals are seeing somebody
descend down a path of radicalization to violence.
We are, thanks to the support of Congress, distributing
grant funds to nonprofit organizations. In fact, we have sought
a $200 million increase in that critically-needed grant
program, the nonprofit Security Grant Program, to enable
nonprofit organizations, including places of worship, religious
schools, to secure themselves.
We have protective security advisors in every State
providing advice as to how facilities, places of gathering, can
best secure themselves. Those are some of the steps that we are
taking to combat this threat in an environment of critically-
needed partnership.
Ms. Abizaid. If I may, Mr. Chairman, if it's OK----
Chairman Green. Yes, go ahead.
Ms. Abizaid [continuing]. Just to answer the question.
Racially- and ethnically-motivated----
Chairman Green. Just quickly.
Ms. Abizaid [continuing]. Violent extremism over the last 5
years, as you noted, has created the most lethality for
Americans, especially here in the homeland. But it is a global
threat. At the National Counterterrorism Center, we're focused
on issues that have a foreign nexus. We would say that
racially- and ethnically-motivated violent extremism certainly
has a foreign nexus. When you look at the motivation behind a
shooter in New York who goes to a supermarket and kills Black
Americans, that is motivated by manifestos that we see from New
Zealand and from Norway, and actually inspired later attacks
that we saw in Slovakia.
So, understanding the global dynamics around this type of
terrorism, I think, is a really important piece of what we are
doing to try and keep up with an evolving threat dynamic that
is affecting many countries.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you for your work in this area. I
yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Garbarino, the gentleman from New York and the Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Cyber for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses, for being here. A couple of weeks ago, we had some
witnesses come in and testify about Iranian threats. I want to
ask Director Wray, you said recently that you expect Iranian
cyber threats to worsen if the conflict in Israel expands. Can
you expand on that? What should we specifically be watching out
for?
Mr. Wray. Well, I think sometimes people overlook the fact
that Iran is one of only two countries to have committed a
destructive cyber attack against the United States. It's been a
few years since that happened. So, they've already shown a
propensity for that. We saw not that long ago, an attempted
cyber attack from Iran against a children's hospital in New
England. So, this is an adversary that is engaged in conduct
that is brazen and aggressive. It is very comparable, in my
view, to what we see in terms of the lethal targeting that I
described in my opening statement and to this committee last
year, which is a country which has attempted to assassinate an
American journalist and human rights activist right smack in
the middle of New York City and tried to assassinate current
and former U.S. officials here on U.S. soil. So, the cyber
threat that they pose in some ways shows a similar level of
aggressiveness and brazenness.
Mr. Garbarino. So, again, specific targets, not, you know,
industries as a whole, do you think--like I know other
countries are focused specifically on possibly industries,
taking down an entire sector. Would you expect the Iranians to
focus on, like you said, the hospital-specific targets?
Mr. Wray. I think critical infrastructure is obviously
where we're most concerned. I am not sure that I could tell
you, sitting here right now, which of the 16 sectors but
critical infrastructure is where we would be most concerned
about their potential cyber activity.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. Secretary Mayorkas, what is DHS
doing to prepare for these possible cyber attacks coming up?
Because I know when Russia invaded Ukraine, we did the Shields
Up program. So, have you done anything since there has been the
war in Israel? What is DHS doing?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, so, day-to-day we work
with our private-sector partners. We have the Joint Cyber
Defense collaborative that our CISA, Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency operates. We are working with
our partners in Israel. We are sharing information and best
practices with them. We work very closely with them because
they are, in fact, experiencing an increase in cyber attacks.
It's taking a page out of the playbook that you mentioned, our
incredible work with Ukraine in the Shields Up campaign. So, we
have many different lines of effort that we are employing on a
day-to-day basis to protect critical infrastructure.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. I think one of those things is
focusing on work force. So, Director Wray, you said earlier
this year that even if all of the FBI's cyber agents and intel
analysts focus exclusively on China threats, Chinese hackers
would still outnumber the FBI's cyber personnel by 50 to 1. Is
that still the case? What is FBI doing to deal with that?
Mr. Wray. Well, that is still my assessment of the
numerical disadvantage that we are at. China has a bigger
hacking program than that of every other major nation combined
and has stolen more of Americans' personal and corporate data
than that of every nation, big or small, combined.
So, it is a scale that is significant. In terms of what we
are doing, in addition to trying to focus on recruiting cyber
talent, both among agents, but also computer scientists, data
analysts, data scientists, we are also focusing very heavily,
and some of this is in the budget request that's up before
Congress, focus on advanced training for our existing work
force. Because one of the things that I hear consistently from
our agents who work this area is that while people who know the
ones and zeros is incredibly important, if you've got a really
good agent who's got the good agent skills, if you get the
right training, you can teach them a lot of the cyber stuff
that they need. So, we're trying to raise the median cyber
proficiency in the work force, not just recruiting our way out
of the problem.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that. We did meet with some of
your agents on a bipartisan trip overseas, some of the work
they are doing, and they are doing a really good job overseas.
I think, especially with the shared information.
I wanted to focus, last, on antisemitism that we are seeing
the rise in antisemitism, especially on college campuses. There
are college campuses around that have student groups that don't
seem to be getting--that are promoting antisemitism, but don't
seem to be getting funding from the universities. There is one
here in the District of Columbia at a school here. Have you
been focused on where they are getting their funding from? Is
it coming from outside sources? Is it coming from overseas,
specifically for these student groups that have caused a lot of
the rise in antisemitism on campuses?
Mr. Wray. Well, when we investigate funding issues, it's in
the context of something where we have a properly predicated
investigation. So, we're not investigating funding in support
of First Amendment activity, just to be clear. But certainly,
we are looking at funding and have for quite some time, looking
at funding of Hamas going in the other direction, and funding,
including looking at, you know, Hamas's use of cryptocurrency
and things like that. When it comes to groups here, if they are
engaged in activity that is properly predicated as a criminal
or national security investigation, then funding is, of course,
part of what we would be looking at.
Mr. Garbarino. I know I am out of time, but I think the
focus on how these student groups are so well, you know, they
are well-prepared, they are well-governed. I mean, the money's
got to be coming from somewhere. It is not coming from the
universities. I think it is coming from somewhere, but I am out
of time. I will yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize a
gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Ivey, who is the Ranking Member on
Oversight----
Mr. Ivey. That is correct.
Chairman Green [continuing]. For 5 minutes.
Mr. Ivey. Sir, Mr. Bishop----
Chairman Green. With Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Ivey. Mr. Bishop's subcommittee. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I wanted to follow up on a couple of questions. One
was to the director, at the end of Congressman Higgins'
testimony or questioning, he had a photo with two buses on it.
We tried to figure out what he was getting at, but it sounded
like he was suggesting that there were FBI operatives who had
infiltrated the January, like two busloads of FBI operatives
who had infiltrated the January 6 raid. I wanted to give you a
chance to clarify on that.
Mr. Wray. Well, I can't speak to the photo. I haven't seen
the photo before, so I can't speak to the specifics of his
photo and what it does or doesn't show. But what I can say and
what I tried to say in response to his questions is that if
somebody is asking or suggesting whether the violence at the
Capitol on January 6 was part of some operation orchestrated by
FBI sources, or FBI agents, or both, the answer is emphatically
not. To suggest to the contrary, I think, is a disservice to
the hardworking men and women of the FBI who bust their tails
every day to keep Americans, including everybody up on Capitol
Hill, safe.
Mr. Ivey. Yes. I want to add as well, I used to be the
NAUSA in this office here in Washington and actually was
handling cases against them while the prosecutions were taking
place. I do want to commend your office and the Department of
Justice prosecutors for putting together, I guess, like 700
cases, I think, at this point, the vast majority of which have
been successful. So, I commend you for that.
I did want to ask about FISA as well. I am on Judiciary.
You testified about FISA 702. As you know, the time is coming
up for reauthorization on that. There are questions about
whether the reauthorization should contain some statutory
changes that put additional restrictions on your office. I know
you have had some objections to that and said that your office
has made some internal changes. I wanted to get a sense of
hearing what those are, though, before I made a final decision
on what I want to do with respect to that bill. There are two,
actually.
Mr. Wray. Well, I will say two things. First on the impact
of the changes and then what the changes were themselves. The
most important thing for this committee and for Congress to
take away on the changes we've made and is the results of those
changes which have now been found, you don't have to just take
my word for it, look at the FISA court itself. The same FISA
judge, by the way, who rightly criticized us earlier, found
that our reforms that we've put in place have resulted in an
increase----
Mr. Ivey. Yes, but if you could tell us what they are, I
would appreciate it.
Mr. Wray. So, the changes include all sorts of changes to
training, oversight, internal oversight, pre-approvals, new
accountability policies.
Mr. Ivey. Let me stop you on that one. Pre-approvals, what
are the pre-approval requirements that have been put in place
now?
Mr. Wray. Well, there are a whole slew of them. Some have
to do with when you have what's called a batch query, when
there's a large number of query terms, that's one as an
example. Certain kinds of sensitive query terms have to get run
all the way up to the level of deputy director. I'd be happy to
arrange a more detailed briefing because it is quite detailed.
Mr. Ivey. That would be great. And----
Mr. Wray. Among the other changes we've put in place is I
created an entire new Office of Internal Audit at the FBI that
did not exist before.
Mr. Wray. Well, let's do this. If you could supplement your
testimony with the written, you may have done it someplace
else, but if you could send me whatever it is that lays out the
details of the changes you have made, I would appreciate it.
Ms. Abizaid.
Ms. Abizaid. Abizaid.
Mr. Ivey. I would hope. OK, I got close. You mentioned 702
in your testimony, but you didn't have anything in your written
testimony about it. I was wondering if you could answer the
same kind of question. What sorts of changes? Or you might
think the current law is fine, but if you think the reforms
that have been made are sufficient or what is your position on
that?
Ms. Abizaid. So, I know the Department of Justice is
engaged in a robust conversation about what kinds of reforms
should be considered. I would only reinforce what I said in my
oral testimony, which is that 702 is a vital authority for the
CT community, and agility is key to that authority. So,
anything we do that reauthorizes it and preserves that agility
will be incredibly important.
Mr. Ivey. OK. Well, fair enough. If you have got, you know,
additional proposed reforms you would like to suggest, please
send those in writing, too.
Ms. Abizaid. Will do.
Mr. Ivey. I have run out of time with respect to a couple
of things here. But I did want to end with this, Mr. McCaul,
and I am sorry he is not here, but he had a chance to respond
to Mr. Goldman. But the aiding and abetting allegation that was
directed at you, Secretary Mayorkas, I thought was just
inappropriate and incorrect. I just wanted to register that on
the record. I know there have been some disagreements about the
way you have run the office and that sort of thing, but I just
don't see how that is productive. So, with that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gonzalez, for his 5 minutes'
questions.
Mr. Gonzales. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you,
witnesses, for being here. I represent the largest border
district in Congress. This border crisis is very real to us,
not only for all Americans, but we are at the forefront of it.
I want to start with Secretary Mayorkas. In April, you told
``60 Minutes'' the migrant surge across our border are
resulting from disinformation by cartels.
I would go a step further and say that these cartels are
terrorizing America, and it is long time that we label these
cartels as terrorist organizations. I have a few questions for
you, if you could be either yes or no or brief in your
response. My first question is this. I am looking for
solutions. Would raising the credible fear standards improve
our border?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, the asylum system and the
immigration system as a whole is in desperate need of reform,
and I look forward to working with Congress on achieving that
reform.
Mr. Gonzales. Do you think that----
Secretary Mayorkas. It is long overdue.
Mr. Gonzales. Do you think that would help?
Secretary Mayorkas. I think, Congressman, it is very
difficult to take one element of an expansive system and say
that is----
Mr. Gonzales. Let's talk about----
Secretary Mayorkas [continuing]. The solution.
Mr. Gonzales [continuing]. A couple of other elements. I
think it would work. Everyone I talk to is saying raise the
credible fear standards is a good start. I hope you would
consider also being vocal on that. The second part, would
increasing repatriation flights improve our border?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we work with our
international partners every day to increase the number of
repatriation flights. In fact, our supplemental funding request
seeks additional funds to achieve that outcome.
Mr. Gonzales. Do these repatriation flights work?
Secretary Mayorkas. Yes, as----
Mr. Gonzales. I would agree with that. I have seen it
first-hand. As soon as we turn on repatriation flights, the
numbers go down. My third question, would increasing penalties
to smugglers improve our border?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I would like to analyze
whether or not the severity of the penalties available are
sufficient. I can tell you from my experience in the
courthouse, in the courtroom as a Federal prosecutor that the
delivery of consequences achieves an important law enforcement
objective.
Mr. Gonzales. What I am seeing is the consequences don't
match the crime and the crime, Americans are dying. It is long
time for us to match the crime to what is occurring. My last
question for you, Mr. Secretary, do you agree we have a crisis
at the Southern Border? Yes, or no?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I have been asked this
question many times. Let me just assure you that we do not
minimize the significance of the challenge at the border.
Mr. Gonzales. I would like to now ask Director Wray, I
agree with your stance on China, firmly believe China is a
grave threat to our Nation on all different fronts, and I
appreciate your stance on that. My question is, how substantial
are the Chinese state ties to entities sending fentanyl
ingredients to the Mexican cartels?
Mr. Wray. Well, I am not sure what I can share in this
setting on that but let me try it this way. When it comes to
questions about state ties and China, I think it's important
for Americans to understand that distinctions that we draw in
this country between the government and, say, the private
sector are distinctions that in the Chinese country, in the
Chinese government, the Chinese state, are distinctions that
are blurry at best, if non-existent. So, we have certainly seen
that entities in China, unscrupulous actors in China, are the
primary source not just of fentanyl precursors, but of pill
presses which are used to press the fentanyl and by the way, of
precursors for meth in the labs in Mexico as well. So, whether
or not that traces back to the CCP directly, that I can't speak
to here.
Mr. Gonzales. Going back to my 20 years in the military,
the Chinese Communist Party is interacted in every aspect of
their government. Very briefly, if you could respond, do you
think Chairman Xi can turn it on or off? Is he critical to
turning these precursors or anything on and off, on or off?
Mr. Wray. There is not a doubt in my mind that if the
Chinese government wanted to be more aggressive and serious
about clamping down on precursors for fentanyl and meth and
pill presses, there are all sorts of things they could do, and
we would welcome their contribution to that.
Mr. Gonzales. I agree with you. I want to move on to the
terrorist attack that happened in Israel. Following Hamas's
attack on Israel on October 7, there has been a rise of
antisemitism and anti-Muslim sentiment in the United States.
Would you agree?
Mr. Wray. Yes.
Mr. Gonzales. If someone here is in the United States on a
visa and they actively support terrorism, what happens to them?
Mr. Wray. Well, I am not an expert on visa revocation, but
if they meet the appropriate visa revocation standard, then
action is taken administratively to revoke their visa.
Mr. Gonzales. Right now, it is illegal if you are here on a
visa and you actively are supporting a terrorist organization,
it is illegal and you need to be deported. The question I have
is, how many cases has the FBI pursued in this route?
Mr. Wray. Well, visa revocation is not within our
authorities.
Mr. Gonzales. Sure.
Mr. Wray. We obviously work with our partners and share
information when we have evidence about somebody's trying to
support terrorism.
Mr. Gonzales. Have there been cases?
Mr. Wray. I don't have a number for you today, but
certainly visa revocation is an important tool that the whole
of Government has.
Mr. Gonzales. Has any occurred this year?
Mr. Wray. Have any visa revocations occurred?
Mr. Gonzales. Where you have worked with other partners? I
will close out here, Chairman. That you have worked with other
entities in the Government to determine if these visa stays are
indeed supporting terrorism?
Mr. Wray. I mean, I know that we've had all sorts of cases
that have resulted in visa revocation, whether or not they fit
the exact criteria of what you are saying----
Mr. Gonzales. But there are active cases that you have been
working on?
Chairman Green. The gentle----
Mr. Wray. We view visa revocation as an important tool in
the toolbox. The only thing I am clarifying is that it's not
our tool----
Mr. Gonzales. Sure.
Mr. Wray [continuing]. But it's a tool we contribute to by
sharing as----
Mr. Gonzales. You do contribute. OK. Thank you, Chairman. I
yield.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize Mr. Garcia from California for his 5 minutes
questioning.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to
all of our witnesses here today and for your service. I want to
start, Mr. Secretary, I know that this last Tuesday night, one
of our colleagues also sits on this committee, really decided
to waste our time with a very political stunt which made some
deeply unfair and untrue allegations against you, sir. While I
am glad that 8 Republicans joined us in defeating that
resolution, I would like to take a moment to correct the record
for the public and the American people. So, Mr. Secretary, yes
or no, is our country currently being invaded?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, that is a term that I find
to be offensive.
Mr. Garcia. I do as well. Thank you. Is invasion----
Ms. Greene. Well----
Mr. Garcia. Is invasion--excuse me, this is my time, Ms.
Greene. Is invasion a responsible way to characterize people
who come to the United States to seek asylum?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I have been asked very
often in many hearings now, I heard one Congressman actually
cite that I have attended 27, participated in 27 hearings. I
didn't realize the number was that large. I am not focused on
language. I am focused on the challenges that we face and
making sure that we meet those challenges on behalf of the
American people.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, sir. Is your agency working every
day to stop fentanyl from coming into our country?
Secretary Mayorkas. It most certainly is.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. Is it true that the overwhelming
majority of fentanyl is, in fact, carried through ports of
entry by American citizens into this country?
Secretary Mayorkas. It is, Congressman.
Mr. Garcia. Is it fair to say that an orderly border
actually requires comprehensive immigration reform, which would
require Congressional action rather than just Executive
actions?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, immigration reform is
vitally necessary to advancing the security of our border.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. Mr. Secretary, I want to thank you.
Those are simple questions, but I think that your record keeps
being distorted unfairly. So, I wanted to make sure, give you a
chance to clear that up.
I think it is also important to hear how we are talking
about security and our threats to the homeland, how the current
head of the Republican Party spent Veterans Day just recently.
So, I want to read you this first sentence, ``in honor of our
great veterans on Veterans Day, we pledge to you that we will
root out the Communists, Marxists, fascists, and radical left
thugs that live like vermin within the confines of our country,
lie, steal, and cheat on elections, and will do anything
possible, whether legally or illegally, to destroy America and
the American dream.''
Here we see Donald Trump calling his fellow Americans
vermin and threatening to root out people based on their
political beliefs. This is the kind of rhetoric that reminds me
of the worst types of dictators in history, and it is not
Trump's first time using this kind of rhetoric. He told an
audience in Iowa that immigrants were poisoning the blood of
our country. That is a quote. He has promised to violate
Federal laws in order to build mass deportation camps and
promised to restore his Muslim ban. He even wants to cancel
legal status for certain categories of immigrants. Donald
Trump, of course, has had dinner and hosted open Holocaust
deniers and white nationalists. We all, of course, remember
that he praised the white nationalist Charlottesville marchers
who chanted, Jews will not replace us. Of course, he faces
Federal felony charges for his role in the January 6
insurrection.
Now, Mr. Secretary, Director Wray, I am not going to ask
you to respond directly to Donald Trump's statements, but I
think we can all agree that they are not worthy of certainly
running--anybody running for President. As we move into this
election year, I am deeply concerned about Donald Trump,
particularly as he faces more and more pressure from his
supporters that may try to invoke additional violence that we
might see from fringe supporters of his.
Now, Mr. Secretary, I wrote to you ahead of Donald Trump's
first indictment, expressing concerns about his ability to
provoke violent attacks. I would like to thank you for your on-
going attention to this matter and more broadly, for taking on
the challenges we have around white supremacy, around the huge
actions that are happening across this country that impact a
lot of people. We also know that Donald Trump isn't the only
politician that has used a history of--or has a history of
violent rhetoric in this country. We need to call it out at
every single turn.
I want to just finally, Director Wray, I want to raise one
final issue with you. The Anti-Defamation League found that in
2022, mass shootings in the United States accounted for most
extremism-related fatalities last year, with about 80 percent
of those murders committed by white supremacists. We saw that
in the Dallas Area Mall case, in the Dollar General store in
Jacksonville. There have been additional shootings after
shootings. What would you need from Congress to help you better
tackle this threat as it relates to mass shootings?
Mr. Wray. Well, our budget request that went up in the
fiscal 2024 budget request includes a number of resources for
counterterrorism, including that would speak to this threat.
That's important because as you've heard in my testimony here
today, the foreign terrorist threat is not only not abating,
but it's intensifying. So, we certainly can't be put in a
position where we're having to, you know, rob Peter to pay
Paul, if you will, to protect the American people from all
forms of terrorist attack.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you very much, sir.
Mr. Wray. Also, I should say, on the issue of mass acts of
violence, mass shootings, putting ideology aside or anything,
or motivation, I think there are also parts of the
appropriation request that go to our ability at NICS to do
background checks in a timely way and process, obviously, make
sure that guns are not purchased by people who are prohibited
under an existing law from having them.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize the
gentlelady from Georgia, Ms. Greene, for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Greene. Secretary Mayorkas, I want you to look at these
innocent Americans. Do you see them?
Secretary Mayorkas. I do, Congresswoman.
Ms. Greene. They are dead. They are from Dalton, Georgia in
my district. They are dead because a 17-year-old, likely
affiliated with the cartels, was smuggling illegal aliens into
our country in Texas, breaking our laws. This happens every
single day in our country. Earlier this week, 8 Republicans
joined the Democrats and protected your job. But I want you to
know you have a short time coming. You can honorably resign, or
we are going to impeach you. It is happening very, very soon.
Mr. Wray, do you remember on October 18, when the Capitol
complex was illegally occupied, breaking the same laws that you
have hunted down Americans for from January 6? Are you familiar
with this?
Mr. Wray. I don't recognize the picture that you're
holding.
Ms. Greene. Well, because maybe your agents haven't been
doing a good job into investigating the organizers that broke
the law, illegally occupied this very building that we are
sitting in right now, and over 300 of them were arrested. Some
of them attacked police officers. I haven't seen on the news,
where the FBI is hunting them down with helicopters, tanks in
the streets, raiding their homes with flashbangs, targeting
these people, watching these people, throwing them in jail for
them to stay in pretrial, in solitary confinement for years
before they ever face trial.
You want to know what this says? I will tell you. This is
one of the organizer's phones, and this is a chat. It says at
the top, global intifada. Now, while we are talking about
terrorism today, are you familiar with the term intifada?
Mr. Wray. I've certainly heard the term.
Ms. Greene. Do you know the definition?
Mr. Wray. I am not going to try to define it but.
Ms. Greene. It means Arab uprising or jihad. Are you
concerned about jihad in this country?
Mr. Wray. I am, and I have consistently testified to that
effect.
Ms. Greene. Yes, but are you interested in using the FBI?
You are the director of the FBI. Do you hunt down terrorists in
our country, those that would be responsible for jihad?
Mr. Wray. Absolutely. That's why we've had jihadist-
inspired terrorism at our highest national threat priority
level since the day that I started as FBI director.
Ms. Greene. Do you still use the Southern Poverty Law
Center as a source? You use them. The FBI used the Southern
Poverty Law Center as a source when targeting Catholics. Are
you still using the Southern Poverty Law Center as a source?
Mr. Wray. Congresswoman, what I think you're referring to
is the so-called Richmond intelligence product, which as soon
as I learned about it, I was horrified, withdrew it. We had an
inspection done. Part of the problem that we found with that
particular product, that particular office, is precisely what
you're talking about, the reliance on the Southern Poverty Law
Center and the way in which they relied on it.
Ms. Greene. Well, you relied on the Southern Poverty Law
Center, but I would have you know, Mr. Wray, that this one
right here, this person involved in the global intifada group
that illegally, they broke the law, came in and occupied the
Canon Office House building, interrupted Congress, interrupted
hearings right here, Katrina Bleakley is the lead attorney for
the Southern Poverty Law Center. Were you aware of this?
Mr. Wray. Congresswoman, as I said, I haven't seen the
photos that you're holding up before.
Ms. Greene. Well, I posted them on my Twitter account. It
is public. You know, maybe you guys are----
Mr. Wray. I don't spend a lot of time on Twitter, ma'am.
Ms. Greene. Well, you know, you--oh, I am sure you do,
because the Department of Homeland Security, organized with
other offices, has censored many Americans, including myself.
Mr. Wray. I'm not part of the Department of Homeland
Security.
Ms. Greene. Right. Mr. Wray, you should be interested in
investigating terrorism. This right here is proof that we had
terrorists in our own office building. Global intifada. You
rely on the Southern Poverty Law Center. Katrina Bleakley is
one of the organizers. I will send this over to your office so
maybe perhaps you can stop targeting innocent grandmothers and
veterans who walked through the Capitol on January 6 and might
actually go after people tied to Hamas, tied to Hezbollah, and
likely Iran. Mr. Wray, are you interested in Members of
Congress that are organized and participating in a Facebook
group that has ties to Hamas?
Mr. Wray. We are not investigating people for participating
in a Facebook group.
Ms. Greene. A Facebook group that is tied to Hamas?
Mr. Wray. We have multiple investigations into individuals
affiliated with Hamas and they're active investigations.
Ms. Greene. You are going to tell me as FBI director, you
will not investigate Americans or United States Members of
Congress that are linked to known terrorists?
Mr. Wray. That's not what I said.
Ms. Greene. Are you going to investigate or not?
Mr. Wray. We are going to investigate individuals who are
affiliated with Hamas if they meet our standards for
predication, which are long-standing standards set by this
department and the prior department and the department before
that.
Ms. Greene. I would hope to God that intifada and jihad and
terrorists in our very country would be something that you
would prioritize instead of a 3-hour event that happened at the
Capitol nearly 4 years ago, Mr. Wray. I yield back my time, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields. I now recognize Mr.
Menendez, I think you are up next, sir.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Mr.----
Chairman Green. The gentleman from New Jersey, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Director Wray,
earlier in your testimony, did you say that defunding the FBI
would be, ``a gift to the Chinese Communist Party, more power
to the cartels, and more damage to critical infrastructure?''
Mr. Wray. I believe I said words to that effect, yes.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate that. Not everybody was in the
room during that part of your testimony. I want to follow up on
what my colleague, Mr. Higgins, said about, ``armed oppression
as one of the primary threats to the homeland.'' I agree that
armed oppression is a massive threat to our homeland, but we
need to be clear about what actually constitutes armed
oppression. In this country, minority groups are routinely
targets of weaponized oppression. Armed oppression is when
Black men cannot go safely for a run in Georgia. Armed
oppression is when Black youth cannot wear hoodies in Florida.
Armed oppression is being LGBTQ in this country and not being
able to safely go to a nightclub in Florida. Armed oppression
is living in a Hispanic community and being targeted while
going to Walmart in El Paso. Armed oppression is being Black in
this country and not being able to go grocery shopping in
Buffalo without being targeted because of the color of your
skin. Armed oppression is not being able to go safely to a
church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or any place of worship to
practice your faith.
Domestic terrorists have targeted each of these locations
and each of these groups in acts of armed oppression. Yet, when
we in the House Committee on Homeland Security established our
committee oversight plan for the 118th Congress, my Republican
colleagues refused to include capital D, capital D, Domestic
terrorism in our plan. That, in my opinion, is where this
committee is failing when we consider our threats to the
homeland.
New Jersey's 8th Congressional District is home to what
homeland security experts call the most dangerous 2 miles in
America, containing ports, airports, major rail lines, densely
populated cities, and chemical plants. I am proud of the work
that President Biden and the New Jersey Congressional
Delegation have done to improve the safety, reliability, and
resiliency of critical infrastructure in North Jersey. The
Biden administration has aggressively protected our critical
infrastructure from foreign adversaries, with President Biden
admonishing Russian President Vladimir Putin that certain
critical infrastructure is off-limits, a stark contrast to
President Trump, who proposed a joint cyber unit with Russia.
Secretary Mayorkas, when considering the threat landscape,
how does the Department take into account the risk posed by
having multiple critical infrastructure sectors in close
geographic proximity?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, the proximity of elements
of our critical infrastructure only increase the challenge that
we confront, but we work very, very closely with our critical
infrastructure partners. The great majority of this country's
critical infrastructure rests in the hands of the private
sector. We work very closely with the private sector to ensure
the security of our critical infrastructure. The remarkable men
and women of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency do a tremendous job.
Mr. Menendez. On the issue of cybersecurity, I want to
address the current threat landscape. When we talk about
cybersecurity, we are talking about threats that don't just
come up from nation-states like Iran, but often from a network
of proxies and affiliated groups. Secretary Mayorkas, how is
the current conflict in Israel giving us additional insight
about Iranian-backed cyber threat actors?
Secretary Mayorkas. I am sorry, can you repeat the
question, just the----
Mr. Menendez. Of course. How is the current conflict in
Israel giving us additional insight about Iranian-backed cyber
threat actors?
Secretary Mayorkas. I think what we are seeing,
Congressman, and I will defer to my colleagues as well, as the
use of cyber as a tool in the repertoire of our adversaries. We
are seeing that play out in the Middle East conflict, just as
we have seen it in the context of the unprovoked Russian
aggression against Ukraine.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate that. One more question for you.
In your testimony, you mentioned how critical it is that the
CFATS program is reauthorized. I am particularly invested in
the CFATS program because there are four facilities covered by
the program in New Jersey's 8th Congressional District. How
does the CFATS program help keep our critical infrastructure
safe?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, the CFATS program, the
Chemical Facilities Antiterrorism Standards, allow us to
inspect facilities to ensure adherence with the security and
safety precautions that are necessary to protect the
surrounding communities. That is one aspect of CFATS. We must
achieve the reauthorization of that program.
Mr. Menendez. I agree. I just want to quickly address some
of the ways that my colleagues have attacked Secretary Mayorkas
here and in other hearings. Mr. Secretary, you and I have had
our disagreements on policies, including recently on an ICE
detention center in Elizabeth in my district, and I am looking
forward to your Department's response to my letter on that.
But I have two quick questions for you. During your long
career in public service, including 30 years as a law
enforcement official and senior positions in the Department of
Homeland Security under the Obama administration, did you take
your responsibility to the American public seriously?
Secretary Mayorkas. I have, and I continue to do so,
Congressman.
Mr. Menendez. When President Biden asked you to serve as
Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, did you
accept to help keep the American people safe?
Secretary Mayorkas. I did, Congressman.
Mr. Menendez. Is that what you focus on every single day
when you wake up to take this office?
Secretary Mayorkas. It indeed is.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you so much for your service, sir. I
yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
D'Esposito, the gentleman from great State of New York----
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, thank you.
Chairman Green [continuing]. For 5 minutes.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary
Mayorkas, the crisis at the Southwest Border not only impacts
border States such as Texas and Arizona, but now every State is
truly a border State. State and local leaders from sanctuary
cities such as New York and Chicago are starting to feel the
strain effects of the border crisis. Over the last months, we
have seen dozens of arrests at the Roosevelt Hotel, which is
housing migrants, including crimes against children, assaults,
traumatic beatings using no parking signs, and assaults against
my fellow members of the NYPD. There was a migrant that came
into New York City that in his first 45 days in New York, was
arrested six times on 14 different charges. But there was no
charges because the great district attorney, one that my
colleague from New York, Mr. Goldman, has supported, the
district attorney, Alvin Bragg, declined prosecution.
Governor Hochul has said there is no room left at the inn.
There is, and I have spoken as recently as 25 minutes ago to
commissioners of police on Long Island who said there is zero
communication from Homeland Security about the individuals that
are coming into our communities. Less than 2 years into his
tenure, Mayor Adams has faced challenges finding housing, and
feeding millions of migrants that have come from the border.
Mayor Adams, at one point during a public speech said, and I
quote, ``the influx of migrants along the Southwest Border will
destroy New York City.''
Illinois Governor, another Democrat, recently sent a letter
to President Biden calling the influx, ``unattainable.'' New
York City is facing a potential 15 percent cut across the board
to city agencies over the next 9 months. Why? To deal with
migrants because of your failed policies. So, my question, and
these are yes, or no. No time to answer differently. Do you
agree with Mayor Adams when he said that the influx of migrants
along the Southwest Border will destroy New York City, yes or
no?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, let me----
Mr. D'Esposito. Yes or no, sir?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I am going to answer your
question that we do not underestimate the challenge at the
Southwest Border and----
Mr. D'Esposito. Mr. Secretary, with all due respect, it is
a yes or no question.
Secretary Mayorkas. I have answered that question. Let me
also add that the----
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Do you agree with the Illinois Governor
who sent the letter to President Biden calling the influx
unattainable, yes, or no?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we work very closely with
the cities to address----
Mr. D'Esposito. Mr. Secretary, with all due respect, it is
a yes or no question. Yes or not?
Secretary Mayorkas. I am going to answer your question,
Congressman.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Does it concern you that Mayor Adams'
office asked a judge to stop a decades-old right-to-shelter
mandate which requires New York to give a place to sleep anyone
who needs one, yes or no?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I can't speak to the----
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Does it concern you that the surge of
illegal aliens crossing the Southwest Border has overwhelmed
our big cities like New York, with approximately 60,000
occupying beds in traditional city shelters and in over 20
emergency sites, yes or no?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I am incredibly proud of
the men and women of the Department of----
Mr. D'Esposito. Does it concern you that Mayor Adams
stated, and I quote, ``we, the city of New York, are getting no
support on this national crisis?'' Yes or no?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we are very proud of the
work we do----
Mr. D'Esposito. Does it concern you that as of August 2023,
New York City was paying almost $10 million, $10 million per
day to provide services for illegal aliens, yes or no?
Secretary Mayorkas. Do I have a chance to answer your
question?
Mr. D'Esposito. Sure, if the answer is yes or no. You have
had the opportunity to answer every one of my questions.
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman----
Mr. D'Esposito. But you refuse to answer the questions
whether they are yes or no. These are not trick questions. They
are not trick questions. The answers should unequivocally be
yes. Every State is a border State. Every city is a border
city. Especially when it comes to bearing the cost of you and
President Biden's failed policies at the border.
I agree with my colleagues. You should be impeached. That
is why we are doing the work that this committee is doing,
because you have failed your oath. As someone who has taken
oaths, probably the one most important, besides being a Member
of Congress, as a New York City police detective, I live that
oath every single day. To answer the question that you were
asked, do you wake up every morning? You clearly don't. Because
from every moment, from the time that you wake up to the time
that you go to sleep, your focus should be securing this
border. There has never ever been such a disaster at our
Southern Border as it is now. That is because of your failed
leadership.
It is a dereliction of your duty. Quite frankly, the
questions that I answered should have been unequivocally yes.
But you sat there and you decided to answer it in another
fashion. That speaks volumes. That is why this committee will
continue working to put the facts together to make sure that we
find a new Secretary of Homeland Security, one that holds this
country and this Nation as most important. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Goldman, the gentleman from New York, for his 5 minutes
questions.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that my
colleague from the 4th District of New York, which does not
include any part of New York City, has spent time as a NYPD
detective and is now an expert on our border policy and the
history of it as he leaves this room.
Secretary Mayorkas, you were not allowed to answer a number
of the questions that my colleague just asked you. I would like
to give you some time to respond if you would like.
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I would only say this,
that we do not minimize the significance of the challenge at
the Southern Border. We also understand the challenge at the
Southern Border and the fact that it is reflective of a
challenge that is gripping our entire hemisphere and, in fact,
the world.
Yesterday, I spent time with my counterparts from the
European Union, who spoke of the challenges that they are
suffering by reason of an historic displacement of people
around the world. We work day and night, 24 hours a day, 7 days
a week, to advance the security of our Southwest Border, to
advance the security of the Northern Border, and to achieve our
highest and most important mission, the safety and security of
the American people.
Mr. Goldman. I appreciate that. I also appreciate very much
that policy disputes are not impeachable offenses. We can wax
poetic and make big political pronouncements about whether you
should be impeached or not. But impeachment is high crimes and
misdemeanors, bribery, and treason. A policy dispute and a
disagreement about how we are managing the border is not
impeachable.
But I do want to give you just an opportunity, because I
know the administration under your leadership has actually
taken numerous measures to address what you rightly point out
to be a dramatic increase in the influx of immigrants to this
country, in large part because of the collapsing governments in
Central and South America, as well as climate disruption. So,
could you just describe briefly some of the measures that you
have taken to address this influx in immigration at our
Southern Border?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, the foundational point is
the following, and it's a point about which everyone agrees
that we are working with a broken immigration system that has
been in desperate need of reform for more than 20 years. I
believe it's since 1996, No. 1.
Within the confines of that broken immigration system, we
are implementing a model that does work, and that is to build
safe, lawful, and orderly pathways for individuals to obtain
the relief that the law that Congress has passed provides them,
and to deliver consequences for those individuals who do not
avail themselves of those pathways. That is a model that has
proven effective in the context of a broken immigration system
and also in the context of a phenomenon, the phenomenon of
migration of displaced people that is incredibly dynamic and
changes month to month.
Mr. Goldman. I appreciate very much your point which my
Republican colleagues do not seem to accept, which is that our
immigration system can only be fixed by us. It requires
legislation passed by Congress that cannot be managed
separately and individually by the Executive branch.
Director Wray, in my short time left, I want to focus on
testimony you gave a couple of weeks ago noting the tremendous
uptick in antisemitic hate crimes. I believe you testified that
even though Jews make up only 2.4 percent of the United States
population, antisemitic hate crimes account for around 60
percent of all religious-based hate crimes. You indicated that
this comes from across the spectrum, from the left, from the
right, foreign terrorist organizations, home-grown violent
extremists, domestic violent extremists. Can you expand a
little bit on those heightened threats to the Jewish community
now, 2 weeks later, and how the increase of antisemitic hate
speech has impacted or affected or increased the threats of
violence that the FBI has noticed since October 7?
Mr. Wray. Well, so, as you said, I have tried to be very
clear that one of the things that jumps out at me, and which is
why we work so closely at the FBI, both nationally and locally,
with the Jewish community, is that the Jewish community is
uniquely targeted by terrorism and hate, really across the
spectrum. Not that there should ever be a proportion for hate,
but the idea that a group that makes up only 2.4 percent of the
American public should be targeted with something close to 60
percent of all religiously-based hate crime is abhorrent and
should be abhorrent to everyone.
We have seen over the last few years an increase not just
in hate crimes overall, but an increase, a marked increase, in
antisemitic hate crimes. That's all with the recognition that
hate crimes are, as we all know, chronically underreported. We
have had just in the past few years, we've thwarted plots to
attack synagogues in Colorado, Ohio, Nevada. We've made arrests
for threats or attacks against the Jewish community in
California, to Michigan, to New Jersey. We helped rescue the
hostages in Colleyville. I could go on and on. That's all
before October 7.
Since October 7, as I've testified, we've seen an increase
in threats and reported threats which cover this across the
spectrum. But the biggest chunk of those, again, by far, is
threats to the Jewish community. So, we are aggressively
investigating those threats. But we are also very purposefully
and intensely doubling down on our engagement with the Jewish
community, which needs our help. I think it's incumbent on all
Americans to stand together on this.
Mr. Goldman. I appreciate that. I appreciate the Chairman
for indulging over time. I would just add that I do hope that
the FBI makes a much more concerted effort to pressure local
law enforcement agencies to participate in the collection of
data on hate crimes, which is woefully deficient. So even that
information that you have only includes about 21 percent of law
enforcement agencies in the country. I thank you and yield
back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Ms.
Lee, the gentlelady from Florida for her 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Earlier this year, I
sponsored the bill to reauthorize the Chemical Facility
Antiterrorism Standards program, which passed the House 409 to
1, but unfortunately has stalled in the Senate and the program
has since expired. Secretary Mayorkas, I know you share my
concern about the lapse in this program, and I would like to
return to your testimony about the potential impact of the
lapse in the CFATS program. Specifically, would you speak to
the role DHS has in the inspection of chemical facilities and
how that changes when the program is allowed to lapse?
Secretary Mayorkas. Thank you very much for your support,
Congresswoman, of the CFATS program. It is vitally necessary to
the protection of not only the communities that surround the
particular facility, but America as a whole. Without the CFATS
authority, we are unable to inspect facilities and ensure
they're in compliance with standards that protect us against
very, very dangerous chemicals. We are fortunate that we have
not had an incident that has been a dramatic example of why
this authority is so vitally needed.
Ms. Lee. Do you believe the likelihood or the threat of
such an incident potentially occurring is greater when the
program is allowed to lapse?
Secretary Mayorkas. Absolutely. Because what we are able to
do is ensure that the standards are being enforced and that
best security practices are being followed. When we are not
able to inspect and enforce those standards, we see facilities
not employing them and creating a significant vulnerability.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Secretary Mayorkas. Director Wray, I
appreciate the testimony that you have given and the
information that you have shared about your internal efforts at
the FBI to address FISA reform and to address taking steps to
address abuses to the 702 program and within the FISC and would
like to discuss that issue with you. The House Committee on
Judiciary and Intelligence have worked to come up with FISA
reform ideas and legislation that would protect American civil
liberties while still ensuring that law enforcement has the
ability to conduct lawful and necessary surveillance. With the
expiration looming at the end of 2023 and the threats that you
have described ever-increasing to our homeland, I would like to
touch on how the FISA program itself and the 702 program assist
in preventing plots to harm Americans and potential threats to
the homeland. Would you please elaborate on why 702 is an
important part of your work?
Mr. Wray. So, 702 is critical to protecting Americans from
foreign terrorist threats. If you think about why 702 was
enacted in the first place, even though it's focused on foreign
adversaries overseas presenting national security threats, the
whole reason we have it is to protect Americans here in the
homeland from those threats. That part is the FBI's part in
running U.S. person queries, among other things. If you have a
foreign terrorist organization overseas, any one of those ones
that I listed off in my opening statement, who decides to task
an operative here or to direct an attack here, it is more
likely than not that 702 is going to be the thing that would
allow us to anticipate or detect that.
If we were to deliberately blind ourselves to that
information, we are taking a wildly irresponsible risk, in my
view. To give you an example, something like 100 percent of our
technically-sourced intelligence about Hamas comes from 702.
That's just one terrorist organization. So why we would blind
ourselves to that when it's not Constitutionally required,
somebody needs to be able to explain to the families of
terrorist victims of the future why something that we were not
Constitutionally required to do, we just decided to do that
made them and their family members less safe.
Ms. Lee. In your written testimony, you specifically touch
on the concept of a warrant requirement related to U.S. person
queries in the 702 database, and your assessment that that
would hamper law enforcement's ability and the intelligence
community's ability to do their work and utilize the database.
Would you explain why it is you believe that a warrant
requirement for U.S. persons queries would be a challenge or a
hurdle for you all to continue to do that work?
Mr. Wray. Well, the first thing I would say is that it's
quite clear under the case law that a warrant is not required
Constitutionally to run a U.S. person query. This is
information that is already lawfully collected, and it's our
ability to run queries of the information that's already
lawfully collected.
The second thing, though, is that the time, the stage in an
investigation where 702 is really used is at the front end to
quickly figure out what are we dealing with here. Do we have a
threat that we have to pursue? So, agility and speed are of the
essence, and trying to get a warrant requirement at the front
end in that stage is really a nonstarter. The delay that it
would cause in allowing us to connect the dots, which is what's
happening when our people are running U.S. person queries,
would basically make the tool largely useless.
The other thing that I think people tend to forget when
they talk about a warrant requirement is that the vast majority
of our U.S. person querying is to identify victims, in
particular of cyber attacks. There's no warrant that anybody
would be getting to be able to run a query of a victim term.
So, we would be essentially putting ourselves in a position
where we wouldn't be able to protect American infrastructure
from Iranian cyber attacks, Chinese cyber attacks, Russian
cyber attacks, North Korean cyber attacks.
So, again, I think there's a--I understand the mindset. We
take very seriously our role as stewards of these important
authorities. That's why I am so committed to the reforms that
we have made. That's why I am so gratified by the findings by
the FISA court and other outside entities about the
effectiveness of those reforms. But please, please don't throw
the baby out with the bathwater.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields. I now recognize Ms.
Clarke for her 5 minutes of testimony.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you,
Ranking Member. I sincerely thank our panel of witnesses for
both their service and their testimony here today. I would like
to extend that gratitude to the women and men in the Federal
enterprise under your leadership.
Last Congress, I partnered with my colleagues in the Senate
and across the aisle to enact the cyber incident reporting for
a Critical Infrastructure Act, which will give the Federal
Government the visibility it needs to identify malicious cyber
campaigns early and better understand the tactics of our
adversaries to prioritize risk reduction investments. Incident
reporting is a critical tool in our ability to defend
ourselves, but it is not the only place we need to invest time
and resources. Competing incident reporting frameworks will
undermine security, not enhance it, because it forces a
disproportionate focus on compliance with various reporting
regulations over security and incident response.
The Cybersecurity Incident Reporting Council has
acknowledged as much. Secretary Mayorkas, the Cyber Incident
Reporting Council has identified duplicative Federal cyber
incident reporting requirements. The National Cybersecurity
Strategy continues to task DHS with harmonizing the Federal
cyber incident reporting requirements. How willing are DHS's
Federal partners, including independent agencies, to do the
work of harmonizing incident reporting requirements? Are you
concerned that multiple inconsistent reporting requirements
could frustrate the security value of incident reporting?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, this is a very important
subject in a domain that is only becoming of increasing
significance to the security of our critical infrastructure and
our country writ large. No. 1, we are receiving excellent
cooperation from our Federal partners with respect to the Cyber
Incident Reporting Council and its effort to harmonize
reporting requirements.
It is a challenge because there are also independent
agencies that have particular mandates, and they perceive
sometimes those mandates requiring a different process, a
different time line than other departments and agencies do. We
are all driving toward the same outcome of a cyber secure
America, but there are some tensions with respect to particular
jurisdictions, and we are working through them, and everyone
has demonstrated impeccable motive.
Ms. Clarke. Very well. Director Wray and Director Abizaid.
Abizaid, I remembered like lemonade. It was stuck in my head.
What do you make of the fact that the U.S.-based persons who
are primarily responsible for terrorism threats here in our
homeland--I am sorry, let me back up here, I kind-of--let me
start. OK. I am struck by an unclassified NCTC product
entitled, Foreign Terrorist Inspired, Enabled and Directed
Attacks in the United States since 9/11, as of February 2023,
that identified 47 attacks and concludes that of the 47, 41
involved U.S. persons.
I hope that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
are paying attention and will recognize that their fixation
solely on threats coming over the Southwestern Border is
dangerous. We cannot lose sight of the threats right here at
home, and it is urgent that we work to counter radicalization
of U.S. persons. So, again, my question is, you know, what do
you make of the fact that U.S.-based persons are primarily
responsible for terrorism threats here in our homeland? How
difficult does this make it for the FBI, NCTC, to detect and
thwart possible attacks? Are you having to shift your
counterterrorism approach to accomplish this?
Ms. Abizaid. Yes. Thank you for the question. It goes right
in line with my testimony here today, which is that the
heightened threat environment in the United States is being
driven by individuals that are inspired to act. I think you've
rightly outlined the number of foreign terrorist inspired,
enabled, or directed attacks since 9/11 here on U.S. soil and
most of those have been inspired attacks. Some have been
enabled, some have been, only three, I think, have actually
been directed by foreign terrorist organizations.
So, that history, I think, is an important sort of context
for the heightened threat environment we're dealing with here
today. That said, part of the reason that we've had that level
of success is because of the very clear priority we've placed
on screening, vetting, watch listing, terrorist identities,
known and suspected terrorists, databases on the Classified
side that really support border security efforts writ large.
Ms. Clarke. My time is up, Mr. Chairman. Again, as we move
to Thanksgiving next week, I give thanks for you and the work
that you do and to all of those families that sacrifice on
behalf of the American people. Happy Thanksgiving to all my
colleagues, and I yield back.
Chairman Green. Well said, Ms. Clarke. Thank you for that.
The gentlelady yields. I now recognize Mr. Lutrell, the
gentleman from Texas, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Luttrell. Good afternoon. Nineteen terrorists in
September 2001 killed 3,000 of our citizens. Then last month,
Hamas fighters invaded Israel. Ms. Abizaid, do we have a number
on how many fighters, Hamas fighters came into Israel? Do we
have a round number on that?
Ms. Abizaid. I don't have a number for you.
Mr. Luttrell. Mr. Wray, you know?
Mr. Wray. I don't.
Mr. Luttrell. Almost a month past now and we don't have a
good accountability on what those numbers look like?
Ms. Abizaid. I'm sure we can get those for you. I don't
have them for you today. But it was a sizable number and to a
shocking degree.
Mr. Luttrell. So, how many deaths in Israel last month,
total civilian?
Ms. Abizaid. We've seen the Israeli government revise their
casualty estimates down to around 1,200. Again, a shocking
number of deaths.
Mr. Luttrell. How many hostages remain?
Ms. Abizaid. There are over 200, is my understanding.
Mr. Luttrell. Mr. Wray, do you believe that in America or
globally, there is a war on fentanyl?
Mr. Wray. Do I believe there is a war on fentanyl?
Mr. Luttrell. Yes.
Mr. Wray. I think there is a whole-of-Government effort to
combat the scourge of the epidemic of fentanyl.
Mr. Luttrell. Just the sheer number of deaths that we see
daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly, I would, and I have----
Mr. Wray. I'm sorry, I started my opening----
Mr. Luttrell. I would just say sheer numbers that we are
losing to fentanyl. As a military man, I would think that loss
would calculate a sheer conflict. So, my question is, do you
consider our challenges against the fentanyl crisis a war? Or
is that too bold of a statement?
Mr. Wray. No, I don't, I mean look, bold language is
appropriate when it comes to fentanyl.
Mr. Luttrell. Good understanding.
Mr. Wray. You know, I will tell you that on the FBI end,
when we are making gang arrests, we have seen over and over
again, violent gang arrests, more often than not now, include
fentanyl seizures. That's all over the country. That's just one
metric. But it shows the degree, along with, for example, the
case that I mentioned in Boston in my opening statement, just
shows it is a routine thing now for our people, working with
our partners, to be making seizures of fentanyl that in one
seizure would be enough to wipe out an entire State.
Mr. Luttrell. I would add sex trafficking to the war as
well given the sheer numbers of individuals that are being held
across the globe. Ms. Abizaid or Mr. Wray, how many known
groups or individuals in the United States are we monitoring
for terroristic activity that we need to be concerned on? Mr.
Mayorkas, I know Mr. Pfluger asked you these questions with
that chart, but I am concerned, we are concerned that, is there
a substantial amount, again, 19 for 9/11? Let's just say 200
maybe Hamas fighters came into Israel. Those are very small
numbers compared to the damages that they inflicted. So, are we
actively engaged on any terroristic watch list inside the
United States that provide an absolute risk or threat right
now?
Mr. Wray. Well, let me try to answer the question this way.
We have, we FBI have, through our 56 Joint Terrorism Task
Forces, have active investigations that relate to Hamas, that
relate to al-Qaeda, that relate to al-Qaeda----
Mr. Luttrell. You said that very eloquently earlier, sir.
Mr. Wray. Yes.
Mr. Luttrell. I hate to cut you off.
Mr. Wray. OK.
Mr. Luttrell. You don't have to repeat yourself. My concern
is I want to know, can I go home and tell my people in Texas
that we are in a safe place? There is no viable risk that we
need to be concerned about right now. Giving just the numbers
that have come across the border, Mr. Mayorkas, these numbers,
you get hit in the face with this every day, so I am sure you
know them well. But in 2018, we had 6 known registers, then it
goes down to 3, 2022 it went up to 98. This year it is 172.
Already in 2024 fiscal year, we are at 13.
So again, this is a worldwide threat to the homeland. My
concern is, are we missing something? Where is our blind side?
Is there one? Are we addressing it? Either one of you.
Ms. Abizaid. So, as an intelligence professional, we are
always concerned about the gaps that we have about the global
terrorism environment. For my part, we are very focused on
foreign terrorist organizations overseas, what we can learn
about their plans and intentions, and the degree to which they
have tried to seed operatives here in the United States. We
don't have credible----
Mr. Luttrell. Are you seeing them seeding those or sewing
those threads here in the United States?
Ms. Abizaid. We do not have credible or corroborated
indications that they are trying to seed operatives into the
United States for terrorist purposes through the Southwest
Border or other borders. That doesn't mean we're complacent. It
is a risk that we monitor and we evaluate every day.
Mr. Luttrell. OK. Mr. Mayorkas, you mentioned in your
opening statement, and I mimic Ms. Lee's statement, about 4470
passed the House, passed out of the committee through the
House. It's sitting in the Senate for CFATS. In your opening
statement, you mentioned Shepherd, Texas. Do you know where
Shepherd, Texas is?
Secretary Mayorkas. Not precisely, Congressman.
Mr. Luttrell. I was kind-of hoping you would say yes
because I am sure you wrote your opening statement. Well,
Shepherd, Texas, that is my district. I didn't intentionally
think you were going to start throwing, you would throw darts
at me after our discussion. I want to thank you for coming to
my office after the first time that we met. You said you would
do that, and you did. So, thank you very much.
But that facility in Shepherd, Texas, a class A facility,
very small. Do you know how the explosion happened?
Secretary Mayorkas. Not precisely, Congressman. I am aware
of the fact of the explosion and how it underscores the
criticality of the CFATS program.
Mr. Luttrell. It does, and it was a human error, is how
inevitably the explosion happened. But I don't know if you are
aware of this now, but that facility is not under CFATS
regulation. I just wanted to bring that to your attention since
you put--I thought you were talking directly to me when you
said that. So, I wanted to make sure that you were aware that
that particular facility does not, even though we support
CFATS, that one does not live in that space. But thank you.
Again, thank you for coming to my office like you said you
would do.
Secretary Mayorkas. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Luttrell. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields and I think Ms. Titus
has asked to defer to Mr. Strong and then come back to her. So,
we will grant that request. The gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Strong, is recognized for his 5 minutes of testimony.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Mayorkas, I
want to follow up on Representative Pfluger's question. In
August, CNN reported that a human smuggling ring containing at
least one individual with known ties to ISIS was responsible
for bringing a number of Uzbek, which is Uzbekistan, migrants,
to the border who were subsequently, were released into the
country. I do have that document. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to add
that to the record. I ask unanimous consent to add this.
Chairman Green. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Exclusive: Smuggler With Ties to ISIS Helped Migrants Enter US From
Mexico, Raising Alarm Bells Across Government
By Katie Bo Lillis, Evan Perez, Priscilla Alvarez and Natasha Bertrand,
CNN
Updated 7:23 AM EDT, Wed August 30, 2023.
CNN.--The FBI is investigating more than a dozen migrants from
Uzbekistan and other countries allowed into the US after they sought
asylum at the southern border with Mexico earlier this year, a scramble
set off when US intelligence officials found that the migrants traveled
with the help of a smuggler with ties to ISIS, according to multiple US
officials.
While the FBI says no specific ISIS plot has been identified,
officials are still working to ``identify and assess'' all of the
individuals who gained entry to the United States, according to a
statement from National Security Council spokesman Adrienne Watson. And
they are closely scrutinizing a number of the migrants as possible
criminal threats, according to two US officials.
Though there is no evidence at this point to justify detaining
anyone, the episode was so alarming that an urgent classified
intelligence report was circulated to President Joe Biden's top Cabinet
officials in their morning briefing book. For some counterterrorism
officials, it shows that the US is deeply vulnerable to the possibility
that terrorists could sneak across the southern border by hiding amid
the surge of migrants entering the country in search of asylum.
The incident kicked off a flurry of urgent meetings among top
national security and administration officials at a time when
Republicans have hammered Biden on the security of the southern border
heading into the 2024 campaign. Staff on key congressional committees
have been informed of the incident, according to two sources familiar
with the matter.
Earlier this year, a cohort of migrants from Uzbekistan requested
asylum and were screened by the Department of Homeland Security, part
of a rising number of asylum seekers who have traveled to the US from
Central Asia in recent years. There was no information in any of the
intelligence community's databases that raised any red flags and the
people were all released into the US pending a court date.
It was only later, when the FBI learned about the existence of a
human smuggling network helping foreign nationals travel to the US--and
that this network included at least one individual with connections to
ISIS--that national security officials put the pieces together.
FBI agents around the country immediately rushed to try to locate
the migrants and investigate their backgrounds. The bureau also worked
with Turkish authorities, who arrested the smuggler and other members
of his network at the behest of the US, and has subsequently obtained
information from him to aid its investigation, US officials said.
``There was no indication--and remains no indication--that any of
the individuals facilitated by this network have a connection to a
foreign terrorist organization or are engaged in plotting a terrorist
attack in the United States,'' Watson said in a statement to CNN.
Since the intelligence became available, homeland security
officials also began detaining, vetting and, ultimately, expediting the
removal of other migrants encountered at the southern border who ``fit
the profile associated with individuals who were facilitated by this
network,'' Watson said.
The ISIS-linked smuggler is not believed to be a member of the
terror group, but more like an independent contractor who has personal
sympathies with the organization, according to US officials. The
intelligence community now believes it is unlikely that he was
assisting these individuals at the behest of ISIS. Most are believed to
be seeking a better life in the United States.
For some Biden administration officials, the episode is an example
of the system working as it should: intelligence came to light about a
particular group of migrants and the US responded with an investigation
determining that they did not pose a threat.
``While the FBI has not identified a specific terrorism plot
associated with foreign nationals who recently entered the United
States at the southern border, we always work with our field offices
across the country, as well as our domestic and international partners,
to identify any potential illegal activity or terrorism threats,'' the
FBI said in a statement to CNN.
But the US has not yet located all of the individuals who traveled
as part of the network, according to Watson's statement. And more than
15 of the migrants tracked down are still under scrutiny by the FBI as
possible criminal threats, according to one US official.
Some law enforcement and intelligence officials privately expressed
concerns that an unusual increase in the number of migrants from
Central Asia, a region that isn't known to be a major source of
refugees, didn't spark more investigation by US border authorities.
``We continually assess our security architecture to ensure that we
are best poised to respond to threats to the homeland,'' Watson said in
her statement to CNN. ``Moreover, we will continue to constantly
recalibrate our screening, vetting, and processing of those encountered
entering the United States to ensure that we are taking into account
the most up-to-date information at our disposal and with an unyielding
commitment to protecting Americans and the homeland from the full range
of potential threats.''
Watson also said in her statement that the US is working with
foreign partners to shut down travel routes associated with the
smuggling network.
In a statement to CNN, an official from the Turkish Embassy in
Washington said that Turkey had arrested four members of a smuggling
ring that, the official said, the US had told Turkey aided the travel
of Uzbeks, Russians, Chechens and Georgians residing in Turkey to the
United States.
The Turkish official denied that there was a connection between any
of the four arrested individuals and ISIS.
A senior administration official suggested that Turkey did not have
access to the same intelligence as the US about the smuggler's links to
ISIS.
``Working with partners, the US can't always share the full scope
of the information picture. We appreciate Turkey's cooperation,'' the
official said.
A DHS spokesperson told CNN that the department along with its
``counterterrorism, and law enforcement partners screen and vet
individuals prior to their entry to the United States to prevent anyone
known to pose a threat from entering the country. DHS continually
monitors all available sources of intelligence and information related
to potential threats and if any new information emerges, we work
closely with the FBI and other partners to take appropriate action.''
Terrorism and the border
The episode sits squarely at the nexus of two of the thorniest and
most politically fraught security challenges facing the Biden
administration: terrorism and the border. Biden has grappled with how
to prevent terror attacks on the US homeland at a time when the
intelligence community and the military have shifted many of their
resources away from counterterrorism in favor of threats from China and
Russia.
Administration officials have also grappled with limited resources
as they face a growing number of migrants at the US southern border.
Migration patterns to the United States have changed dramatically in
recent years, with people arriving to the United States from more than
150 countries--the result, officials say, of unprecedented mass
migration around the world.
In July, border authorities encountered more than 183,000 migrants
at the US southern border, according to US Customs and Border
Protection data.
Both the Biden and Trump administrations have been forced to
wrestle with similar cases of suspected terrorists trying to enter the
country at the southern border.
But the number of individuals encountered at the border with
records in the terror watchlist in a givenyear is extremely small and
represents a very small percentage of the total number of known or
suspected terrorists who try to enter or travel to the US through other
means.
When USCBP officers process migrants at the border, they take
biometrics, like fingerprints and facial scans, and run individuals
through certain law enforcement databases for any red flags.
Migrants arriving at the US southern border from central Asia may
trigger additional screening because of the distance and cost required
to take the journey, according to a former senior DHS official, which
raises questions about why an individual from that part of the world
would choose to cross at the US southern border.
But if there is no so-called derogatory information about a person
in US databases, then the migrant is released pending a court date.
Although some asylum seekers do not appear for their court date,
officials say that US law enforcement has surveillance tools at its
disposal to locate those individals in the United States.
It's not clear whether this particular group of migrants received
secondary screening at the time, but it's possible--even likely--that
they did. But because officials believe the Turkish smuggler was acting
as a run-of-the-mill human smuggler, not an agent of ISIS, it's not
clear that they would have been detained or in any other way handled
differently even if the government had known about his role at the time
they were processed.
For some intelligence and law enforcement officials who spoke
privately to CNN, that's part of the problem. The US government has to
figure out how to define who is and who isn't a threat in a murky world
where criminal activity like human smuggling is often commingled with
amorphous connections to terrorism organizations. It is particularly
difficult to disentangle those threads for desperate migrants fleeing
countries where terror groups routinely recruit and operate.
Speaking at a July congressional hearing, FBI Director Christopher
Wray said, ``From the FBI's perspective, that we are seeing all sorts
of very serious, very serious, criminal threats that come from across
the border.''
Wray said the southern border was becoming ``more of a priority''
for the FBI.
Some intelligence officials who viewed the intelligence report sent
around earlier this month worry that ISIS may shift its tactics to
target the southern border, long a bogeyman on the political right but
one that intelligence officials say has yet to become a reality.
For other officials, the intelligence reporting to top policymakers
was better described as an appropriately cautious response by a
responsible government--a warning describing the theoretical risk to
the United State so that national security agencies could understand
the threat and determine how best to harden American defenses.
``Whenever we have indicators that criminal actors--such as those
involved in human smuggling--have connections to terrorism, we work
diligently with our partners to investigate and understand how foreign
terrorist organizations may attempt to exploit their capabilities so
that we can best mitigate any risk to the American public,'' the FBI
said in its statement.
This story has been updated with additional reporting.

Mr. Strong. Thank you. After learning of the ISIS
connection, the Biden administration has been scrambling to
determine the whereabouts of these Uzbek individuals. Secretary
Mayorkas, has the Biden administration determined the
whereabouts of all of these individuals? Have they all been
detained? Have they all been vetted?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we vet and screen
individuals whom we encounter at the Southwest Border, No. 1.
No. 2, individuals who pose a threat to the safety of the
American people, who pose a public safety or national security
threat, and whose release would advance that threat, are, in
fact, detained. They are in immigration enforcement
proceedings, and they will be removed if, in fact, they don't
have a basis to remain in the United States.
Mr. Strong. Have they been detained?
Secretary Mayorkas. There are those who have been detained
because, in fact, we cannot be assured of the safety of the
public. I would be pleased to provide you with greater details
in a different setting.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. As you know, the
nonintrusive inspection system program is critical for
detecting illegal drugs such as fentanyl and other illicit
contraband hidden inside cars, trucks, and cargo entering the
United States legally through ports of entry. Secretary
Mayorkas, you have stated in recent testimony before the Senate
Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee that DHS has
surged resources to our ports of entry as it relates to NII
systems. However, DHS's own numbers tell us that with the NII
system, only approximately 2 percent of passenger vehicles and
17 percent of cargo vehicles are even inspected for the
detection of fentanyl and other contraband. Do you really
consider that a surge of resources?
Secretary Mayorkas. Oh, Congressman, we have surged not
only the deployment of technology, the nonintrusive inspection
technology known by its acronym, NII, but we have also surged
forward-operating labs to be able to analyze controlled
substances that are interdicted. If, in fact, we identify them
as fentanyl, then we take the appropriate prosecutorial action
specific to the attempted importation of this incredibly fatal
opioid. Also----
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I reclaim my time.
Thank you. Director Wray, I appreciate your candor when you
testified last year that the border represents significant
concerns to the FBI. Since then, the number of illegal border
crossings, gotaways, and those on the terrorist watch list
attempting to cross into the United States has continued to
balloon. Would it be safe to say that the situation at our
border is still of significant concern?
Mr. Wray. Certainly. The concerns that I articulated last
year remain very much top of mind for us.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Director Wray, I know that it is not
your border policies that have gotten us here, but I would be
remiss, not to mention the strain that the open border puts on
your work force and their ability to carry out the FBI's
primary mission. But that is not what I want to talk to you
about today. In your testimony, you mentioned the threat posed
by criminal syndicates and nation-states as it relates to
cyber. Specifically, you spoke to the threat posed by the
Chinese Communist Party in this arena.
I was glad you briefly mentioned earlier the impact of
advanced training in cyber. Can you speak to the capabilities
of the FBI Redstone in Huntsville, Alabama, and specifically
the role that Huntsville plays in combating the unique and
evolving cyber threats posed by our adversaries?
Mr. Wray. Well, thank you, Congressman. I am incredibly
excited about everything that's going on in Huntsville,
including in particular, we view that as where we're going to
have be the center of gravity for our advanced training,
especially high-tech, especially cyber, especially innovation.
We've been down there numerous times to check on the
expansion, and we are now up to, I think, about 1,900 employees
down there. Nineteen different headquarters divisions have
people there. So, it's a hub of activity. Especially on the
cyber side, I think it's going to be a very important part of
the FBI's future.
Mr. Strong. Like I say, I appreciate that information. We
are very proud of how it has worked there at Redstone. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bishop [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Ms. Titus for her 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses, especially Secretary Mayorkas, for being here today.
As I am sure you know, it is exactly 1 year ago today that we
sat in this hearing with these exact same witnesses, the exact
same issues, exact same questions, and here we are, and this
committee's done very little other than talk about the border.
I want to thank you first, Mr. Secretary, for working with
me on the Sears decision. You know, this week is the week of
the big race in Las Vegas, and we worked my office, with your
office very hard to get the security level raised to a Level 2,
and that's been done. We appreciate that kind of cooperation.
Also, I have introduced a bill to codify that program. It
is called a Special Events Program and Support Act. It is
bipartisan. So, I hope we can continue to work together on
that, because I think that will be a good next step.
We listen to the story of the threats and who is
threatening us and how they are threatening us and where they
are and where they came from. You know, right now, we are
talking about what is happening in the Middle East and how it
has been translated to threats or violence in this country.
Before, it was talking about it in the wake of the Supreme
Court decision on the abortion issue.
So, it seems like the methods are the same, but the motives
change by just whatever is politically on the agenda. It must
be like playing whack-a-mole how you deal with the threats.
Would you tell us kind-of what you have in place to adapt or
adjust to what the current news is that is bringing out perhaps
a new group of these kind of home-grown terrorists?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, is that a question
directed to me?
Ms. Titus. Yes, or Mr. Wray, either one.
Secretary Mayorkas. I would say that the two leaders seated
with me and their colleagues in the intelligence and law
enforcement enterprise are the best in the world, and that
gives us visibility in terms of the threat landscape and allows
us to operationalize the measures to meet that challenge.
Mr. Wray. I would say that we rely heavily on partnerships,
State, local, not just with the Federal agencies here, but in
particular with State and local law enforcement, with the
community, with the private sector, in order to be able to try
to anticipate where the threat's going so that we go to where
the threat's going to be and not waiting to always be in a
reactive posture. Our goal is to be ahead of the threat, and
partnerships are the critical ingredient in that. Again, not
just within the Federal Government, but with all those other
very important stakeholders.
Ms. Titus. I know we have a fusion center in Las Vegas
where you have a strong presence as these agencies, but also
the private sector, nobody has more security than gaming does,
that eye in the sky. So, I think they are valuable partners.
Excuse me.
Ms. Abizaid. Yes. I would just add to what my colleagues
said that we have a work force combined across our different
agencies that is just full of tenacity. Their job is to not
sleep on threats. Their job is to understand, be curious, and
evaluate every single report that comes in and take it
seriously and understand whether it reflects a real and
credible threat and whether it reflects a changing trend in the
kind of dynamic that we're facing here in the country and
globally. So, we are really proud of that tenacious work force.
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, if I can just add,
because Director Wray used the term that is incredibly
important, that's the term of partnership, because indeed it's
correct. It's not just across the Federal enterprise, but with
our State, local, Tribal, territorial, campus law enforcement,
with the private sector, and also, very importantly, with our
international partners. It really does require a community of
action.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. I would ask you, Director Wray, about
something you kind-of expanded on in this report or your
statement today from a year ago, and that is international
organized crime, the retail crime that we see, organized retail
crime. We are going to see more pictures of that as we go into
the holiday season, the smash-and-grab, the shoplifting that
then the money is turned into human trafficking or drugs or
guns or whatever. Can you tell us a little bit about how that
is a priority for you?
Mr. Wray. Well, we are in a number of States supporting our
State and local law enforcement partners who are really the
first line of defense on that. But to the extent that there are
national connections, national networks, to the extent that the
crime that you're describing contributes to some broader
organized criminal activity, then we are actively engaged. In
some States, for example, we have dedicated task forces that
are focused just on that issue. It is something that is heavily
concentrated in a few geographies in particular, but it's
starting to become a more national trend.
Ms. Titus. It is not just big box stores anymore. It is
small stores. I was in a drugstore, and somebody came in, just
raked off the eyelashes into a backpack and walked out with
them. Now, eyelashes aren't power tools, but it is a problem at
all levels. So, appreciate you kind-of keeping an eye on that.
Mr. Bishop. The gentlelady's----
Ms. Titus. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Bishop. The gentlelady having yielded back, the Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Brecheen, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Our
decaying national security is on full display. We know the
Southern Border is open. I think colleagues across the aisle
know the Southern Border is open. Illegal aliens definitely
know the Southern Border is open. The policies are what is
causing millions to come to the border. Under the Trump
administration, we saw a 45-year low of illegal aliens coming
to the border in 2019.
Things have completely reversed. We are seeing the highest
numbers in our Nation's history. President Biden, Secretary
Mayorkas, leadership matters, and there has not been a Federal
law change that has provoked this. It is the leadership from
the top. Since February 2021, Custom and Border Protection has
reported over 6.5 million alien encounters at our Southern
Border under this administration, an additional 1.7 million
gotaways. That is 8.2 million total since this administration
took office. That is 3 times the population of Oklahoma. That
means in 3 years, almost every year, the population of Oklahoma
is coming illegally across our Southern Border.
Custom and Border Protection reports they have apprehended
294 known or suspected terrorists between ports of entry under
President Biden's time frame. Only 14 suspected terrorists were
caught trying to cross the border during the entirety of the 4
years of the Trump administration. There is a passage in the
Bible that I find interesting. I think it is appropriate. It's
Ecclesiastes 811. It says, when a sentence for a crime is not
quickly carried out, the people's hearts are filled with
schemes to do wrong.
It remains and has been lawlessness to cross that border,
Southern Border, would undermine the rule of law. Lawlessness
is contagious. Lawlessness of an open border encourages
lawlessness of the fentanyl drug trade. It encourages human
smuggling. It encourages illegal aliens to drive without a
driver's license once they get here or go on for those illegal
aliens that are here and commit additional crimes because they
remain hidden. Under your leadership, Secretary Mayorkas, we
are not deporting them to the levels that we were. We all know
this.
Former Ambassador John Richmond was before this committee
yesterday. He said that criminal convictions by the Department
of Justice against human trafficking is also down 48 percent
since 2019. It is amazing.
I have got a couple of pictures here. It is amazing what
leadership can do. I want to hold these up. This is a Custom
and Border Patrol agent cutting barbed wire that the Texas
Department of Public Safety put in place. This administration
leadership is bringing this about. I got another picture here.
This is a loader tractor, and it is lifting up barbed wire also
put in place by the Texas Department of Public Safety. Those
images are pointing to the fact that a secure border is
lacking, and the Border Patrol agents following the leadership,
the culture of leadership, are doing what they can to undermine
the rule of law.
We know that as of last June, an illegal immigrant living
in Ohio was charged with plotting to kill former President Bush
by smuggling Iraqi citizens across the Southern Border. He
applied for asylum the year prior in March 2021. An
assassination plot against a former President of the United
States that has ties to what is happening at the Southern
Border.
Director Wray, you testified in your opening statement that
protecting the American people from terrorism remains the FBI's
No. 1 priority. You also said this morning to our Chairman, and
I am quoting you, ``greater fidelity regarding who comes into
the country makes us safer.'' Director Wray, I understand you
are walking a fine line. I understand that you serve this
President, and I know that your position is something that you
think about in what you say. There is a statement in our
culture that says, blood on our hands, and many people, if you
are interested where it comes from, it actually comes from the
Torah.
I thought it was interesting, Secretary Mayorkas, you
started this morning talking about what has happened in Israel
in the last 60 days. In the Torah in Ezekiel 33, Israel is
faced with an invasion and how they defended themselves from
that invasion. In the Torah in Ezekiel 33, it says this. It
says, if you speak to your people and say, if destruction is
about to come on the land, the people of the land, take a man
among them and make him their watchman. Gentlemen, think about
the platform, please, that you have been given by this Nation.
They make him their watchman, and he sees the sword of danger,
destruction, coming on the land, and he blows the trumpet and
warns the people. Then he who hears the sound of the trumpet
and does not take warning, his blood is on his own head. But if
the watchman sees the sword coming, the watchman who has been
put in that position by the people, sees the sword coming,
destruction coming, does not blow the trumpet, and the people
are not warned and a sword of destruction comes and takes the
person from them. Talking about the watchman, his blood will be
required from the watchman's hand. The individual, the people
in that country will be from the watchman, he will have blood
on his hands.
Director Wray, are you doing all you can to speak to
Secretary Mayorkas and President Biden and crying out loud the
destruction that is coming to our Nation and potentially come
if a terrorism attack hits us within the next years, months?
Have you done all you can to know that your conscience is clean
on this front?
Mr. Wray. Congressman, my conscience is clean that I am
doing everything in my power to protect the American people
from the threat of terrorism, from the threat of fentanyl, from
any number of the other threats that we've talked about here
today. That includes working closely with the rest of my
colleagues in Government.
Secretary Mayorkas. Mr. Chair.
Mr. Bishop. In my discretion, I will let Mr. Mayorkas
respond.
Secretary Mayorkas. I'll take just a minute. I appreciate
your exercise of discretion. I believe the Congressman said
that in 2019, there was a decades-long low in the number of
encounters at our Southwest Border. That is a remarkably
stunning mis-statement of facts, since in 2019, it was almost
100 percent increase in the number of encounters over just the
year prior.
But I won't correct all of the mis-statements. The mis-
statements with respect to the concertina wire and the like, I
just want to address one. Because I am accused of all sorts of
things in these hearings, and I can take it. What I will not
accept--I can take it, I don't--I just return to my work, and I
do the work of the Department of Homeland Security, incredibly
proud to support the 260,000 men and women of that Department.
But to say that the Border Patrol agents who risk their lives
every single day to protect our country, undermine the rule of
law, is beyond the pale. I just want to make that clear.
Mr. Bishop. Well, I think since you have impugned the
Member, I need to allow him to respond to that. I didn't
understand him. I thought I heard him to be indicting
leadership. But, Mr. Brecheen, you are recognized for a
response.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is a result of
leadership. It is a result of a culture that says one thing and
does something else at the Southern Border. It is lawlessness.
You take a company, you take a Government entity, you take
anything, leadership matters. So, this is lawlessness, and
somebody has to take responsibility for it.
In regards to 2019, one of the months, you saw one of the
lowest numbers in 45 years of recorded illegal immigration in
2019, one of those months. That information, I would stand by
that. I yield.
Mr. Bishop. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Crane, for his 5
minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to start with
Director Wray. Have the border security policy changes made
under this administration, sir, made it more difficult for the
FBI to keep Americans safe?
Mr. Wray. Well, I don't know that I could cite it to
specific policies. What I would say is that certainly the
threats that we are contending with that emanate from the other
side of the border, whether it's fentanyl trafficking, whether
it's the increase in the number of KSTs that we've seen over
the last 5 years, all those are things that make the work that
the FBI has on our side of the border to try to get ahead of
those threats more challenging.
Mr. Crane. So, you don't acknowledge that the increase in
traffic that we are seeing, the increase in individuals on the
terror watch list, have anything to do with some of the policy
changes of this administration?
Mr. Wray. Well, I didn't say that. I think what I'm saying
is when it comes to border security and questions of how that's
supposed to be done, I defer to DHS on that. What I would say
is the threats that we're contending with, which come from the
other side of the border, are certainly extremely challenging
over the last several years.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, sir. In your professional opinion,
what is causing the increase of encounters of individuals on
the terror watch list and the traffic at our Southern Border?
Mr. Wray. You know, I'm not sure that I have a professional
opinion about immigration. We try to stay in our lane and focus
on the issues that we're contending with.
Mr. Crane. Well, actually, sir, I know you are a really
smart guy. I know you do have an opinion. If you are not
willing to share it in this setting, that is OK. But I know you
have studied criminology. You have studied deterrence. I mean,
you are the head of the FBI. We all recognize that. But I
understand, sir, you are in a tough situation here today.
On that note, though, Director Wray, is it fair to say that
the now-President of the United States, while he was
campaigning to become President back in June 27, 2019, said
this in multiple statements like it on the campaign trail, he
said, and those who come seeking asylum, we should immediately
have the capacity to absorb them, keep them safe until they can
be heard. On September 12, sir, 2019, we are a Nation who says
if you want to flee and you are fleeing oppression, you should
come. Did you hear any of those comments by then-candidate Joe
Biden?
Mr. Wray. I'm not sure I can quote people's, you know,
campaign statements.
Mr. Crane. Do you think that has anything to do with the
dangerous situation that we now see at our border and now
within the United States of America?
Mr. Wray. Again, I am not sure that I am really the one who
can speak to immigration dynamics.
Mr. Crane. I think you could speak to it, sir. I just don't
think you want to. Sir, about how many American citizens have
been arrested for entering the Capitol on January 6? If you can
just give me an estimate, that would be great.
Mr. Wray. Well, I don't know how many were tied to that
specific piece of it. I know that we've had upwards of 700
cases brought related to January 6 in one way or another.
Mr. Crane. Yes. It has definitely been hundreds. OK. Sir, I
am interested, has the pipe bomber who planted bombs at the DNC
and the RNC on January 6, has he been arrested yet?
Mr. Wray. That is something we are still aggressively
investigating.
Mr. Crane. OK. So, you were able to arrest hundreds of
individuals who are allowed into the Capitol, walked around,
took selfies, but we can't find the individual who committed
the most dangerous crime and attempted to cause multiple mass
casualty events at the Capitol or around the Capitol.
Mr. Wray. Congressman, we have an entire dedicated team
focused specifically on this investigation. We've done
thousands of interviews, visited, again just in the pipe bomb
investigation----
Mr. Crane. OK.
Mr. Wray [continuing]. Thousands of interviews, visited
thousands of residences and businesses, reviewed millions of
pieces of data. There's something like 39,000 video files.
We've assessed like 500 or something tips. We've done extensive
public publicity. We've increased the reward money. We've got
our lab working on it. We've got our WMD Directorate working on
it. We've got our Office of Technology Division, our cellular
analysis team. So, the folks that we have working on this
investigation are working very aggressively on it. I, as much
as anybody, would like to see it solved, but it is certainly
not for lack of effort and lack of priority, I can assure you
of that.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, sir. Sir, do you find it interesting
how many whistleblowers there are right now from your
organization coming forward and testifying to Congress about
the conduct of the FBI and how they can no longer--they no
longer even want to work for the FBI? They are willing to risk
everything, including their livelihood, to come and talk to
Congress about what they perceive to be a change in the culture
at the FBI?
Mr. Wray. Certainly, I respect the role of whistleblowers
in our system. It's an important part of the way our system of
government works. When it comes to the culture of the FBI, I am
very proud of our 38,000 people. I think you will be relieved
to know that the number of people applying to be special agents
from the State of Arizona has gone up over 135 percent over the
last 5 years.
The view that you've just described, I don't think matches
what I hear from the 55-plus chiefs and sheriffs and other
agency heads in the State of Arizona who have dedicated
something like 200-plus of their task force officers to serve
on our task forces. We've got about as many task force officers
on our task forces----
Mr. Crane. Real quick, sir. Do you find----
Mr. Wray [continuing]. As we do agents now.
Mr. Crane. Do you find their testimonies to be reliable? Or
do you think that when you hear what they are saying to
Congress, do you think they are pushing false narratives?
Mr. Wray. I'm not going to be weighing in on the accuracy
of individual people who have made allegations against us. We
take them all seriously. There have been plenty of inaccuracies
lodged by any number of people about the FBI. We are going to
stay focused on our work and the people we do the work with and
the people we do the work for.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, sir. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize the
gentleman from New York, Mr. LaLota, for 5 minutes of
testimony.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for hosting this
important hearing. Secretary Mayorkas, during Mr. Garcia's
questioning today, you claimed that 90 percent of fentanyl is
carried through ports of entry. Yet this comes a day after the
chief of the Border Patrol, Jason Owens, announced a seizure of
over 300 pounds of fentanyl, which was not seized at a port of
entry. In fact, the Border Patrol seized a record number of
fentanyl between ports of entry last year, about 2,800 pounds.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into the record Chief
Owens' social media post regarding this week's fentanyl
seizure. I will read for you, Chairman.
Chairman Green. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LaLota. According to the CDC, over 150 people die every
day from overdoses related to synthetic opioids like fentanyl.
Yesterday, USBP agents in Nogales and Wilcox, Arizona,
interdicted two smuggling loads consisting of over 304 pounds
of fentanyl worth over $1.9 million. The leading cause of death
amongst Americans ages 14--excuse me--18 through 45, is
fentanyl overdoses. This addictive drug is responsible for
nearly 70 percent of the United States's 107,000-plus drug
overdose deaths in the past year. It is 50 times stronger than
heroin and 100 times stronger than morphine.
Mr. Secretary, I think one of the biggest threats to
Americans in every corner of this country is fentanyl. Do you
agree, Secretary Mayorkas?
Secretary Mayorkas. I do, Congressman. I will tell you, if
I may, that we are taking it to the traffickers and----
Mr. LaLota. We are going to get into that in a second. Mr.
Secretary, last year, nearly 200 people died every day from
fentanyl poisoning. That is the equivalent of a commercial
airliner crashing every day. Nearly 75,000 Americans in just 1
year. The fact that criminal networks have been able to import
and distribute an unconscionable amount of fentanyl under your
watch, Mr. Secretary, is beyond negligent.
Secretary Mayorkas, you have stated many times in the past
and with great pride that you are, ``taking it to the
cartels.'' With 75,000 Americans dead in just 1 year, and
cartels raking in billions of dollars and armed to the teeth
with military like weaponry, and with enough fentanyl coming
across our border to kill nearly every human on the planet,
would you classify this as successfully, ``taking it to the
cartels?''
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we have not overcome the
scourge of fentanyl. Let me say, yes, we are taking it to an
unprecedented degree, to the traffickers. One death from this
extraordinarily toxic and fatal opioid, is one----
Mr. LaLota. Are you pleased with your results, Mr.
Secretary?
Secretary Mayorkas. If I may, is one death too many.
Mr. LaLota. Mr. Secretary, the question was about you
taking it to the cartels. Are you pleased with your performance
with respect to----
Secretary Mayorkas. I am incredibly----
Mr. LaLota [continuing]. Taking it to the cartels?
Secretary Mayorkas. I am incredibly proud of the work that
the men and women of the Department of Homeland Security
perform----
Mr. LaLota. I appreciate that, Mr. Secretary. Reclaiming my
time, sir. You have stated in past hearings that you have
interdicted more fentanyl than ever before. But the very people
who work for you say that you are only interdicting anywhere
from between 5 and 10 percent at our ports of entry. Who is
right, Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Mayorkas. Do you realize, Congressman, that there
were over 57,000 deaths, overdose deaths, from fentanyl in the
year 2020?
Mr. LaLota. I appreciate the question. I am going to ask
you a question, though. Who is right? You or the folks who work
for you? They are saying that you are massively understating
the fentanyl that is being seized between ports of entry and
that gets past our border between ports of entry and what you
are saying. Are you right, sir? Or are they?
Secretary Mayorkas. No, you're actually mistaken with
respect to your characterization of the statements,
Congressman. I'd be very happy to clarify for you, if you'd
give me the opportunity. The fact that we are interdicting an
unprecedented amount of fentanyl does not mean that the scourge
of fentanyl is diminished. We are seeing an increase in the
number----
Mr. LaLota. I am going to reclaim my time, Mr. Secretary.
With respect to the fentanyl that is coming across our border,
not at ports of entry, how much fentanyl is coming across our
border between ports of entry?
Secretary Mayorkas. I'd be very happy to provide you with
data with respect to the different means by which fentanyl
enters our country. By air, we have an interdiction facility at
Kennedy----
Mr. LaLota. I am familiar with the process, Mr. Secretary,
but specifically with respect to known gotaways, how much are
they trafficking into our country?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I would be very, very
pleased to provide you with whatever data you inquire about. We
certainly are providing this committee with a tremendous amount
of data with respect to all of the mission sets that we
perform.
Mr. LaLota. I wish next time you would come with some more
specific information, Mr. Secretary. But, Mr. Chairman, with
the remaining time I have, I want to shift gears and talk just
for a moment, about antisemitism on college campuses. New York
State, my home State, is home to more than 2.2 million Jewish
Americans, the largest population of Jewish Americans in the
entire country. According to the American Jewish Population
Project at Brandeis University, over 21 percent of Jewish
Americans live in New York State. Unfortunately, since the
terrorist attacks in Israel on October 7, many Jewish students,
some of whom are my constituents, don't feel safe merely going
to class due to the rise of antisemitism on college campuses.
As we are all well aware, a 21-year-old student at Cornell
University, located in Ithaca in New York State, was arrested
just 2 weeks ago for threatening to, ``shoot up'' Jewish
students in a predominantly kosher dining hall on that college
campus. Thankfully, the Federal law enforcement intercepted
threats posted on-line and arrested him before it was too late.
Director Wray, I will ask you some questions in another
setting, sir. Thanks very much for your time.
Chairman Green. You can always submit those in writing and
ask Director Wray to send them to you. The gentleman yields. I
now recognize Ms. Cammack, who has waived onto the committee
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and it is great to
be back at Homeland. Secretary Mayorkas, good to see you once
again. Director Wray, good to see you. Ma'am, thank you for
appearing before the committee today. I will jump right into
it, Director Wray. Recently, I have been apprised of
information that is concerning regarding individuals that are
encountered at the border who, during the process of
interviewing in the field, specifically using an I-213 form,
the match for their ID comes back as inconclusive. That
information is then subsequently redacted and listed as
derogatory.
When Members of this committee, as well as other committees
have attempted to get access to this information, it has been
denied. Why is this information in these field interviews with
these individuals, who have then subsequently been found to be
suspected on the suspected terror watch list, why is that
information derogatory, and why has the FBI neglected to share
that information with Congress?
Mr. Wray. Congresswoman, I'm not familiar with the
particular redactions in question. So, I am happy to have my
staff follow up with you and figure out why there is a
disconnect. Certainly, I know we've provided all sorts of
information to this committee in a variety of forms, and I'm
happy to see what it is that's missing and why.
Mrs. Cammack. Well, and I think you have demonstrated a
willingness to work with this committee and others. So, could
you commit in the next 30 days to providing the committee staff
on Homeland Security all of the unredacted field interviews?
Mr. Wray. Well, what I can commit to is that I will follow
up with my team to find out what the heck is going on. If
there's information that we can provide that we haven't----
Mrs. Cammack. No, no, no.
Mr. Wray [continuing]. We will.
Mrs. Cammack. Well, no----
Mr. Wray. Because I'm not----
Mrs. Cammack [continuing]. No information should be
redacted, and there can be no good reason. If you can't provide
me with a reason why the information is listed as derogatory
right now, then you should commit to full transparency to
Congress, and that can be in a SCIF. That is fine in a
Classified setting. But this committee staff should have full
access to the field interviews, especially as it pertains to
individuals that have been apprehended or encountered at the
Southwest Border with ties to terrorist groups, yes or no?
Mr. Wray. I'm not trying to be obtuse, I promise. Since I
am not familiar with the specific redactions, I would ask to be
able to go back with my team and find out why it's redacted and
if there is a reason for it----
Mrs. Cammack. Can you provide us----
Mr. Wray [continuing]. That is valid, we will discuss----
Mrs. Cammack [continuing]. Within 30 days----
Mr. Wray [continuing]. That with you. If there is not a
reason, we will----
Mrs. Cammack [continuing]. Director Wray----
Mr. Wray [continuing]. We will provide you the information.
Mrs. Cammack. Director Wray, within 30 days, if you can
provide this committee, in writing, a rationale as to why that
information is redacted and what classifies it as derogatory,
that would be incredibly helpful.
Mr. Wray. We'd be happy to get back to you----
Mrs. Cammack. Perfect.
Mr. Wray [continuing]. Within 30 days.
Mrs. Cammack. I am going to follow up because I want to be
sensitive to the time here. Can you confirm, I know my
colleague, August Pfluger from Texas, had followed up with
Alejandro, I am sorry, Secretary Mayorkas, on the issue of
Uzbek nationals and their ties to the confirmed ISIS smuggling
ring, can you confirm that you are currently and actively
investigating the Uzbek nationals that were connected to this
ISIS smuggling ring? Yes or no?
Mr. Wray. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Cammack. OK.
Mr. Wray. We are very focused on this particular threat
stream. We have a number of active, on-going investigations
related to it. I will say that we have so far not identified
any intelligence that the individuals came to conduct terrorist
attacks. But that's not the same thing as suggesting that we
don't take it extremely seriously and that we are not working
it very aggressively. We have lots and lots of agents working
on this at the----
Mrs. Cammack. But they did come through a connected
terrorist network.
Mr. Wray. The network that is in question has itself has
some ties to ISIS, which is part of why we were concerned.
That's why we are taking it so seriously. So, what I want to be
clear about is not in any way to have my answers suggest to you
that we are not taking this extremely seriously and that we are
not working it very aggressively. I am just also trying to
avoid undue alarm about what we found so far. So far is a key
set of words there, so far.
Mrs. Cammack. OK. I am going to have follow-up questions,
for the record with you, Director Wray. Secretary Mayorkas, I
don't want you to feel left out at all. So, I want to touch
really quickly on the Homeland Intelligence Experts Group that
raises some really questionable concerns about the Department's
impartiality and objectivity. So, isn't it true that on
September 19, 2013, the Department announced the establishment
of the Homeland Intelligence Expert Group to provide advice and
perspectives on intelligence and National security efforts to
the Office of Intelligence and Analysis, INA, and the
Department's Office of Counterterrorism and their coordinator?
Yes or no?
Secretary Mayorkas. We recently announced the group. I'm
not sure----
Mrs. Cammack. Yes, perfect.
Secretary Mayorkas [continuing]. The precise----
Mrs. Cammack. So, isn't it true that the composition of
this so-called experts group includes former top-level
intelligence officers James Clapper, Brennan, and Paul Colby?
Secretary Mayorkas. I believe so, yes.
Mrs. Cammack. OK. So, are you aware that Clapper, Brennan,
and Colby all signed a now-discredited public statement on
October 19, 2020, that incorrectly implied the New York Post
reporting about Hunter Biden's laptop and influence peddling
that was supposedly the product of Russian disinformation?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, these are distinguished
members, former members of the intelligence community.
Mrs. Cammack. But this is a simple yes or no. Did they or
did they not sign the letter?
Secretary Mayorkas. I don't know the answer to that
question, but I----
Mrs. Cammack. I do.
Secretary Mayorkas. I----
Mrs. Cammack. They did. Are you aware that on October 19,
2020, the statement used by various media organizations and
social media businesses to downplay and censor the Post
reporting before the 2020 Presidential election?
Secretary Mayorkas. I'm sorry. With the indulgence of
additional time, Mr. Chairman, could you ask that question just
at a bit of a slower pace?
Mrs. Cammack. Are you aware that on October 19, 2020, the
statement was used, the statement that was signed by Brennan,
Clapper, and Colby was used by multiple media organizations,
social media businesses, to downplay and censor the story about
the Hunter Biden political influence right before the 2020
Presidential election?
Secretary Mayorkas. I am not tracking that, Congresswoman.
Mrs. Cammack. Wow. For as much time and effort as you are
putting into a Homeland Intelligence Experts Group, that seems
shocking that you wouldn't be tracking that. Are you aware that
another member of this newly-created group, then-associate
deputy attorney general for the Department of Justice, Tashina
Gauhar--I am sorry, I am messing up her name here--was
extensively involved in the FBI's probe into baseless
allegations against President Trump's campaign, colluding with
Russia?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, let me share with you
what I can tell you with confidence is that the individuals who
were selected to the experts group are very distinguished and
reputable members, former members of the intelligence
community, and we are incredibly proud to avail ourselves of
their expertise and judgment.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady's----
Mrs. Cammack. And have since been discredited.
Chairman Green [continuing]. Time has expired.
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Green. I want to now yield to the Ranking Member
for his closing statement.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We have
had quite a lengthy hearing about threats to the homeland. I
thank our witnesses for their indulgence and patience, and it
is appreciated.
A couple of things I wanted to add before I do my closing
comments. You know, our asylum laws are the laws of the land.
As I said in my opening statement, if you don't like them, you
are in the right forum to change them. But you can't criticize
people who are following the law just because you don't like
it. I guess you can, but it doesn't make a lot of sense.
I chaired the January 6 committee. I saw a lot of things
that went on in this country is clearly not who we are as
Americans. I thank the FBI for doing one heck of a job in
trying to identify those individuals who attacked this great
institution of ours and let the courts determine innocence or
guilt. Mr. Wray, I thank you for that.
Apart from that, as I said in the start of the hearing, we
face serious threats to the homeland from many fronts. A war in
the Middle East that may inspire attacks here in the United
States, foreign and domestic terrorism, and cyber attacks.
Rising antisemitism, and Islamophobia, and related violence,
also. Threats to our democratic institutions, our values, as
well as our way of life.
Serious threats demand action from serious people. Not
politically-motivated attacks, not inflammatory language that
divides us rather than unite us, not grandstanding. What is
perhaps most troubling is the way my colleagues have twisted
facts. Success in interdicting dangerous drugs is suddenly a
failure. Success in removing people who should not be in the
country is suddenly an impeachable offense. Mr. Chairman, it is
upside down.
Democrats remain committed to working with the Department
of Homeland Security, the FBI, and the National
Counterterrorism Center to address all these threats. Democrats
are also ready to back up that commitment by supporting the
personnel and resources necessary to carry out this critical
mission.
As I said, a lot of us talk tough, but when it comes time
to putting the resources behind the talk, many of my colleagues
don't do it. But then we criticize the men and women who are
tasked with the responsibility of caring for the direction of
keeping us safe. So, I hope after we close the hearing, the
President has submitted a supplemental budget that will address
a lot of the issues that have been discussed and expressed from
a concern standpoint. I look forward to the new Speaker calling
it up at some point for us to discuss it.
But if we don't provide the resources, if you say you are
concerned about the threat environment, Israel, Ukraine, other
parts of the world, we have to support it. We have yet to get
agreement on making that happen.
We have to continue to be the world leader, and in order to
do that, we have to take responsible action. So, this committee
has always historically been bipartisan, one of the more
bipartisan committees in Congress. I look forward to trying to
get us back to that bipartisanship. We can disagree, but the
manner in which we disagree, in my humble opinion, is not who
we are as Americans, not who we have demonstrated on this
committee since its inception. So, that is what the dedicated
public servants also, who work to keep us safe, do every day.
So, again, let me thank the three individuals here, but all
the men and women actually, who are positioned all around the
world, who keep us safe. Thank you so much. On my side, if
resources is what you need to get the job done, I commit to
support the resources for the men and women to do the job. I
yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I wanted to thank the
witnesses for being here. A lot of work goes into preparing for
these, I know. A lot of work goes into doing the jobs that you
do. I also want to thank our staff that helps put on these
committee hearings. Again, a lot of work. I know the Members
pour themselves into preparing for this, so thank the Members
as well.
Director Wray, I want to thank you today for your honest
admission that the risk is increased secondary to this war. You
also said in questioning by me or from me, that this known
gotaway group is a big, huge question mark, that there are no
guarantees, and so thus there is an increased risk from that.
The question is, how did we get to those known and unknown
gotaways so large, well over 300 percent. I mean, you can add
up the last two Presidencies in this, just 3 years, it exceeds
the last 12 years.
Well, as I said earlier, I think policies were working.
They were removed. People tested the system. They realized you
could get in and just be released. They called home and
millions came. This migration crisis is a self-inflicted
crisis, one we created by the change of our policies, and it
has put Americans at increased risk, as you have acknowledged.
I think I used in my opening statement the analogy of the
college bar that stops carding. That bar will be overwhelmed. I
think we all get that.
That is what has happened at our Southern Border with mass
waves of cartels. With this mass wave of people, the cartels
have seized the opportunity to overwhelm Customs and Border
Patrol and bypass them and get the fentanyl into the United
States. How else could we explain the fact that fentanyl was
$95 a hit on the street when this Secretary Mayorkas came into
office, and it is now $25, $26 a hit in Tennessee? It is simple
supply and demand.
These catch-and-release policies that Mr. Mayorkas, you
know, I think, has implemented is the cause of the problem. You
have to ask yourself, why wouldn't, with the way these catch-
and-release policies are working now, I mean, that is really
what happens. You can look at the CBP One app. They are only
getting rid of I think 98 percent of the people who do that get
to come into the country. So, if you get to come into the
country, why wouldn't you just turn yourself into Customs and
Border Patrol? Why would somebody even go around Customs and
Border Patrol now? Because you are going to come in, get
paroled, and get into the country. Well, it is because they
don't want to be caught. That scares us even more, considering
that it is 2 million people.
I also want to thank you, Mr. Wray, you admitted that your
department is looking for people right now on the known
terrorist watch list. I think your question you answered to Mr.
Pfluger. Mr. Mayorkas kind-of didn't really answer the question
on whether or not if they identified somebody, 100 percent of
the time they kept them. There was some discussion about a
system that was implemented to determine if the person was a
risk. We know because we talked to the Customs and Border
Patrol agents that there is no policy that if they are caught
on the terrorist watch list, that they are immediately detained
in 100 percent of the cases.
So, these policies not to do that, which make no sense to
us, have put Americans at risk. Interestingly enough, your
agents, who are now having to find these individuals somewhere
in our country, those decisions, those policies, not only put
the American citizens at risk. They put your agents at risk
because they are out there now having to find these
individuals. The truth is, the current policy in the Department
of Homeland Security does not require immediate detention of
these people, and that is wrong.
I asked Director Wray if the policies of his colleagues are
making it worse for the FBI. That was one of my questions, and
you kind-of--I get it, professionalism, you walked around that
question. But I think it is clear to every American that these
policies at our Southern Border that are willful decisions,
those changed policies, have increased the risk of not only the
Americans in this country, but also the law enforcement all
over this country, to include the FBI.
Now, I want to take issue with several of the comments that
my colleagues on the Minority side have said, some of their
accusations today. The Ranking Member said that Republicans
were AWOL. Now, I am a military guy. That term means something
to me. AWOL is an acronym that stands for absent without leave,
meaning you don't show up to your place of duty. In my
recollection, in all of our committee hearings, the only time
someone didn't show up to a hearing was when the Democrats
refused to show up at a border hearing. When we had a hearing
on the border, all the Republicans were there. Not a single
Democrat showed up. So, as far as I am concerned, there has
never been a time when Republicans have been AWOL. But there
certainly was a time when the Democrats were AWOL.
The Ranking Member also said that a lot of the discussion
we have had is a difference in policies and things like that. I
have to tell you I agree on some of that. But it is pretty
clear that Americans are at risk by decisions that have been
made. There is nothing wrong with us investigating that and
pointing it out to the American people and trying to find the
cause. If those decisions have put Americans at risk, holding
people accountable.
Today, the Ranking Member, very interestingly, didn't
mention Hamas in his opening statement, didn't mention
Hezbollah. He didn't mention the cartels. He didn't mention the
CCP. The only thing he seemed to want to talk about was the
MAGA Republicans and President Trump. I find that interesting.
I would like to point that out for the record, that in our
World Threats hearing, the Ranking Member didn't talk about any
of that.
The Ranking Member suggested that we have a Member in our
party that wants to defund the FBI. We are not defunding the
FBI. But I will tell you, some of their Members want to defund
ICE, have said it many times on the record, more than just one.
We had one Member of our side that said to defund the--many of
them have wanted to defund ICE. They have talked about
defunding law enforcement all across this country for years.
So, I was a little offended by the fact that he brought that
up, but I wanted to set the record straight on that one.
The Ranking Member also suggested that we are criticizing
the men and women of your departments. I would never do that. I
worked for a lot of great military leaders in the day, my time
in the army. But occasionally we had a guy, a leader, that was
not effective. I would never be critical of that unit's
soldiers. Always the leader. Our criticism's not the men and
women of DHS, Mr. Secretary. Our criticisms are your policies
that you have implemented that changed everything when you came
into office and changed the flood of migration and changed the
fentanyl flow into this country. Tragically now with a war in
the Middle East and heightened risk to the United States
because we are supporting their other great enemy, Israel, at
much greater risk.
I also want to correct this notion because it keeps coming
up that 90 percent of the fentanyl's being caught. Well, that
is not true. Ninety percent of what comes across the border
that is caught is caught at the crossing sites. That is an
accurate statement. But to say that you are catching 90 percent
of the fentanyl, you don't know the denominator, you can't
figure the percentage. I wish people would be intellectually
accurate when they make statements, but they just seem to cling
to things that aren't true.
There is also this accusation that just because people want
border security, that we are somehow racist. We heard that
again today. You would think that that would just get tired and
be thrown out. The people coming across the Southern Border,
when I was there, there was a huge group of Russians. They are
whiter than I am. This notion that you are somehow racist
because you want border security, it is really insane.
I can assure you this. The people who are all over this
Nation right now yelling from the river to the sea, the
destruction of Israel, I will eat that Red Bull can if there is
a Republican in that group.
I also want to thank you, Ms. Abizaid. You brought up the
home-grown and the lone wolves and all this stuff, and you gave
some really compelling testimony. I am from Tennessee. What
happened in Chattanooga several years ago at that recruiting
station is just an example of what you are talking about. Keep
saying that over and over again. America needs to know about
this. They are actively trying to flip people in our country
and to convince them to hurt Americans. That incident in
Chattanooga, we in Tennessee will never forget it. I thank you
for bringing that point home.
Now, Mr. Mayorkas has said that we need to add dollars. The
truth of the matter is, there was no budget change between the
last administration and this administration. But you can look
at the graph. It is like this and then like this. It ain't
about dollars. Although we are not against, if you look in H.R.
2, we put more dollars into that technology, pay for Border
Patrol people, despite what some people have said.
You also mentioned, Mr. Mayorkas, immigration laws. Yes,
they are broken. They need to get fixed. But the truth of the
matter is that the Immigration and Nationality Act is being
subverted right now. Courts have ordered you to do it a
different way than you are doing it. So, I am not even sure if
we did change the immigration laws you would even abide by
them.
The Ranking Member mentioned that the asylum laws, we need
to change that. But we are not living according to the
definition of the asylum laws now and detaining people. We are
actually sending them to hotels and sending them away while ICE
detention beds sit empty despite what the law says. More
resources? No, this is a policy issue. The policies were
changed by the Secretary, and the results are people came, some
on the terrorist watch list being chased by the FBI, loose in
our country, thousands dead to fentanyl, millions disrupted by
the cartel crime. Thousands of children lost in the system.
Thousands of people trafficked. Billions of taxpayer dollars.
The New York mayor, who happens to be a Democrat, says it is
going to cost his city $12 billion right out of the taxpayer
dollar. Not at their choice. They didn't vote on this. You just
moved the policies out of the way, here let me write the check
because that is what Mr. Mayorkas wants us to do.
Now, as I said, with the conflict in Israel, we are faced
with an open border coupled with a heightened threat as we give
assistance to the, as I said, the only other country or group
of people that the terrorists hate more than us, Israel. The
abysmal failure to secure our Southern Border has put every
American at risk. Even a baby crawling around on the floor of a
VRBO who encounters fentanyl left by the previous renter, dead.
To crime, to human trafficking, to billions of money going to
some of the worst human beings on the planet, cartels. Now, of
course, international terrorists.
Before I finish my comments, I want to say a few things,
because you guys have raised some really good points, and I
want to just give you some assurances. CFATS, the House passed
it. We are pushing the Senate. We have a CFATS working group to
try to get it in a posture where the Senate will actually
approve it. But that side of the building is controlled by
another party. We passed it over here. We are waiting on them.
No, we are actually trying to get it in a posture that they
will actually support.
UAS, we are working very diligently to get that done. You
are right, Director. FISA, there is a special committee that is
working on this. I promise you that will get done.
The CWMD, of course, was on the CR that just passed, so it
is done. It is over on the Senate side, waiting.
Those are very valiant. I agree with you. Those things need
to be taken care of. We are working on it.
Mr. Wray, thank you for being here. Thank you for your
testimony. Ms. Abizaid, thank you. Mr. Mayorkas, thank you. I
know you rearranged your schedule to stay a little later, and I
get that, and I deeply appreciate it.
It is clear that you believe you are doing a great job, and
I am not hiding it, we are looking into all this because we on
our side think that you are not. We are in our last phase of a
five-phase process that you are following in the press, just
like the rest of my constituents and people across the country.
We are going to finish that up, I think, sometime around
December. I would love to know today if you would commit to
come back. We will finish that thing out. I think maybe in
December. Does that sound reasonable to you? Will you be able
to come back for that?
Secretary Mayorkas. I will honor the request of this
committee.
Chairman Green. Thank you. Again, I want to reiterate my
point about the people of your departments. It is hard work
protecting this country, protecting the citizens of this
country. I know the men and women who do that professionally,
as a career, deserve the utmost of our respect, and every one
of them has it from us. Our frustrations are not with them. It
is not. It is with leadership that we think has made bad
decisions. With that, I am concluding my closing remarks.
The Members of this committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we would ask that the
witnesses respond to those in writing, if you get any. Pursuant
to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will be held open
for 10 days for those written statements. Without objection,
the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:59 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Question From Honorable August Pfluger for Honorable Alejandro N.
Mayorkas
Question. I understand Homeland Security Investigations has many
important priorities. Recently, HSI has conducted multiple seizure
operations on Iranian oil tankers that were attempting to evade
sanctions. Unfortunately, these operations are costly and HSI is
inadequately equipped to execute more of these operations. I have
recently introduced legislation with Congressman Panetta and Senators
Ernst and Blumenthal to give HSI the resources it needs to conduct more
operations to disrupt Iran's illicit oil trade. Would you commit to
working with me, Congressman Panetta, and Senators Ernst and Blumenthal
on this legislation?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Mike Ezell for Honorable Alejandro N. Mayorkas
Question 1a. According to the Office of the Inspector General's
report, DHS encountered obstacles to screen, vet, and inspect all
evacuees during the recent Afghanistan crisis. It is clear from this
report that CBP did not collaborate with the FBI to thoroughly vet
evacuees before they entered the United States. Below is an example
from the report:

``CBP paroled one evacuee into the United States who had been liberated
from prison in Afghanistan by the Taliban in August 2021. The
individual cleared lily pad screening and vetting processes and flew to
the United States. At the U.S. POE, CBP officers identified derogatory
information during the primary inspection. However, a supervisor
`unreferred' the individual and paroled the individual into the country
without a secondary inspection. Although the supervisor acted within
policy, we could not determine whether the supervisor was aware of the
evacuee's prior incarceration. Approximately 3 weeks after this
evacuee's parole, the FBI obtained derogatory information.
Subsequently, ICE removed this individual from the United States.''

What specific steps have the FBI and DHS taken to improve
collaboration?
Question 1b. If a similar evacuation was to occur today, how will
CBP assure individuals that are of concern to the FBI will not be
allowed into the United States?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. As of September 14, 2023, 160 migrants whose
identities match those on the FBI's terrorist watch list have been
stopped trying to cross the U.S.-Mexico border, compared to 100 in
2022.
What is the procedure for handling and processing a border crosser
determined to be on the Terrorist Screening Database?
Question 2b. How many of these border crossers determined to be on
that database are referred to the Department of Justice for
prosecution? What are some reasons an individual would not be referred
for prosecution?
Question 2c. Which terrorist organizations were these border
crossers affiliated with? Can you tell us approximately how many border
crossers belonged to each of these organizations?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. Recently, the Biden administration convened close to
50 countries together to continue the Counter Ransomware Initiative.
What is DHS doing to combat the ransomware threat?
Question 3b. Do these threats stem more from malicious nation-
states or cyber criminals?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable August Pfluger for Christopher A. Wray
Question 1a. During your opening statement at the Worldwide Threats
hearing in front of the Senate Homeland Security and Government Affairs
Committee, you highlighted the growing threats from the Iranian regime
and how the October 7 terrorist attacks in Israel have galvanized the
jihadist movement. Between these two issues and the continuing cases of
on-line radicalization within the United States, I feel our Nation is
in an incredibly vulnerable position. Do you believe our Nation is
properly equipped to disrupt terror operations overseas and at home?
Question 1b. If not, what steps are you taking to secure the
homeland?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Does Lebanese Hezbollah or any other proxy affiliated
with the Iranian regime have a desire to attack the United States?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Marjorie Taylor Greene for Christopher A. Wray
Question 1. Director Christopher Wray testified that he was unaware
of the riot in the Capitol complex on October 18, 2023. In response, I
would like to provide information detailing the events that occurred as
well as request answers to the questions listed below.
On October 18, Jewish Voice for Peace (JVP) and If Not Now, both
violent, pro-Islamic anti-Semitic groups that seek the destruction of
the State of Israel, launched an illegal uprising in the Capitol
complex in support of Hamas. Such actions caused elevators to be shut
down, staircases and hallways to be blocked, exits to be made
inaccessible, police officers to be assaulted, and official proceedings
to be obstructed in both the House of Representatives and Senate,
including a Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearing. This was a
direct security threat to Members of Congress, their staff, and Capitol
visitors. The riot organizers communicated through a chat titled,
``Global Intifada,'' which means global Arabic uprising and refers to a
series of protests and violent riots carried out by Palestinians in
Israel. Furthermore, Congresswoman Rashida Tlaib incited the illegal
uprising by riling up the rioters during her speech that day and
encouraging Hezbollah's call for ``a day of unprecedented anger.''
Over 300 rioters were arrested in violation of D.C. Codes  22-1307
(Crowding, obstructing, or incommoding) and  22-405 (Assault on member
of police force). However, 18 U.S. Code  1512(c)(2) specifically
states, ``Whoever otherwise obstructs, influences, or impedes any
official proceeding, or attempts to do so, shall be fined under this
title or imprisoned not more than 20 years, or both.'' To remain
consistent with the DOJ's means of prosecution, this crime of
obstructing official proceedings should also warrant solitary
confinement, psychological and physical torture, and restricted access
to legal counsel, all while awaiting trial.
Given Director Wray's ignorance of the events occurring on October
18, I request answers to the following questions.
Were you or anyone at the FBI or DOJ, to your knowledge, aware of
the unlawful uprising that occurred in the Cannon House Office
Building, prior to receiving this information?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Were you or anyone at the FBI aware that a Senate
Foreign Relations Committee hearing was obstructed by the rioters,
prior to receiving this information?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. If the FBI was informed of such riot, what actions has
the FBI taken in response to the unlawful uprising on October 18, 2023?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. Are there currently any open investigations into
individuals who were involved in obstructing official proceedings?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. If no action has been taken to investigate and address
such events that occurred in the Capitol complex on October 18, will
the FBI commit to investigating and prosecuting these individuals to
the fullest extent of the law?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Mike Ezell for Christopher A. Wray
Question 1a. According to the Office of the Inspector General's
report, DHS encountered obstacles to screen, vet, and inspect all
evacuees during the recent Afghanistan crisis. It is clear from this
report that CBP did not collaborate with the FBI to thoroughly vet
evacuees before they entered the United States. Below is an example
from the report:

``CBP paroled one evacuee into the United States who had been liberated
from prison in Afghanistan by the Taliban in August 2021. The
individual cleared lily pad screening and vetting processes and flew to
the United States. At the U.S. POE, CBP officers identified derogatory
information during the primary inspection. However, a supervisor
`unreferred' the individual and paroled the individual into the country
without a secondary inspection. Although the supervisor acted within
policy, we could not determine whether the supervisor was aware of the
evacuee's prior incarceration. Approximately 3 weeks after this
evacuee's parole, the FBI obtained derogatory information.
Subsequently, ICE removed this individual from the United States.''

What specific steps have the FBI and DHS taken to improve
collaboration?
Question 1b. If a similar evacuation was to occur today, how will
CBP assure individuals that are of concern to the FBI will not be
allowed into the United States?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. As of September 14, 2023, 160 migrants whose
identities match those on the FBI's terrorist watchlist have been
stopped trying to cross the U.S.-Mexico border, compared to 100 in
2022.
What is the procedure for handling and processing a border crosser
determined to be on the Terrorist Screening Database?
Question 2b. How many of these border crossers determined to be on
that database are referred to the Department of Justice for
prosecution? What are some reasons an individual would not be referred
for prosecution?
Question 2c. Which terrorist organizations were these border
crossers affiliated with? Can you tell us approximately how many border
crossers belonged to each of these organizations?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. During fiscal year 2023, CBP has seized over 27,000
pounds of fentanyl coming across the Southwestern Border, which is
enough to kill 6 billion people and is an 88 percent increase in
seizures since fiscal year 2022. It is widely believed that only 5-10
percent of the amount smuggled across the border is seized by law
enforcement.
During a U.S. House Committee on the Judiciary hearing earlier this
year, it was stated that the FBI has between 300 to 400
``investigations into the leadership of the cartels trafficking that
fentanyl.''
Where are those cartel leaders primarily located?
Question 3b. How are they predominantly trafficking those illicit
drugs?
Question 3c. Are they coming through legal points of entry or
through unsecured sectors of our border?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4a. Recently, the Biden administration convened close to
50 countries together to continue the Counter Ransomware Initiative.
What can the FBI do to disrupt the financial infrastructure of
these actors?
Question 4b. How many investigations does the FBI currently have
into ransomware attacks? How has this figure compared to the last
several years?
Question 4c. Who has the FBI identified as the main nation-states
and/or cyber groups responsible for attacks or threats of attacks
against U.S. businesses and the Government?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

[all]
