- SECTOR DOWN: ENSURING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE RESILIENCE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SECTOR DOWN: ENSURING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE RESILIENCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 27, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-73

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

59-596 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Eric Swalwell, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           J. Luis Correa, California
August Pfluger, Texas                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Nick LaLota, New York                Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Robert Garcia, California
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION

Andrew R. Garbarino, New York, Chairman
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California, Ranking
Mike Ezell, Mississippi                  Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Robert Menendez,  New Jersey
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Cara Mumford, Subcommittee Staff Director
Moira Bergin, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Eric Swalwell, a Representative in Congress From
the State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection::
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Mr. Frank J. Cilluffo, Director, McCrary Institute for Cyber and
Critical Infrastructure Security, University of Auburn:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
Mr. Matthew McCabe, Managing Director, Cyber Broking, Guy
Carpenter & Company, LLC:
Oral Statement.................................................    18
Prepared Statement.............................................    19
Ms. Kimberly Denbow, Vice President, Security and Operations,
American Gas Association:
Oral Statement.................................................    25
Prepared Statement.............................................    26
Mr. Jack Kudale, Chief Executive Officer, Cowbell:
Oral Statement.................................................    31
Prepared Statement.............................................    32

Appendix I

Questions From Chairman Andrew Garbarino for Frank J. Cilluffo...    53
Questions From Chairman Andrew Garbarino for Matthew McCabe......    53
Questions From Chairman Andrew Garbarino for Kimberly Denbow.....    54
Questions From Chairman Andrew Garbarino for Jack Kudale.........    54

Appendix II

Statement of Lucian Niemeyer, CEO, Building Cyber Security.org...    57

SECTOR DOWN: ENSURING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE RESILIENCE

----------

Thursday, June 27, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:04 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Andrew R.
Garbarino [Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Garbarino, Ezell, Lee, Luttrell,
and Swalwell.
Mr. Garbarino. The Committee on Homeland Security's
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection
will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to understand cyber
stakeholders' responses to a catastrophic cyber attack on
various critical infrastructure sectors, such as energy, water,
and health care. Additionally, this hearing will emphasize the
role of cyber insurance and organizational preparedness and
recovery, including what cyber insurance is, what it covers,
and how to ensure it gives organizations confidence that they
will not be alone at their most vulnerable moment.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement. Let's
imagine some scenarios for our critical infrastructure: Our
electrical grid goes down, our hospitals are taken off-line,
our water systems are shut down indefinitely, we are unable to
make transactions. Each one of these scenarios is nothing short
of catastrophic for our economy and for our national security
interests, especially if we do not know how quickly they can be
resolved. From health care to banking, we depend on each one of
these sectors daily, such that it may seem unfathomable to have
one of them go down.
However, rapidly-evolving tactics in cyber space heighten
the possibility of their recurrence each and every day.
Recognizing that--recognizing the wide-spread damage that these
events would cause, our public and private sectors must be
prepared to respond quickly, effectively, and collaboratively.
Due to this, entities must know what to--must know who to go
to, how much of the damage they will be responsible for
covering, and what assistance will be available to them. This
will help them develop a proactive recovery plan before a major
attack occurs, rather than scrambling when they are at their
most vulnerable point.
Given the nature of threats is changing and impacts vary,
the cyber insurance industry is a critical--is critical to
determining how nimble we can respond. This is a challenge
today, because absent a major attack, our standards for
coverage are still being defined. However, we should have hope;
with clearer expectations for cyber insurance coverage, there
is promise for mitigating risks to individual companies and
broader society.
For example, cyber insurance providers can help cover the
financial cost of a cyber attack much like any other form of
insurance. We can also build off the work firms are already
doing. Currently, many firms provide cyber analytics for
covered companies and look for potential vulnerabilities in
advance of a cyber attack. Some also provide legal defense for
any compromised data, while others have best practices and
recommendations for resiliency that they provide to clients.
We are here today to dig into these issues by exploring a
range of scenarios to think through the development of the
standards. We must start with basic--with a basic understanding
of what cyber insurance is, and what is currently covered under
a range of circumstances. This will inform our discussion about
what should be covered.
The U.S. Government also plays a pivotal role in responding
to major cyber attacks on our critical infrastructure. Private-
sector companies cannot be expected to handle the impact of
nation-state attacks alone. Although we do not have our Federal
partners present today, I hope that we can have a robust
discussion about existing Federal mechanisms for incident
response in a major attack. This will help us understand where
our private-sector partners might need more help, and where we
can strengthen and clarify our lines of communication with
public/private partnerships.
We have a unique opportunity to revisit incident response
for critical infrastructure given Federal action that has
unfolded in recent months. For example, as this subcommittee
examined last month, CISA will begin work on the final SOSIA
rule soon, which aims to create proactive Federal standard for
incident reporting.
Additionally, the recent release of the National Security
Memorandum 22 reaffirmed the 16 critical infrastructure sectors
and has now kick-started the rewrite of sector-specific plans
for sector risk management agencies. These have not been
updated for almost 10 years, despite dramatically different--
despite a dramatically different threat landscape. The new
sector-specific plans will feed into CISA's development of the
2025 National Infrastructure Risk Management Plan. This hearing
is a good opportunity to examine how the sector risk management
agencies manage collective risk and how CISA executes its role
as national coordinator.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here to help us
understand the complex cyber threat landscape against our
critical infrastructure sectors, and how the cyber ecosystem,
government owners and operators, insurance providers, and
others can improve their coordination and collaboration. My
goal is for us to leave this hearing with a better grasp of
what is working well among these partners, and where we need to
improve our relationships and response processes.
[The statement of Chairman Garbarino follows:]
Statement of Chairman Andrew Garbarino
June 27, 2024
Good afternoon everyone.
Let's imagine some scenarios for our critical infrastructure: Our
electrical grid goes down. Our hospitals are taken off-line. Our water
systems are shut down indefinitely. We're unable to make transactions.
Each of these scenarios is nothing short of catastrophic for our
economy and for our national security interests, especially if we do
not know how quickly they can be resolved. From health care to banking,
we depend on each of these sectors daily, such that it may seem
unfathomable to have one of these sectors go down. However, rapidly-
evolving tactics in cyber space heighten the possibility of their
occurrence each and every day.
Recognizing the wide-spread damage that these events would cause,
our public and private sectors must be prepared to respond quickly,
effectively, and collaboratively.
To do this, entities must know who to go to, how much of the damage
they will be responsible for covering, and what assistance will be
available to them. This will help them develop a proactive recovery
plan before a major attack occurs, rather than scrambling when they are
at their most vulnerable point.
Given the nature of threats is changing and impacts vary, the cyber
insurance industry is critical to determining how nimble we can
respond. This is a challenge today because absent a major attack, our
standards for coverage are still being defined.
However, we should have hope: with clearer expectations for cyber
insurance coverage, there is promise for mitigating risks to individual
companies and broader society. For example, cyber insurance providers
can help cover the financial cost of a cyber attack, much like any
other form of insurance. We can also build off the work firms are
already doing. Currently, many firms provide cyber analytics for
covered companies, and look for potential vulnerabilities in advance of
a cyber attack. Some also provide legal defense for any compromised
data, while others have best practices and recommendations for
resiliency that they provide to clients.
We are here today to dig into these issues by exploring a range of
scenarios to think through the development of standards. We must start
with the basics by understanding what cyber insurance is and what is
currently covered under a range of circumstances. This will inform our
discussion about what should be covered.
The U.S. Government also plays a pivotal role in responding to
major cyber attacks on our critical infrastructure. Private-sector
companies cannot be expected to handle the impact of nation-state
attacks alone.
Although we do not have our Federal partners present today, I hope
that we can have a robust discussion about existing Federal mechanisms
for incident response in a major attack. This will help us understand
where our private-sector partners might need more help, and where we
can strengthen and clarify our lines of communication within public-
private partnerships.
We have a unique opportunity to revisit incident response for
critical infrastructure, given Federal action that has unfolded in
recent months. For example, as this subcommittee examined last month,
CISA will begin to work on the final CIRCIA rule soon, which aims to
create a proactive, Federal standard for incident reporting.
Additionally, the recent release of National Security Memorandum-22
(NSM-22) reaffirmed the 16 critical infrastructure sectors and has now
kickstarted the rewrite of Sector-Specific Plans for Sector Risk
Management Agencies (SRMAs). These have not been updated in almost 10
years, despite a dramatically different threat landscape. The new
Sector-Specific Plans will feed into CISA's development of the 2025
National Infrastructure Risk Management Plan. This hearing is a good
opportunity to examine how SRMAs manage collective risk, and how CISA
executes its role as National Coordinator.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here to help us understand
the complex cyber threat landscape against our critical infrastructure
sectors, and how the cyber ecosystem--Government, owners and operators,
insurance providers, and others--can improve their coordination and
collaboration.
My goal is for us to leave this hearing with a better grasp of what
is working well among these partners, and where we need to improve our
relationships and response processes.

Mr. Garbarino. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from California, Mr. Swalwell, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Swalwell. I thank the Chairman. This is quite timely of
a hearing, and, in fact, too often quite prescient, because
we'll hold a hearing on an issue, and then we'll realize in a
couple months that we were really just circling the target as
far as what we are vulnerable to. That's really a credit, I
think, to the Chairman and his team and his members, and also,
our team and our colleagues who have, for the last, I guess,
19, 20 months, really been aligned in taking on this threat.
I also want to welcome--and want to welcome all of you as
witnesses, but particularly Jack Kudale from Cowbell Insurance.
Cowbell is headquartered in Pleasanton, California, which is in
the heart of my Congressional district. As you will learn, they
are insuring small- and medium-size businesses up to
approximately $250 million in revenue.
That's who the Chairman and I--as we talk about cyber,
that's who we worry about the most, are the small- and medium-
size businesses, because, look, the giants, we want to make
sure that, you know, they're taken care of in their cyber
hygiene, awareness, staff, but the giants often are going to
have a CISO and a full team and outside consultants and
advisers, but it's really small- and medium-size businesses who
are also bolted onto so much of critical infrastructure that
they don't. Having folks like Cowbell and just this emerging
insurance industry helping them understand the risk, price the
risk, and then backstop the risk is really important. So I look
forward to that conversation.
According to the FBI's IC3, cyber crime costs Americans
$12.5 billion in 2023, which was a 20 percent increase in
losses from 2022, and we expect it will only go up in this
coming year. They've reported that 40 percent of ransomware
attacks in 2023 targeted critical infrastructure, making cyber
attacks not only expensive, but potentially disruptive.
That's also, in part, why I support what the Chairman was
referencing in undoing the SEC reporting rule and making it
more, I would say, adaptive to the real-life, real-time
decisions that folks have to make to decide if they're
undergoing a cyber attack or if they are just experiencing a
software upgrade issue. But we don't want them spending too
much time with lawyers and not enough time with cyber
professionals as they take on and try to understand what is
hitting them.
Fortunately, on most realms, the Biden administration is
leading a range of efforts to bring the unique capabilities of
Government and the private sector together in new ways to
confront emerging cyber threats. They've laid out, as you've
heard in this committee over and over, the National
Cybersecurity Strategy. Three important initiatives relevant to
this hearing of that strategy is stabilizing the insurance
market, maturing operational collaboration, and improving our
ability to understand the cascading effects of cyber attacks so
we can mitigate the impacts and respond more dynamically.
Cyber insurance policies have long served as a
nonregulatory way to incentivize the adoption of cybersecurity
controls and blunt the losses of cyber attacks that overcome
network defenses. I've heard from Jack and others that in this
industry, this early in its evolution, the most successful
companies are not the companies that have the most policy
holders, because it's still too difficult to price the risk,
and that they seek to do that in their endeavors. But what we
can do here in Government left of boom, left of an attack, is
to better help create standards and incentives, and, perhaps,
grant programs and tax deductions to help small- and medium-
size businesses protect themselves left of boom so that we can
have a broader insurance market that protects all of us.
But increases in the frequency of attacks and
sophistication have cost cyber incidents, along with the lack
of historical data, lack of models to accurately assess risk,
and lack of consistency in terminology and coverage have
created a lot of friction in the cyber insurance market. These
dynamics have created a perfect storm. Demand for cyber
insurance has increased, premiums have gone up, and some
insurers are reluctant to write new policies. So we are in a
unique position to bring certainty and stability to the market,
and I'm glad that the Biden administration is seeking to do
that.
Notably, the administration has prioritized identifying
ways the Federal Government can help address gaps in the cyber
insurance market, particularly related to coverage for
catastrophic cyber incidents. The administration is 2 years
into assessing the need for and potential structures of a
Federal backstop to a catastrophic cyber event, and I look at
this somewhat in the same framework of the Terrorism
Reinsurance Project, TRIA, that we have funded in years past.
Without Government intervention, we run the risk of cyber
insurers being over-extended when a catastrophic cyber incident
occurs or writing policies that include so many exemptions that
no one can make a claim. The Biden administration has also
relaunched the cyber insurance and data analysis working group,
CDAWG--not a rap or hip hop band, but a Biden administration
policy. It would also probably be a cool rap or hip hop band.
Mr. Garbarino. In another life, you can do it.
Mr. Swalwell. Yeah. Yeah, exactly, in another life.
At CISA, CDAWG help insurers better analyze risks by
identifying the security controls that are most effective in
improving access to data. Enhancing our ability to evaluate
risk will help the cyber insurance market at every level,
making cyber insurance more attractive and accessible.
Ultimately, higher rates of cyber insurance uptake will reduce
systemic risk and yield dividends in resilience.
I'm looking forward to our witnesses' perspectives on what
more the Federal Government could be doing to strengthen the
cyber insurance market. I was encouraged that the National
Security Memorandum 22 recommitted the administration to
building operational collaboration.
So very much look forward to this hearing, Mr. Chairman,
and I'll turn it back to you so we can hear from our witnesses.
[The statement of Ranking Member Swalwell follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Eric Swalwell
June 27, 2024
Malicious cyber actors--whether state-sponsored or cyber
criminals--are growing more sophisticated, bolder, and more prolific,
and it is costing us. According to the FBI's IC3, cyber crime cost
Americans $12.5 billion in 2023, a 22 percent increase in losses from
2022. IC3 also reported that 40 percent of ransomware attacks in 2023
targeted critical infrastructure, making cyber attacks not only
expensive but potentially disruptive.
Fortunately, the Biden administration is leading a range of efforts
to bring the unique capabilities of Government and the private sector
together in new ways to confront evolving cyber threats. The
administration is making important progress on the ambitious agenda it
set in the National Cybersecurity Strategy and is modernizing the
doctrine that defines how we build collective resilience.
Three initiatives are particularly relevant to this hearing:
stabilizing the cyber insurance market; maturing operational
collaboration; and improving our ability to understand the cascading
effects of cyber attacks so we can mitigate the impacts and respond
more dynamically.
Cyber insurance policies have long served as a non-regulatory way
to incentivize the adoption of cybersecurity controls and blunt the
losses of cyber attacks that overcome network defenses. Unfortunately,
increases in the frequency, sophistication, and cost of cyber incidents
along with the lack of historical data, lack of models to accurately
assess risk, and lack of consistency in terminology and policy coverage
have created friction in the cyber insurance market. These dynamics
have created a perfect storm--demand for cyber insurance has increased,
premiums have gone up, and some insurers are reluctant to write new
policies.
The Federal Government is in a unique position to bring certainty
and stability to the market and I am glad the Biden administration is
working to do just that. Notably, the administration has prioritized
identifying ways the Federal Government can help address gaps in the
cyber insurance market, particularly related to coverage for
catastrophic cyber incidents.
The administration is 2 years into assessing the need for--and
potential structures of--a Federal backstop to a catastrophic cyber
event. Without Government intervention, we run the risk of cyber
insurers being overextended when a catastrophic cyber incident occurs,
or writing policies that include so many exemptions that no one can
make a claim. Neither scenario is good for our economy or national
security, and I look forward to supporting on-going efforts to find a
solution.
The Biden administration has also re-launched the Cyber Insurance
and Data Analysis Working Group (CIDAWG) at CISA, which will help
insurers better analyze risk by identifying the security controls that
are most effective and improving access to data. Enhancing our ability
to evaluate risk will help the cyber insurance market at every level,
making cyber insurance more attractive and accessible. Ultimately
higher rates of cyber insurance uptake will reduce systemic risk and
yield dividends in resilience.
I'm looking forward to our witnesses' perspectives on what more the
Federal Government could be doing to strengthen the cyber insurance
market. Another area where the Government is uniquely suited to bring
value is operational collaboration. No other entity has the same
convening power or intelligence insights that can help the private
sector make better sense of the activity they are seeing on their
networks.
I was encouraged that National Security Memorandum 22 recommitted
the administration to building operational collaboration capacity.
CISA, the National Coordinator for the Security and Resilience of
Critical Infrastructure, has been modernizing its approach to
operational collaboration for almost 3 years with the Joint Cyber
Defense Collaborative (JCDC). I will be interested in hearing from the
witnesses today how operational collaboration bodies like the JCDC can
more strategically leverage public and private-sector competencies to
boost resilience.
Finally, the Government has an important role to play in bringing
greater clarity to the interdependencies and cascading consequences of
cyber attacks. Earlier this year, for example, we were caught
flatfooted after the Change Healthcare ransomware attack. It took too
long to understand the broader impacts on the health care system, and
it limited our ability to respond nimbly.
I was encouraged that NSM-22 directed CISA to identify key
interdependencies that would be implicated by cyber attacks so we can
better manage risk. I look forward to working with CISA to improve its
ability to conduct that type of analysis.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Swalwell.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
June 27, 2024
In the past several years, significant cyber incidents have
demonstrated how an impact on one entity can have wider implications
across a critical infrastructure sector or for the broader U.S.
economy.
Whether it was the Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack in 2021,
which resulted in gas shortages across the East Coast, or the recent
Change Healthcare ransomware attack, which stalled payments to medical
providers across the country, cyber attacks are having real-world
impacts. Preventing these incidents in the first place must be a top
priority, but we must also ensure that critical infrastructure is
resilient and that we are adequately prepared to respond and recover
from cyber incidents.
One way to improve critical infrastructure resilience is the
increased use of cyber insurance, which can encourage better
cybersecurity practices and help ensure that companies have the
resources to respond to and recover from a cyber incident. We know
there are major challenges in the cyber insurance market, with
providers reluctant to offer coverage when it is difficult to assess
risk.
With the extent of cyber-related losses depending on technological
changes and geopolitical uncertainties, cyber insurers have to
underwrite policies with limited information. In particular, the
potential for catastrophic losses across many entities in the event of
a major cyber attack or global conflict creates significant risk for
insurers.
I am glad to see the Biden administration has taken the lead on
evaluating the potential for a Federal backstop, and I look forward to
on-going engagement with our administration partners and private-sector
stakeholders on assessing whether one is needed. I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses today about how they see the current state
of the cyber insurance market and how the Federal Government can play a
better role in supporting it.
Additionally, ensuring critical infrastructure resilience will
require improving operational collaboration between the Federal
Government and critical infrastructure. CISA's Joint Cyber Defense
Collaborative, or JCDC, has significant potential to facilitate the
kind of public-private partnerships that will improve resilience and
incident response. Passing Ranking Member Swalwell's legislation to
authorize and provide structure to the JCDC is critical to ensuring the
JCDC can fully realize operational collaboration going forward.
Today's hearing will give the subcommittee an opportunity to hear
from stakeholders about how CISA is collaborating with critical
infrastructure and how we can ensure that it provides the necessary
support to improve resilience.

Mr. Garbarino. I am pleased to have a distinguished panel
of witnesses before us today on this very important topic. I
ask that our witnesses please rise and raise their right hand.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you'll give before
the Committee on Homeland Security of the U.S. House of
Representatives will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth so help you God?
All. I do.
Mr. Garbarino. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative.
Thank you very much. Please be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses. Mr.
Frank Cilluffo, currently serves as the director of the McCrary
Institute for Cyber and Critical Infrastructure Security. Mr.
Cilluffo was a member of the U.S. Cyber Space Solarium
Commission and served on the Department of Homeland Security's
Advisory Council where he chaired various initiatives on
counterterrorism, cybersecurity, and economic security. He then
joined the George Washington University in 2003--I was there at
the same time--establishing the Center for Cyber and Homeland
Security as a prominent, nonpartisan think tank----
Mr. Swalwell. But he probably only did it in 4 years.
Mr. Garbarino. Yeah.
--as a prominent nonpartisan ``think and do tank''
dedicating to building bridges between theory and practice to
advance U.S. security. He served as associate vice president at
GW where he led a number of national security and cybersecurity
policy and research initiatives. He directed the Center for
Cyber and Homeland Security, and with the School of Business,
launched the university's World Executive MBA and Cybersecurity
Program.
Prior to his White House appointment, Mr. Cilluffo spent 8
years in senior policy positions at the Center for Strategic
and International Studies at a Washington-based think tank. He
currently also serves as trustee for the Alabama School of
Cyber Technology and Engineering and is chairman of the
advisory board, Cyber Florida.
Mr. Matthew McCabe is the managing director of Cyber
Broking, Guy Carpenter. Mr. McCabe came to Guy Carpenter from
Kivu Consulting, Inc., a provider of cybersecurity and cyber
incident response services specializing in ransomware. At
Kivu--Kivu? Kivu? All right--Kivu, he acted as general counsel
and advised on response, ransomware negotiation, and
mitigation.
Prior to Kivu, he worked as a senior vice president and
assistant general counsel for cyber policy at Marsh's Cyber
Center of Excellence, where he advised global clients with
placement of cyber insurance, negotiation of coverage, wording,
and the administration--and the administering of cyber
insurance claims.
Prior to his career in cyber insurance, Mr. McCabe served
as senior counsel to the U.S. House of Representatives
Committee on Homeland Security where he advised Congressional
representatives on cybersecurity and data privacy issues in the
administration of President George W. Bush as a policy director
on the Homeland Security Council.
Before working in Washington, he was a litigator at a law
firm in New York--I wasn't going to say that name--specializing
in securities and accounting fraud and a law clerk for the
Honorable William H. Pauley, III, in the Southern District of
New York.
Ms. Kimberly Denbow is vice president of security and
operations at the American Gas Association. She's also the
executive director of the Downstream Natural Gas Information
Sharing and Analysis Center. Over the course of her 27 years
with AGA, she has served as staff executive for multiple AGA
technical committees covering security, safety, gas control,
underground storage, field operations, environment, and
supplemental gas.
At present, she leads the AGA board safety and security
committee and the AGA cybersecurity strategy and regulatory
action committee. She serves as the industry liaison to
numerous U.S. Department of Homeland Security and Department of
Energy natural gas physical and cybersecurity programs. Ms.
Denbow is an active member of the Oil and Natural Gas Subsector
Coordinating Council where she stood up and co-chairs the
Cybersecurity Work Group.
Mr. Jack Kudale is the founder and CEO of Cowbell, the
industry's first AI-powered cyber insurance provider that aims
to make cyber insurance accessible to all businesses. He brings
25 years of business experience having led 3 venture-backed
Silicon Valley cybersecurity and data analytic startups after a
long stint as an executive in charge of distribution at a
Fortune 500 software company. He's a frequent speaker at
industry events covering topics such as the future of cyber
insurance and the use of AI and technology to enable continuous
underwriting for cyber. He was recently named Entrepreneur of
the Year Bay Area Award Winner by Ernst & Young, a highly-
coveted award that honors entrepreneurs whose ambition,
courage, and ingenuity have driven their company's success.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today. I
now recognize Mr. Cilluffo for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF FRANK J. CILLUFFO, DIRECTOR, MC CRARY INSTITUTE
FOR CYBER AND CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY, UNIVERSITY OF
AUBURN

Mr. Cilluffo. Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell,
Congressman Luttrell, thank you for the opportunity to testify
before you today. The cyber threat continues to grow in scale,
scope, and complexity with nation-state actors, cyber
criminals, and other malicious entities creating significant
risk to our national security, economic prosperity, and public
safety.
If there's a conflict brewing somewhere, rest assured
there's a cyber element to it. Cyber capabilities have become
integral to modern warfare strategy and doctrine, whether
through computer network attack, computer network exploit or
espionage, intelligence preparation of the battlefield, or
disinformation and misinformation to expand the fog of war.
While threats come in various shapes, sizes, and forms, the
People's Republic of China tops the list as an existential
threat to U.S. networks. Chinese state-sponsored actors like
Volt Typhoon have demonstrated their intent to shift from
espionage to prepositioning in a concerning escalation. Volt
Typhoon has been particularly active in targeting American
facilities in Guam, the strategically important U.S. territory
in the Pacific. It has compromised organizations across various
critical infrastructure sectors and is living off the so-called
land.
Beyond direct nation-state threats, countries are
increasingly turning to proxies to conduct cyber operations,
allowing nation-states to mask their identity and maintain
plausible deniability. This blurs the line between state-
sponsored activities in cyber crime, making both attribution
and response more challenging. Russia, for example, has become
a safe haven for ransomware gangs complicating any effort to
combat them.
Ransomware is hitting epidemic proportions, as we know,
putting a target on everyone's back and impacting organizations
of all sizes across every sector of our economy and society.
The landscape is rapidly evolving. Our approaches to
cybersecurity must evolve, too. The increasing sophistication,
the expanding attack surface, and impact of cyber threats
demand a reimagining of our defense strategies, particularly
public/private partnerships.
To date, our cybersecurity posture has largely been
reactive, responding to incidents, putting out fires. This is
unsustainable, and we can no longer simply firewall our way out
of the problem. We must recalibrate and shift toward more
proactive and collaborative approaches that leverage the full
spectrum of national capabilities. This includes identifying
and protecting systemically-important entities, or SIEs, whose
compromise could have significant cascading effects on our
security and stability.
National Security Memorandum 22, promulgated earlier this
year, introduced a concept of SIEs. While I applaud the
guidance writ large, one significant shortcoming was not
designating space systems, which underpin a wide range of
critical services as a critical infrastructure sector.
Robust public/private relationships are essential to secure
SIEs. Government and industry must actively collaborate to
secure these entities, and to turbo-charge this effort we need
to move beyond the traditional information-sharing approach and
into a joint threat analysis coordinated incident response and
shared responsibility for risk mitigation.
The Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, or JCDC, represents
a strong model, but it needs to scale. We also need to launch
sector-specific approaches that address unique challenges and
needs. Project Fortress from U.S. Treasury is a promising
example of Government and industry sitting side-by-side in the
same foxhole moving beyond defense to include possible
offensive capabilities.
We must not lose sight of the backbone of our economy, as I
think, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, you both brought up.
The backbone is small- and medium-size businesses. Any
solutions should allow them to both benefit from and contribute
to our collective defense.
Exploring innovative models for risk-sharing, such as new
insurance frameworks and Government backstops for catastrophic
incidents, is crucial. The cyber insurance market is beginning
to stabilize, but nation-state threats often exceed the scope
of traditional policies creating a coverage gap that leaves
many organizations vulnerable in instances of war, significant
nation-state actors, and attacks on critical infrastructure.
While insurers can and must incentivize better security
practices, market forces alone are unlikely to fully address
the full spectrum of risk. Developing a cyber insurance
framework similar to the TRIA, Terrorism Risk Insurance Act,
could provide a solution but only if Government intervention is
carefully designed to complement private-sector efforts, not
replace them.
As we move forward, striking the right balance between
Government involvement and private-sector innovation is vital.
We must be careful not to stifle growth, innovation, or cause
moral hazard while providing the necessary support for
catastrophic risk.
In conclusion, the threat landscape demands a bold,
collaborative and adaptive response. After all, how many
businesses--even the biggest--went into business thinking they
had to defend themselves against foreign militaries and foreign
intelligence services? Yet, that is precisely the challenge our
critical infrastructure operators today face. This asymmetry
demands new models.
By leveling up collaboration and translating nouns into
verbs between Government and industry, developing sector-
specific approaches and exploring innovative models for risk
sharing, we can effectively mitigate the risk of catastrophic
cyber incidents and safeguard our critical infrastructure.
Sorry for going over, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cilluffo follows:]
Prepared Statement of Frank J. Cilluffo
June 27, 2024
introduction
Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and distinguished
subcommittee Members thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you today on a subject that is clearly of national importance. Your
oversight in examining these critical topics is commendable.
In my remarks today, I aim to provide an overview of the landscape
of cyber threats, highlighting their growing complexity and
seriousness. The cyber threat can no longer be treated in isolation,
because it plays a central role in global crises and flashpoints. It's
impossible to examine cyber issues without an appreciation for the
geopolitical environment and global crises in all contexts. Cyber
threats have evolved from a niche concern to a core issue in all
conflicts. I will shed light on the various players involved, including
nation-states and cyber criminals, along with their advanced strategies
like leveraging proxies and employing ``living off the land'' tactics.
Furthermore, my testimony will delve into the impact of National
Security Memorandum 22 (NSM 22) and its guidelines for identifying
Systemically Important Entities. This will highlight the significance
of adopting a cybersecurity approach that considers the
interconnectedness within our infrastructure framework.
Moreover, I will discuss the pressing need to revamp and strengthen
our private partnerships. By reviewing initiatives such as the Joint
Cyber Defense Collaborative and Project Fortress, I hope to demonstrate
how these models can be expanded and customized to establish resilient
and proactive defense mechanisms across various sectors.
Last, I will discuss how the insurance industry can encourage
improved cybersecurity practices and the potential for a national
strategy to deal with severe cyber risks. By assessing the landscape of
cyber insurance and suggesting ways to better calibrate Government
involvement, I aim to highlight the delicate balance between private-
sector creativity and essential Government assistance.
It is important to note that our historical cybersecurity posture
has been largely reactive, primarily focused on responding to incidents
and putting out fires. This approach is no longer sufficient in the
face of evolving and sophisticated threats. We cannot simply
``firewall'' our way out of the problem. Instead, we must shift toward
a more proactive defense strategy that focuses on managing risks,
minimizing potential impacts, and building resilience across our
critical infrastructure and key sectors.
Going forward, our approach to cybersecurity needs to be adaptable,
cooperative, and forward-looking. The time is ripe for decisive efforts
to move beyond reactive measures. By fostering stronger collaborations
between the public and private sectors and taking strategic government
actions, we can bolster our country's ability to anticipate, prevent,
and mitigate cyber threats rather than merely responding to them after
the fact. This proactive stance is essential to effectively protect our
national security, economic interests, and public safety in the digital
age.
overview of the cyber threat landscape
The cyber threat landscape facing the United States is becoming
increasingly complex and dangerous, with nation-state actors, cyber
criminals, and other malicious entities creating significant risks to
our national security, economic prosperity, and public safety.
In today's geopolitical environment, it's increasingly difficult to
imagine any conflict without a significant cyber element. Cyber
capabilities have become integral to modern warfare and geopolitical
strategy, whether through direct cyber attacks, espionage for target
selection, intelligence preparation of the battlefield (pre-
positioning), or the use of disinformation and misinformation to create
a fog of war.
While cyber threats come in various shapes, sizes, and forms,
nation-state threats remain at the forefront of our concerns. The
People's Republic of China is ``the most active and persistent cyber
threat to U.S. Government, private sector, and critical infrastructure
networks.''\1\ Chinese state-sponsored actors, such as Volt Typhoon,
have shown a growing willingness to compromise and hold at risk
critical infrastructure systems, even those without inherent espionage
value.\2\ This shift from traditional espionage to pre-positioning is a
concerning escalation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Office of the National Cyber Director, ``2024 Report on the
Cybersecurity Posture of the United States'' (Washington, DC, May
2024), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/2024-
Report-on-the-Cybersecurity-Posture-of-the-United-States.pdf.
\2\ ``Countering the Cyberthreat from China,'' May 15, 2024,
https://docs.house.gov/meetings/GO/GO12/20240515/117309/HHRG-118-GO12-
WState-EvaninaW-20240515.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Volt Typhoon hackers have been particularly active in targeting
American facilities in Guam, a strategically important U.S. territory
in the Pacific.\3\ This focus on Guam, along with other critical
infrastructure both inside and outside the country, highlights the
group's potential to disrupt U.S. military operations and response
capabilities in the event of a conflict in the region, such as over
Taiwan.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ David DiMolfetta and Frank Konkel, ``Some Volt Typhoon Victims
`Won't Know They're Impacted,' Mandiant CEO Says,'' Nextgov.Com
(Online) (Washington: Government Executive Media Group, April 11,
2024), 3037102859, ProQuest Central, http://search.proquest.com.ezp-
prod1.hul.harvard.edu/magazines/some-volt-typhoon-victims-won-t-know-
they-re/docview/3037102859/se-2?accountid=11311.
\4\ CISA et. al., ``PRC State-Sponsored Actors Compromise and
Maintain Persistent Access to U.S. Critical Infrastructure/CISA,''
February 7, 2024, https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/cybersecurity-
advisories/aa24-038a; CISA et. al., ``PRC State-Sponsored Cyber
Activity: Actions for Critical Infrastructure Leaders,'' 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recent advisories from CISA and partner agencies highlight the
urgency of this threat.\5\ Volt Typhoon successfully compromised
organizations across American critical infrastructure sectors,
including Communications, Energy, Transportation Systems, and Water and
Wastewater Systems. Their ``living off the land'' techniques and
exploitation of valid accounts allow for long-term, undiscovered
persistence, sometimes maintaining access to compromised environments
for 5 years or more.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ CISA et. al., ``PRC State-Sponsored Cyber Activity: Actions for
Critical Infrastructure Leaders''; CISA et. al., ``PRC State-Sponsored
Actors Compromise and Maintain Persistent Access to U.S. Critical
Infrastructure/CISA.''
\6\ CISA et. al., ``PRC State-Sponsored Cyber Activity: Actions for
Critical Infrastructure Leaders.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While China poses the most significant threat, Russia, Iran, and
North Korea are also conducting malicious cyber activities against U.S.
interests. These and other adversaries are increasingly extending
geopolitical conflict into the cyber domain for geopolitical conflict,
further amplifying risks to U.S. and allied critical infrastructure.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Office of the National Cyber Director.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beyond direct nation-state threat actors, nation-states are
increasingly turning to proxies to conduct their cyber operations.\8\
The use of proxies allows a given nation-state to mask their identity
and skirt international law while maintaining plausible deniability.
This tactic blurs the lines between state-sponsored activities and
cyber crime, making attribution and response more challenging. For
instance, Russia has become a safe haven for ransomware criminals by
allowing these actors to operate with impunity on their soil,
complicating international efforts to combat this growing threat.
Further, the use of proxies complicates our ability to defend against
and deter such attacks and raises significant policy challenges around
how to respond and hold accountable the true orchestrators of these
cyber activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Mannan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ransomware threat continues to grow and has effectively
democratized the threat landscape, putting a target on everyone's back.
No longer is this threat confined to large corporations or high-profile
targets; it now impacts organizations of all sizes across every sector.
In 2023, nearly 5,200 organizations reported ransomware attacks, and
countless more attacks have likely gone unreported.\9\ Ransomware's
impact extends beyond financial losses, with such attacks disrupting
critical services and potentially threatening lives. For instance, a
November 2023 attack on Ardent Health Services, a 30-hospital system,
put lives at risk by forcing diversions across 3 States.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Matt Kapko, ``Elevated Ransomware Activity Hit Nearly 5,200
Organizations in 2023,'' Cybersecurity Dive, January 12, 2024, https://
www.cybersecuritydive.com/news/elevated-ransomware-activity-2023-
rapid7/704476/.
\10\ Emsisoft Malware Lab, ``The State of Ransomware in the U.S.:
Report and Statistics 2023,'' Emsisoft/Cybersecurity Blog, January 2,
2024, https://www.emsisoft.com/en/blog/44987/the-state-of-ransomware-
in-the-u-s-report-and-statistics-2023/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Financially, the costs are significant. Ransom payments in the
first half of 2023 were estimated to be $449 million, while individual
attacks on major corporations resulted in hundreds of millions in
losses.\11\ The MGM Resorts attack in September 2023 is estimated to
have cost at least $100 million, while the August 2023 Clorox attack is
estimated to have cost at least $356 million.\12\ Further, the systemic
risk to critical infrastructure cannot be overstated. As demonstrated
by the ICBC attack in late 2023, even a relatively small entity can
have an outsized impact on critical systems like the U.S. Treasury
market.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Emsisoft Malware Lab.
\12\ Emsisoft Malware Lab.
\13\ Treasury's Cyber Defenses and AI Future with Todd Conklin,
2024, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZaxENpjsTeg.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The emergence of artificial intelligence (AI) presents both
opportunities and risks in the cybersecurity landscape.\14\ While AI
can enhance defensive capabilities, it also provides cyber criminals
with more efficient means of conducting attacks.\15\ The potential for
AI-generated deepfakes, particularly in audio and video impersonation,
presents a new frontier of cyber threats that could compromise
authentication systems and facilitate social engineering attacks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ ``How Ransomware Could Cripple Countries, Not Just
Companies,'' The Economist, December 31, 2023, https://
www.economist.com/international/2023/12/31/how-ransomware-could-
cripple-countries-not-just-companies.
\15\ Innovating at Speed: Advancing AI with Teresa Shea and Glenn
Gaffney, 2024, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T6Ii0HnqSgQ.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As we confront this evolving threat landscape, it is clear that our
approaches to cybersecurity need to evolve, too. The increasing
sophistication, scale, and potential impact of cyber threats demand a
reimagining of our defense strategies, particularly public-private
partnerships. We must move beyond reactive postures and information
sharing to more proactive, collaborative approaches that leverage the
full spectrum of national capabilities.
systemically important entities
We must identify and prioritize protecting entities whose
compromise could have cascading effects on our national security,
economic stability, and public health and safety. The concept of
Systemically Important Entities (SIEs) emerged as a crucial framework
for understanding and addressing the interconnected and interdependent
nature of our critical infrastructure.
The recently-issued National Security Memorandum 22 (NSM-22)
introduces the concept of SIEs, acknowledging that specific
organizations and systems have far-reaching impacts that extend beyond
their immediate sectors.\16\ This recognition is a significant step
forward in our national cybersecurity strategy, as it aims to mitigate
the potential for wide-spread disruption that could result from attacks
on these key entities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ The White House, ``National Security Memorandum on Critical
Infrastructure Security and Resilience,'' The White House, April 30,
2024, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/
2024/04/30/national-security-memorandum-on-critical-infrastructure-
security-and-resilience/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The criteria for designating SIEs, as outlined in NSM-22, are based
on the potential for an entity's disruption or malfunction to cause
nationally significant and cascading adverse effects. This updated
approach reflects a more current understanding of the complex
interdependencies within our critical infrastructure ecosystem.
Considering sectors in isolation is no longer sufficient, we must adopt
a holistic view that accounts for the ripple effects of cyber incidents
across our interconnected systems.
One example is the ``tri-sector'' approach, which emphasizes the
critical and interrelated nature of the finance, energy, and
telecommunications sectors.\17\ These sectors form the backbone of our
modern economy and society, and their resilience is paramount to our
national security. The energy sector warrants particular attention due
to its fundamental role in enabling all other critical infrastructure
operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ CISA Cybersecurity Advisory Committee, ``Building Resilience
and Reducing Systemic Risk to Critical Infrastructure'' (Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), September 13, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is important to note that the designation of SIEs extends beyond
these 3 sectors. The designation and support processes must be dynamic
and adaptive as threats and technology change. For instance, the
increasing reliance on cloud computing and space-based assets
necessitates reevaluating what constitutes critical infrastructure in
the 21st Century. This flexibility allows for the inclusion of other
functions that may not fall neatly into traditional sector definitions,
ensuring a comprehensive approach to critical infrastructure
protection.
While considering what constitutes critical infrastructure in the
21st Century, it's crucial to recognize emerging domains that play an
increasingly vital role in national and economic security. One such
domain is space. The space sector underpins a wide range of critical
services, from communication and navigation to surveillance and weather
forecasting. Space infrastructure is vital to civil and military
operations, making it a prime candidate for designation as a critical
infrastructure sector. While NSM-22 takes significant strides in
updating our approach to critical infrastructure protection, the
omission of space as a designated sector represents a missed
opportunity that should be addressed in future policy updates.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Frank Cilluffo and Alison King, ``How to Fine-Tune the White
House's New Critical Infrastructure Directive,'' CyberScoop (blog), May
1, 2024, https://cyberscoop.com/how-to-fine-tune-the-white-houses-new-
critical-infrastructure-directive/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regardless, the identification and protection of SIEs require
robust public-private partnerships. Government and industry must
actively collaborate to secure these entities. This collaboration must
go beyond the traditional ``information sharing'' approach and move
into joint threat analysis, coordinated incident response, and shared
responsibility for risk mitigation. Now is the time to reimagine and
deepen our public-private cyber partnerships.
Furthermore, we must recognize that the concept of SIEs has
international implications. Cyber threats do not respect national
boundaries, and many critical systems are globally interconnected. As
such, our approach to protecting SIEs must include international
cooperation and alignment of cybersecurity standards and practices.
Identifying and protecting SIEs represent an essential evolution in
our national cybersecurity strategy. By focusing our resources and
efforts on these key nodes within our critical infrastructure, we can
more effectively mitigate the risk of catastrophic cyber incidents.
However, as mentioned, this approach demands both a reimagining of
public-private partnerships and a commitment to continuous adaptation
in the face of evolving threats.
rethinking the public-private partnership
As we confront the evolving landscape of cyber threats to our
critical infrastructure, it is imperative that we fundamentally
reimagine and deepen our approach to public-private partnerships in
cybersecurity. While valuable, the traditional model of more
information sharing is no longer sufficient to address the
sophisticated and persistent threats we face today.
We must acknowledge a stark reality: no company, regardless of size
or sector, entered the market expecting to defend itself against the
significant strength of foreign military and intelligence services.
Yet, this is precisely the challenge our critical infrastructure
operators now face. This asymmetry demands a new paradigm of
collaboration between Government and industry.
The Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative (JCDC), established by the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), represents a
positive step toward more integrated cooperation.\19\ It's worth noting
that the concept of such a collaborative effort was initially
recommended by the Cyberspace Solarium Commission, which led to the
creation of the Joint Cyber Planning Office (JCPO) through the fiscal
year 2021 National Defense Authorization Act.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Lamar Johnson, ``CISA Launching Joint Cyber Planning Office
`Shortly,' '' July 27, 2021, https://www.meritalk.com/articles/cisa-
launching-joint-cyber-planning-office-shortly/.
\20\ Cyberspace Solarium Commission, ``Cyberspace Solarium
Commission--NDAA Press Release,'' December 3, 2020, https://
www.solarium.gov/press-and-news/ndaa-press-release.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
JCDC, evolving from the JCPO concept, is an operational entity that
brings together public and private-sector partners to enhance the
Nation's cyber defenses. JCDC is exceptionally effective at rallying
stakeholders around specific crises, such as the Log4j vulnerability.
But, there is also an opportunity to enhance day-to-day collaboration
and information sharing to further strengthen the collective
cybersecurity posture between crises. It's important to recognize that
JCDC is still in its early stages and has limitations. It currently
involves a relatively small number of members, and there's a clear need
to scale this model as we confront increasingly complex and wide-spread
threats.
While JCDC provides a framework for collaboration, more is needed
to address the full spectrum of cybersecurity challenges we face. To
genuinely have trust and operationalize these partnerships, we need to
develop sector-specific approaches that can address different
industries' unique challenges and needs.
One promising example of a sector-specific approach is Project
Fortress, recently launched by the U.S. Department of Treasury. This
initiative aims to enhance cybersecurity in the financial sector by
moving beyond a purely defensive posture to a more proactive defense
model that includes offensive capabilities.\21\ By creating automated
intelligence-sharing pipelines between the U.S. Government and the
financial sector, Project Fortress demonstrates the potential for
deeper, more dynamic public-private collaboration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Treasury's Cyber Defenses and AI Future with Todd Conklin.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As we consider expanding such models to other critical
infrastructure sectors, we must be mindful of small and medium-sized
businesses' unique challenges. These enterprises form the backbone of
our economy but often lack the resources to participate fully in
sophisticated cybersecurity partnerships. We must develop scalable
solutions that allow these smaller entities to benefit from and
contribute to our collective defense.
To truly turbocharge our public-private partnerships, we should
consider establishing collaborative environments that go beyond
information sharing to include joint threat hunting, coordinated
incident response, and shared defensive operations. These environments
could leverage Government and industry partners' unique capabilities
and perspectives, creating a force multiplier effect against
sophisticated adversaries.
Furthermore, we must explore innovative models for risk-sharing
between the public and private sectors. This could include new
insurance frameworks, government backstops for catastrophic cyber
incidents, and incentives for companies that adopt enhanced security
measures and participate in collaborative defense efforts.
As we develop these sector-specific approaches, it's important to
note that improved harmonization across regulatory and reporting
frameworks can help all these efforts while supporting our posture.
Harmonization is also particularly important for small and medium-sized
businesses, which often lack the resources to navigate complex
regulatory structures. Harmonizing will help reduce redundancy and
organizational burden while supporting a more effective cybersecurity
posture. We cannot afford a check-the-box or lowest-common-denominator
harmonization solution. Our approach must be dynamic and focused on
continuous improvement rather than merely meeting minimum standards.
As we move forward, it is crucial to recognize that this reimagined
partnership is not about shifting all responsibility to the Government.
Instead, it is about creating an ecosystem where public and private-
sector strengths are synergistically combined to enhance national cyber
resilience. This approach requires transparency, trust-building, and
continuous adaptation as the threat landscape evolves.
insurance and cybersecurity
The cyber insurance market has experienced significant growth in
recent years,\22\ with global premiums reaching approximately $20
billion by 2025.\23\ However, this figure belies the true extent of
organizations' cyber risk exposure.\24\ The current state of the market
is characterized by underinsurance, with many businesses lacking
adequate coverage for the full spectrum of cyber threats they face.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Graham Steele, ``Remarks by Assistant Secretary Graham Steele
at the Federal Insurance Office and NYU Stern Volatility and Risk
Institute Conference on Catastrophic Cyber Risk and a Potential Federal
Insurance Response,'' U.S. Department of the Treasury, June 18, 2024,
https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1922.
\23\ Sasha Romanosky et al., ``Content Analysis of Cyber Insurance
Policies: How Do Carriers Price Cyber Risk?,'' Journal of Cybersecurity
5, no. 1 (January 1, 2019): tyz002, https://doi.org/10.1093/cybsec/
tyz002.
\24\ Christiaan Beek, ``2023 Ransomware Stats/Rapid7 Blog,''
Rapid7, January 12, 2024, https://www.rapid7.com/blog/post/2024/01/12/
2023-ransomware-stats-a-look-back-to-plan-ahead/.
\25\ Matthew Lerner, ``Systemic Cyber Cat Event Could Top Cover Due
to Aggregation: Experts,'' Business Insurance, November 20, 2023,
https://www.businessinsurance.com/article/20231120/NEWS06/912361138/
systemic-cyber-cat-event-could-top-cover-due-to-aggregation-experts-.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While the insurance industry has made strides in developing cyber
risk products, it faces substantial challenges in addressing threats
from nation-state actors. These sophisticated adversaries possess
capabilities that often exceed the scope of traditional insurance
policies, creating a coverage gap that leaves many organizations
vulnerable.\26\ This limitation is particularly concerning given the
increasing frequency and severity of state-sponsored cyber attacks
targeting critical infrastructure.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Gianchandani et al., ``Dear Colleague Letter: IUCRC Proposals
for Research and Thought Leadership on Insurance Risk Modeling and
Underwriting Related to Terrorism and Catastrophic Cyber Risks: A Joint
NSF and U.S. Department of the Treasury Federal Insurance Office Call
(Nsf24082)/NSF--U.S. National Science Foundation''; Lerner, ``Systemic
Cyber Cat Event Could Top Cover Due to Aggregation''; Federal Insurance
Office, ``Update on the Federal Insurance Office's Assessment of a
Potential Federal Insurance Response to Catastrophic Cyber Incidents.''
\27\ Michael Martina et al., ``US Officials Deliver Warning That
Chinese Hackers Are Targeting Infrastructure,'' Reuters, January 31,
2024, sec. Cybersecurity, https://www.reuters.com/technology/
cybersecurity/chinese-hackers-are-targeting-us-infrastructure-fbi-
chief-testify-2024-01-31/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Industry perspectives on the role of cyber insurance and potential
Government intervention are varied. Some industry leaders have
supported a Federal framework to address catastrophic cyber risks. At
the November 2023 conference co-hosted by the Federal Insurance Office
(FIO) and NYU's Volatility and Risk Institute, several insurance
executives expressed the need for Government involvement in managing
systemic cyber risks.\28\ However, others in the industry caution
against premature Government intervention, arguing that the market is
still evolving and growing.\29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Federal Insurance Office, ``Update on FIO/NYU Conference on
Catastrophic Cyber Risk and a Potential Federal Insurance Response and
FIO's Catastrophic Cyber Insurance Work.''
\29\ None, ``Tiernan: Systemic Cyber Event Would Undermine Societal
Role of the Industry,'' Cyber Risk Insurer, June 13, 2024, https://
www.cyberrisk-insurer.com/news/tiernan-systemic-cyber-event-would-
undermine-societal-role-of-the-industry/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The insurance sector has responded to the challenges posed by
nation-state threats and potential systemic risks by introducing
exclusions for war, nation-state actions, and attacks on critical
infrastructure.\30\ While these exclusions protect insurers' balance
sheets, they leave a significant gap in coverage for the most severe
cyber incidents, potentially shifting the burden to policy holders or,
ultimately, to the Government in the event of a catastrophic attack.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Jan Larson, ``The State of the Insurance Market for Cyber
Incidents--Important Developments from 2023 and Looking Ahead in
2024,'' Mondaq Business Briefing, February 16, 2024, Gale Business:
Insights.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite these challenges, the insurance industry is crucial in
promoting better cybersecurity practices. Insurers can encourage
organizations to implement more robust security controls and improve
cyber hygiene through underwriting requirements and pricing incentives.
This market-driven approach should significantly enhance the
cybersecurity posture of businesses across various sectors.
However, market forces alone are insufficient to address the full
spectrum of cyber risks, particularly those posed by nation-state
actors. The potential for a catastrophic cyber event that could
overwhelm private-sector capabilities necessitates considering the
Government's role in cyber risk management.
One potential solution is developing a cyber insurance framework
similar to the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act.\31\ Such a program could
position the Government as an insurer of last resort for catastrophic
cyber attacks, providing a backstop for the private insurance market
and ensuring that critical infrastructure operators have access to
coverage for even the most severe incidents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Larson, ``The State of the Insurance Market for Cyber
Incidents--Important Developments From 2023 and Looking Ahead in
2024''; U.S. Department of the Treasury, ``Potential Federal Insurance
Response to Catastrophic Cyber Incidents,'' Federal Register, September
29, 2022, https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/09/29/2022-
21133/potential-federal-insurance-response-to-catastrophic-cyber-
incidents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It's important to note that any Government intervention should be
carefully designed to complement private-sector efforts rather than
replace them. A well-structured program could help grow market capacity
and provide stability while still incentivizing businesses to invest in
robust cybersecurity measures.
A pilot project could be initiated, focusing on a specific critical
infrastructure sector such as energy and power utilities. This pilot
could involve collaboration with existing mutual insurance
organizations like AEGIS, which already has significant experience in
insuring utility companies.\32\ By starting with a targeted approach,
we can assess the effectiveness of a public-private insurance model and
refine it before considering broader applications.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Cullen (Associated Electric & Gas Insurance Services Limited)
to Ifft (Federal Insurance Office).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Office of the National Cyber Director, along with strong
partners in the Treasury Department through its Federal Insurance
Office and the Department of Homeland Security through the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, would be key players
in developing and implementing such a program.\33\ Their involvement
would ensure the initiative aligns with broader national cybersecurity
strategies and critical infrastructure protection efforts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Federal Insurance Office, ``Summary of Comments on Request for
Comment: Federal Insurance Response to Catastrophic Cyber Incidents.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Creating a robust cyber insurance system also presents a strong
business case for enhanced cybersecurity. By setting clear standards
for insurance sector involvement and coverage, we can incentivize
organizations to improve their security practices. This approach
leverages market forces to drive better cybersecurity outcomes, with
the Government providing support where private-sector solutions fall
short.
It's crucial to strike the right balance between Government
intervention and private-sector innovation. While a Federal backstop
can provide necessary security for catastrophic risks, we must be
careful not to stifle growth and innovation in the private sector,
encompassing services, technology, and the cyber insurance market. The
truth is that innovation shouldn't be stifled in the name of security.
The goal should be to create an environment where private companies can
continue to develop new products, services, and technologies while
insurers expand coverage. Government support should focus on addressing
systemic risks that exceed market capacity, particularly in areas of
catastrophic attacks, without impeding the natural evolution and
improvement of private-sector solutions.
As we consider these potential solutions, we must also work to
address the unique challenges small and medium-sized businesses face.
These organizations, which form the backbone of our economy, often lack
the resources to invest heavily in cybersecurity or purchase
comprehensive cyber insurance. Any Federal program should consider how
to extend protection and incentives to these smaller entities through
targeted initiatives or support for industry-specific insurance pools.
conclusion
The cyber threat landscape facing our Nation has reached a level
that demands a fundamental reimagining of our approach to
cybersecurity. As I have shared throughout this testimony, our
challenges are multifaceted and evolving, requiring a collaborative
response from both the public and private sectors.
Identifying and protecting Systemically Important Entities (SIEs)
represents a crucial step forward in our national cybersecurity
strategy. By focusing our efforts on these key nodes within our
critical infrastructure, we can more effectively mitigate the risk of
catastrophic cyber incidents that could have far-reaching consequences
for our national security, economic stability, and public safety.
However, the designation of SIEs is just the beginning. We must
deepen and turbocharge our public-private partnerships to create a more
resilient cybersecurity ecosystem. This reimagined collaboration should
go beyond traditional information sharing to include joint threat
hunting, coordinated incident response, and shared defensive
operations. Initiatives like Project Fortress in the financial sector
provide a promising model for this enhanced cooperation.
The role of the insurance sector in this new paradigm cannot be
overstated. While market forces and private insurance have driven
significant improvements in cybersecurity practices, the limitations of
the current cyber insurance market's ability to address nation-state
threats and potentially catastrophic events is clear. We must seriously
consider the development of a Federal insurance response to
catastrophic cyber incidents similar to the model provided by the
Terrorism Risk Insurance Act. The time to deliberate and think this
through is now, not after a catastrophic incident occurs, rather than
scrambling to develop solutions in the aftermath. By proactively
considering these issues, we can better prepare our Nation's cyber
systems to withstand catastrophic incidents.
However, any Government intervention must be carefully calibrated
to complement rather than replace private-sector efforts. A well-
designed Federal backstop could help grow market capacity and provide
stability while still incentivizing businesses to invest in robust
cybersecurity measures. The proposed pilot project focusing on the
energy sector could serve as a valuable testing ground for this
approach.
As we move forward, we must remain mindful of the needs of small
and medium-sized businesses, ensuring that our strategies for enhancing
cybersecurity and cyber insurance are scalable and accessible to
organizations of all sizes.
In conclusion, today's cyber threats require a bold, collaborative,
and adaptive response. By reimagining our public-private partnerships,
leveraging the power of the insurance sector, and providing targeted
Government support where necessary, we can build a more resilient and
secure digital infrastructure for our Nation.
We must also recognize that this is not a one-time effort. As
highlighted in the recently-released National Cyber Director's Posture
Report, the cybersecurity landscape is constantly evolving.\34\ We must
be prepared to consistently recalibrate our approaches, learn from our
experiences, improve our strategies, and adapt to new threats as they
emerge.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ Office of the National Cyber Director, ``2024 Cybersecurity
Posture Report.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our efforts to strengthen national cybersecurity should be seen as
an on-going and interactive improvement process. We must move beyond
simply reacting to cyber threats and adopt a more proactive, forward-
looking stance. This includes developing effective cyber deterrence
strategies tailored to different adversaries, as the tactics that work
against one nation-state may differ from those needed to counter others
or cyber criminal groups.
The time for action is now, but our commitment must be enduring. We
must seize this opportunity to strengthen our collective defense
against today's cyber threats while remaining vigilant and adaptable to
better protect our economic and national security in the face of
tomorrow's challenges.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you today. It
is a privilege to contribute to this important conversation and I look
forward to trying to answer any questions you may have.

Mr. Garbarino. All right. That's not bad. ``In
conclusion,'' that was a long in conclusion. All right. It's an
important topic, so it's great.
Mr. Cilluffo. I've got the vowel at the end of my name,
too.
Mr. Garbarino. I know. That's why I let you keep going.
Thank you, Mr. Cilluffo.
I now recognize Mr. McCabe for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW MC CABE, MANAGING DIRECTOR, CYBER BROKING,
GUY CARPENTER & COMPANY, LLC

Mr. McCabe. Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell,
and Congressman Luttrell, thank you very much. My name is
Matthew McCabe. I'm a managing director and cyber reinsurance
broker at Marsh McLennan. Marsh McLennan is a leading
professional services firm advising clients across 130
countries. We help these clients navigate complex challenges
through 4 market-leading businesses: Marsh, Guy Carpenter,
Mercer, and Oliver Wyman. These challenges include developing
cyber risk strategies for clients of all sizes and across all
sectors of industry. Often, this involves measuring exposure to
cybersecurity incidents and the placement of cyber insurance,
or reinsurance. Marsh McLennan introduced some of the very
first insurance policies that address data privacy and cyber
risk.
My comments today focus on cyber threats to critical
infrastructure and the roles that industry and Government can
play in building cyber resilience against catastrophic attacks.
The cyber threat to critical infrastructure is undeniable. We
referenced the Volt Typhoon attack and in the joint
cybersecurity advisory about that threat. The agencies warned
that nation-state threat actors were prepositioning themselves
already on IT networks to enable lateral movement and to
disrupt functions. Just last year, the FBI tallied 193
complaints of ransomware from companies that operate critical
infrastructure.
Critical infrastructure companies encounter this threat
every day. Increasingly, cyber insurance serves as an essential
component for mitigating that risk. First, the underwriting of
insurance serves as an annual assessment of security by an
objective third party, and that assessment receives scoring in
economic terms through either premiums or terms of coverage.
Second, cyber insurers use risk engineering to monitor the
level of cyber hygiene maintained by their insured.
Third, cyber insurance provides incident response planning
services. These expert services empower organizations to
navigate through ransomware events, data breaches, and other
cyber incidents. This aspect is especially valuable to
thousands of small- and mid-sized businesses that have
encountered cyber incidents.
Last, cyber insurance fulfills the critical role of helping
organizations manage capital through the transfer of financial
risk.
For these reasons, insurance is increasingly--is an
increasingly vital component of cyber risk management, although
uptake varies by company size. Forty-seven percent of Marsh
clients with annual revenues greater than $1 billion purchase
cyber insurance. That compares with 34 percent of clients with
annual revenues of less than $1 billion.
However, there are some cyber events, whether carried out
by a nation-state or a criminal threat actor, that could
disrupt U.S. infrastructure so severely that the insurance
industry cannot accept the magnitude of the losses. Such an
event could have global economic impact and overwhelm insurers.
It is difficult to quantify the delta between the ceiling for a
catastrophic cyber event and the current limits of cyber
insurance.
The Global Federation of Insurance Associations estimates
that this protection gap may be as high as $900 billion. There
are now discussions regarding the potential benefit of a
public/private partnership for catastrophic cyber risk, where
the Government would become the reinsurer of last resort if a
cyber event resulted in losses deemed too large for the
insurance industry to absorb.
Last year's National Cybersecurity Strategy recognized when
catastrophic cyber incidents occur, it is Government's
responsibility to stabilize the economy and provide certainty
in uncertain times. Structuring that response before a
catastrophic event occurs rather than rushing to develop an aid
package after the fact could provide certainty to markets and
make the Nation more resilient. Federal support has precedent
with other risks such as nuclear, terrorism, and flood.
This committee should also consider a targeted option that
takes a sector-specific approach, such as the energy sector--
the committee could examine which sectors of critical
infrastructure have the greatest need for a Federal backstop.
If we start preparing now, we can bend the risk curve for
catastrophic cyber events. Insurance creates the right economic
incentives to drive changes in society. Analyzing this issue
now and leveraging the benefits of risk management will help
build a more resilient U.S. economy.
I appreciate the opportunity to share our perspective on
cyber threat and how insurance works to mitigate that risk and
enhance resilience, and look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McCabe follows:]
Prepared Statement of Matthew McCabe
June 27, 2024
Marsh McLennan is the world's leading professional services firm in
the areas of risk, strategy, and people. Our more than 85,000
colleagues advise clients in 130 countries. We work with corporate and
public-sector clients to navigate complex challenges through 4 market-
leading businesses--Marsh, Guy Carpenter, Mercer, and Oliver Wyman.
These challenges include developing strategies for clients of all
sizes and across all of industry to mitigate cyber risk. Marsh McLennan
introduced some of the very first insurance policies that addressed
data privacy and cybersecurity risks, and we remain leaders in that
business today.
We appreciate the opportunity to share our perspective on the cyber
threat to critical infrastructure, how cyber insurance works to
mitigate that risk and enhance resilience, and potential Government
solutions that harness the mechanism of cyber insurance.
executive summary
The responsibility for building cyber resilience in the
infrastructure sector is shared among its owners, the insurance
industry, and Government.
Cyber threats to critical infrastructure
There is an on-going threat of cyber attack against U.S. critical
infrastructure--financial institutions, communications providers,
health care, energy, transportation, and water utilities
infrastructure--including from activity sponsored by nation-states and
others.

The FBI's Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) received
nearly 1,200 complaints in 2023 from the critical
infrastructure sector regarding ransomware attacks, a
persistent and growing threat across all industries.

In 2023, Marsh McLennan received more insurance claims
related to ransomware than in any prior year.
Cyber insurance helps build organizational resilience
Over time, insurance has proven effective at turning potentially
ruinous risks into manageable components--whether it's responding to
natural catastrophes, cyber attacks, or the broad range of other risks.

Cyber risk ranks among the top threats facing companies
today, requiring vigilance and continuous monitoring in order
to build resilience.

Cyber insurance is a critical tool in managing the financial
risk associated with cyber risk.

Insurance underwriting contributes to organizational
readiness for cyber attacks by, among other benefits, acting as
an annual assessment of cyber risk preparedness.

Marsh McLennan's Cyber Risk Intelligence Center provides
data-driven analyses to help companies identify where to invest
in effective cyber risk management.
The cyber insurance protection gap
The potential damage to U.S. critical infrastructure from an attack
or other major event has the potential to produce financial losses
beyond the insurance industry's ability to accept. The cyber protection
gap is difficult to quantify; some estimates put the global gap as high
as $900 billion.
Establishing a public-private partnership
There is increasing discussion regarding the role a public-private
partnership (PPP) might play in managing the cyber risk protection gap.
Doing so would not be without precedent as other risks--including
nuclear, terrorism, and flood--have established PPPs.
cyber threats to critical infrastructure
There is a clear and present cyber threat against the U.S.
companies that own and operate critical infrastructure. U.S. officials
acknowledged the threat in a recent Joint Cybersecurity Advisory that
warned operators of critical infrastructure that nation-state cyber
threat actors had already compromised their cyber defenses and were
``pre-positioning themselves on IT networks to enable lateral movement
to [operational technology] assets to disrupt functions.'' The report,
whose authors included the Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security
Agency (CISA), the FBI and the National Security Agency (NSA), noted
that nation-state cyber threat actors targeted multiple critical
infrastructure organizations--in areas including health care,
communications providers, energy, transportation, and water utilities--
throughout the United States and its territories.
In its annual report on industrial controls systems, the
cybersecurity company Dragos found that ransomware remains the No. 1
cyber threat. Dragos observed 50 active ransomware groups impacting
industrial organizations in 2023 and tracked 905 reported ransomware
incidents impacting industrial organizations in 2023.
Also in 2023, the FBI's Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3)
received 1,193 complaints from organizations belonging to critical
infrastructure sectors that were affected by a ransomware attack.
Although ransomware represented less than 20 percent of claims reported
to Marsh in the United States in 2023, the number of Marsh clients
reporting cyber extortion events in 2023 was the highest annual level
to date. It remains a top concern for our clients given its increased
frequency, sophistication, and potential severity.
On a positive note, the percentage of companies paying ransom
demands continued to decline, signaling that organizations are growing
more resilient to ransomware threats.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

In some instances, cyber operations against critical infrastructure
threaten cyber physical systems, where there is the potential for
kinetic consequences including machinery breakdown, pipeline leakage,
train derailment, and disruption of the global supply chain. Today, the
risk of disrupting cyber physical systems has grown more acute through
the internet of things (IoT), which connects cyber physical systems to
the internet, as well as the increasing standardization of technologies
that makes industrial control systems more easily recognizable to
adversaries.
cyber insurance helps organizations build resilience
Industry and Government face an unrelenting barrage of cyber
threats. As a result, cyber risk ranks as one of the leading challenges
facing organizations today, as seen in analyses such as is found in the
annual Global Risks Report from the World Economic Forum, to which
Marsh McLennan is a key contributor. Despite the resources invested,
cybersecurity remains a dynamic and evolving risk that requires
continuous management in order to build organizational resilience.
Cyber insurance has become an essential component of cyber risk
management, as it fulfills the critical role of helping organizations
manage capital through the transfer of financial risk for potential
cyber incidents. Cyber insurance can also play a key role in bolstering
cyber resilience.
Underwriting for cyber insurance serves as an annual assessment of
an organization's cyber hygiene. Those insureds that do not demonstrate
effective technology, practices, and procedures to mitigate cyber risk
typically will receive ``feedback'' in the form of higher policy
premiums and/or less favorable terms and conditions. Cyber insurance
underwriting has grown increasingly demanding as insurers seek a fuller
understanding of their potential exposures and how individual risks
might aggregate and impact their overall portfolios.
Marsh McLennan has established the Cyber Risk Intelligence Center,
which provides leading solutions for cyber analytics and modelling. For
example, the center has undertaken focused research on the
prioritization of cyber risk controls. Its research evaluated controls
including endpoint detection and response (EDR), multifactor
authentication (MFA), and privileged access management (PAM) and
provided a weighted scoping for each control's effectiveness, which can
help businesses decide where to prioritize their cybersecurity
investments.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Cyber insurance supports many vital aspects of cybersecurity. For
example, cyber insurers typically provide risk engineering services to
insureds, and some will provide active threat detection monitoring.
Cyber insurance has also introduced incident response planning services
to thousands of companies. This aspect is especially valuable for small
and mid-size businesses. Insurers have helped these organizations
navigate through numerous ransomware events and data breaches. Last,
the financial risk transfer provided by insurance will support
companies in their recovery from cyber events.
For these reasons, insurance is an increasingly vital component of
cyber risk management, although uptake varies by company size--47
percent of Marsh clients with annual revenues greater than $1 billion
purchase cyber insurance, compared to 34 percent of clients with annual
revenues below $1 billion.
the cyber insurance protection gap
The potential impact from some cyber events--whether due to an
attack by a nation-state or other cause--could disable and disrupt some
of the most critical U.S. infrastructure to such an extent and at such
a cost that the insurance industry alone could not accept the risk. By
definition, such an event could have a global economic impact and
overwhelm the cyber insurance marketplace, individual insurers, and
others.
It is difficult to quantify the delta between the ceiling for a
catastrophic cyber event and the current limits of insurance coverage,
but the Global Federation of Insurance Associations estimates that this
protection gap may be as high as $900 billion. Such gaps primarily
represent two categories: underinsured losses and uninsurable losses.
Underinsured losses.--Global cyber insurance premium today is
approximately $15 billion, which is roughly 3 times the size of the
cyber insurance market 5 years ago. In comparison, Marsh McLennan
projects a catastrophic global event loss at the once-in-200 years
level would range between $15.6 billion and $33.4 billion. These
figures indicate that the cyber insurance market remains in an early
stage, with insurers carefully managing limits to avoid large losses
from catastrophic cyber events. As a result, large organizations with
significant risks may struggle to purchase sufficient limits to offset
their potential exposure.
Uninsurable losses.--Like other insurance lines, cyber coverage
will exclude events that could result in large losses that cannot be
easily modeled. The most prominent examples of this are exclusions for
failure of critical infrastructure and losses arising from cyber
operations supporting acts of war or hostilities. If a large cyber
event meets the thresholds of these exclusions, then losses would be
fully borne by the insured.
a public-private partnership to address the cyber protection gap
There are now discussions regarding the potential benefits of a
public-private partnership (PPP) for catastrophic cyber risk, where the
Government would become the reinsurer of last resort if a cyber event
resulted in losses deemed too large for the insurance industry to
absorb. Such a partnership would reduce the cyber protection gap and
incentivize providers of capital to share in the risk because it would
limit the ceiling of exposure.
A Federal framework to address catastrophic cyber risk would
respond to a gap in a manner that could only be fulfilled by the U.S.
Government. As last year's National Cybersecurity Strategy recognized:
``When catastrophic incidents occur, it is a Government responsibility
to stabilize the economy and provide certainty in uncertain times . . .
Structuring that response before a catastrophic event occurs--rather
than rushing to develop an aid package after the fact--could provide
certainty to markets and make the Nation more resilient.''
Precedent exists for the Government to undertake this role. Current
risk-sharing mechanisms include the Price Anderson Act of 1957 for
providers of nuclear power; the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP); and the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program (TRIP), established
following the attacks of September 11, 2001. The establishment of a
Federal framework to address the cyber coverage gap would be a natural
evolution of the Government's role. Without discussion and planning
today about the Government's role in a catastrophic cyber event, there
would, in all likelihood, be a period of confusion to determine how to
meet the need when such a crisis occurs. Therefore, we believe the time
is now to have that conversation.
conclusion
We appreciate the Homeland Security Committee dedicating a hearing
to this important matter, and we encourage the committee to hear from
critical infrastructure owners and operators to better understand their
cyber risk.
If we start preparing now, we can bend the risk curve for
catastrophic cyber events. Insurance creates the right economic
incentives to drive change in society. Analyzing this issue now, and
leveraging the benefits of risk management, will help to build a more
resilient U.S. economy.
Appendix
ransomware: a persistent challenge in cyber claims
Understanding cyber claims trends helps to inform an effective risk
management strategy for one of the signature risks in today's tech-
driven society.
Analysis of the 1,800+ cyber claims submitted to Marsh in the
United States and Canada in 2023 reveals the following:

21 percent of clients that purchased a cyber policy reported
an event in 2023, consistent with the percentage over the past
5 years.

In 2023, events were driven by factors including increased
sophistication of cyber attacks; the MOVEit event, highlighting
supply chain vulnerabilities; and privacy claims.

Health care, communications, retail/wholesale, financial
institutions, and education remain in the top 5 of most
affected industry sectors.

Ransomware represented less than 20 percent of claims
reported, but remained a top concern for organizations given
their increased frequency, sophistication, and potential
severity.

In managing claims, it's important to follow proper
procedures, including notifying insurers, brokers, and other
stakeholders and maintaining proper documentation.

Organizations' cyber resilience strategy should incorporate
a view of cyber risk across the enterprise, including its
potential economic and operational impact and taking account of
cybersecurity at vendors and other third parties.
solving the cyber risk financial dilemma
The average cost of a data breach globally was US$4.45 million in
2023, increasing by 15 percent over a 3-year period. The average cost
of a data breach in the United States was more than double, at US$9.48
million.
Today's digital-dependent world consists of unrelenting cyber
threats. At the same time, macroeconomic conditions may place senior
leaders under enormous pressure to reduce risk while managing
constricted budgets. This can lead to senior leaders considering
whether to invest in cybersecurity controls or purchase cyber coverage.
Instead of an either-or choice, organizations should strike a
balance through a two-pronged approach to financially prudent cyber
resiliency. This consists of investing in cybersecurity controls while
purchasing insurance that aligns with risk tolerance to cover losses
following a potential cyber incident.
To help make objective, informed decisions, senior leaders should
consider the following questions.

What are my contractual requirements?

How much would a cyber incident cost my organization?

What does cyber insurance cover?

How much does cyber insurance cost?

Is the cyber insurance application too time-consuming?
public-private partnership examples
Significant loss events or changes in how risks are modeled can lead to
market-wide capacity withdrawal.
TRIA was passed in 2002 following a wide-spread withdrawal of
commercial terrorism cover by reinsurers after the September 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks.
Flood Re was developed to provide affordable flood risk cover to
the approximately 3 percent of UK homeowners living in high flood risk
areas. Industry-wide improvements in flood risk modeling had made
coverage unaffordable for this cohort.
Extreme risks typically require some form of Government backstop.
Government treasuries are the insurer of last resort on multiple
loss-sharing schemes. For example, the U.S. National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP), the UK's Pool Re, and France's CCR Cat Nat and Gestion
de l'Asurance et de la Reassurance des risques Attentats et actes de
Terrorisme (GAREAT) have unlimited guarantees. TRIA, the Australian
Reinsurance Pool Corporation (ARPC), Germany's Extremus, and the
Netherlands' Nederlandse Herverzekeringsmaatschappi/ voor
Terrorismeschaden (NHT) have limited guarantees.
Public-private partnerships provide credibility and can be structured
to gradually shift risk to the private sector.
The U.S. Government's terrorism backstop enabled insurers to access
affordable reinsurance for terrorism coverage. Over time, Federal
reinsurance participation in the program has fallen from 90 percent in
2002 to 80 percent in 2020, while insurer deductibles have risen from 7
percent of premium in 2002 to 20 percent in 2020. Insurer retentions
have also increased, from $5 million in 2002 to $200 million in 2020.
The U.K. government's backing of Pool Re similarly enabled insurers
to access affordable terrorism reinsurance. Over time, the Pool Re fund
grew and private reinsurer confidence was restored, to the point that

2.4 billion of reinsurance cover is now purchased. As a
result, a loss fund of approximately
10 billion (including
member retentions) sits between the consumer and the government needing
to step in.
Programs can be used to incentivize the adoption of preventive
measures.
Eligibility for the U.S. flood risk program, NFIP, requires
communities to adopt and enforce strict floodplain ordinances and
offers premium discounts for outstanding performance.
While there is no direct requirement for risk mitigation by Pool Re
stakeholders, premium discounts of up to 7.5 percent are available for
insureds that proactively undertake such initiatives.
The U.S. crop insurance industry supports continued agronomic
research to determine how farmers can best incorporate risk management
best practices in their operations and the impact those practices may
have on insured crops.
The US SAFETY Act of 2002 was created to spur the adoption of
improved security measures by offering to limit liability of companies
providing anti-terrorism products and services for qualified vendors.
Similar policies, coupled with a robust public-private insurance
market, could incentivize private-sector adoption of prophylactic
measures to drive down exposures.
Flood Re is intended as a temporary solution to be phased out by
2039. As such, the Government has committed to major investments in
preventive measures, while Flood Re has prompted insurers to work to
enhance their understanding, mapping, and modeling of flood risk and
their collection of data for improved underwriting.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. McCabe.
I now recognize Ms. Denbow for 5 minutes to summarize her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF KIMBERLY DENBOW, VICE PRESIDENT, SECURITY AND
OPERATIONS, AMERICAN GAS ASSOCIATION

Ms. Denbow. Hello? How's that?
Mr. Garbarino. Wonderful.
Ms. Denbow. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Garbarino,
Ranking Member Swalwell, and Congressman Luttrell. I'm Kimberly
Denbow, vice president of security and operations at the
American Gas Association, AGA. AGA represents more than 200
local energy companies that deliver clean and affordable
natural gas to 96 percent of natural gas customers in the
United States. I have led AGA's security policy and technical
program for nearly 3 decades.
Of particular interest here, I authored comments on behalf
of AGA in response to the Federal Insurance Office's potential
Federal insurance response to catastrophic cyber incidents.
Thank you for inviting me here today, to this hearing to share
the natural gas utility perspective.
Safety and security are core values for America's natural
gas utilities, which are countering the cyber threat daily
through a diverse portfolio of tools that include cybersecurity
insurance, a variety of cybersecurity enhancement and
information-sharing programs, natural gas system, operational
resilience, and public/private partnership opportunities.
With respect to cyber insurance and from the natural gas
utilities experience, the number of insurance providers willing
to write cyber insurance policies has been limited. While
capacity appears to be improving, actuarial data in the
industry continues to be in short supply, and is limiting the
scope of coverage. The terms of exclusions vary widely and are
difficult for many operators, particularly smaller ones, to
understand what is covered and where important limiting
coverage terms are in policy definitions. Owner/operators would
benefit from standardized cyber insurance policy language,
definitions, and applications that are simpler and more
streamlined. Further, AGA members support a Federal backstop
for cyber insurance.
AGA members continually work with Federal Government
partners and regulators to promote risk-based cybersecurity
programs that support attainable, sustainable, and auditable
security measures. On the regulatory front, this is best
represented by our work with the Transportation Security
Administration, TSA. TSA continues to coordinate with pipeline
owner/operators to improve risk-based cybersecurity
requirements and achieve predetermined cybersecurity outcomes,
all the while promoting flexibility to strengthen and add value
to the pipeline's security directives.
On the voluntary front, the pipeline effort of the Joint
Cyber Defense Collaborative, JCDC, is an exemplary model of
convening diverse communities of government, natural gas
pipeline owner/operators, and industrial control system vendors
to solve the tougher pipeline sector cybersecurity challenges.
Before I close, I would be remiss if I did not draw your
attention to a leading topic that continues to impair trust
between owners and operators and our Government. This topic is
sensitive information protection. This is best depicted by the
recent CISA chemical security assessment tool cybersecurity
breach and the failure--the failure--of the Federal Government
to protect owner/operator sensitive operational information. We
are talking about security and operational resilience; in this
case, the Government dropped the ball.
There must be Government accountability in the collection,
aggregation, and protection of critical infrastructure
sensitive operational information. It is insufficient for
agencies to express regret while operators are left to bear the
brunt of the consequences.
In closing, AGA member utilities combat the evolving cyber
threat daily by leveraging a diverse cybersecurity management
portfolio. Cyber insurance stakeholders benefit from
standardized cyber insurance policy language, definitions, and
applications. AGA encourages the Government to learn from the
successes of TSA and the JCDC in their genuine collaboration
with owner/operators. Last, the Federal Government should hold
itself to comparable, if not higher, standards for the
protection of aggregated sensitive critical infrastructure
information.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. I look forward
to the exchange.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Denbow follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kimberly Denbow
June 27, 2024
Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and Members of the
subcommittee, I am Kimberly Denbow, vice president of security &
operations, at the American Gas Association (AGA). I have led AGA's
security policy and technical program for nearly 3 decades. Also
relevant to this hearing, I am a former voting member of the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) Surface Transportation
Security Advisory Committee and helped stand up and co-chaired the
cybersecurity subcommittee. I also stood up and presently co-chair the
Cybersecurity Working Group of the Oil & Natural Gas Subsector
Coordinating Council. Additionally, I authored comments on behalf of
AGA in response to the Federal Insurance Office's ``Potential Federal
Insurance Response to Catastrophic Cyber Incidents''.\1\ Thank you for
inviting me to share my perspectives on the natural gas utility
experience with cyber insurance, natural gas utility cybersecurity and
operational resilience, and opportunities for further and improved
security-related coordination with the Federal Government.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Potential Federal Insurance Response to Catastrophic Cyber
Incidents'' as published in the Federal Register on September 29, 2022,
at 87 FR 59161 et seq. 2022-21133.pdf (govinfo.gov).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
AGA, founded in 1918, represents more than 200 local energy
companies that deliver clean, domestic, and reliable natural gas
throughout the United States. There are more than 77 million
residential, commercial, and industrial natural gas customers in the
United States, of which 96 percent--more than 74 million customers--
receive their gas from AGA members. Today, natural gas meets more than
one-third of our Nation's energy needs. AGA members recognize that with
the benefits and opportunities natural gas offers our country, there
comes great responsibility to protect our distribution pipeline system
network from cyber compromise.
Technological advances continue to make natural gas operations
safer, more cost-effective, and better able to serve customers via web-
based programs and tools. The corollary to a more connected and more
efficient industry is our attractiveness as a target for increasingly
sophisticated cyber actors. This said, America's natural gas utilities
are combatting the threat daily via:

skilled personnel,

robust cybersecurity system protections,

an industry commitment to security,

collaboration with other industries and associations,

on-going cybersecurity partnerships with the Federal
Government, and

interaction with the Downstream Natural Gas Information
Sharing & Analysis Center (DNG-ISAC) Community for real-time
awareness and action.
safety and security--core values for america's natural gas utilities
AGA and its member companies are committed to investing in leading
security technologies, utilizing best practices and training, and
promoting an industry-wide security culture of vigilance to help
fortify our security defenses and enhance all aspects of safety. To
that end, the following provides an overview of AGA member natural gas
utility experiences with cyber insurance, natural gas utility
cybersecurity and operational resilience, and opportunities to build on
existing public/private partnerships.
Cyber Insurance and Natural Gas Utilities
Insurance Coverage Availability & Effectiveness
In the gas utility sector's experience, the number of insurance
providers willing to write cyber insurance policies has been limited.
While capacity appears to be improving, the relatively unpredictable
scale and cost of a successful cybersecurity compromise of critical
operations unsurprisingly has limited the scope of coverage. Actuarial
data in the industry continues to be in short supply and may be
ineffective as a predictor given the rapid changes in cyber threats. As
a result, some existing cyber insurance programs are unnecessarily
restrictive in terms of coverage.
For example, gaps in insurance coverage resulting from cyber
incidents leave an owner/operator uncovered when a cyber event results
in physical impacts. Such impacts generally do not fall under the cyber
policy, and while they may be pieced together under a property policy
or through a specialty product designed to bridge this gap, this is a
disincentive to an owner/operator obtaining cyber insurance.
Another common issue is most insurance policies limit or eliminate
coverage if the cyber attack is conducted as part of an ``act of war''
or carried out by nation-states or their affiliates. The terms of these
exclusions vary widely and are difficult for our owners/operators to
evaluate. Some versions of these exclusions may place the owner/
operator in the position of not only having to demonstrate the impact
of the cyber incident but also to identify the origin and motive of the
adversary--the latter action is beyond the practical scope of natural
gas utility cybersecurity programs and sometimes even beyond the
capability of our Federal partners.
These issues are indicative of an overall need for simpler, more
streamlined cyber policy terms and the applications required to
purchase such insurance. It is difficult for many operators,
particularly smaller ones, to understand what is actually covered under
cyber insurance policies where important limiting coverage terms are
often buried in places like policy definitions.
Federal Backstop
AGA members plan for potential disruptions caused by successful
cyber incidents on their systems and services and may procure insurance
to offset associated potential financial losses. Given that a
disruption of energy systems can lead to significant economic impact,
AGA members have a vested interest in ensuring that a healthy cyber
insurance market exists, including one that can adequately offset so-
called ``catastrophic'' losses.\2\ An appropriately structured Federal
backstop is needed to stabilize the cyber insurance market. It would
cap potential losses and allow insurers to assess and quantify risks
without the fear of a devastating loss event.\3\ Additionally, it could
help address persistent cybersecurity shortfalls if the Federal
backstop is made contingent on the standardization of insurance cyber
policy language/definitions and applications. An owner/operator
adherence to cybersecurity best practices that are risk-based \4\ or
regulatorily prescriptive may further help advance security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ AGA comments to Federal Insurance Office (FIO) ``Potential
Federal Insurance Response to Catastrophic Cyber Incidents'' as
published in the Federal Register on September 29, 2022, at 87 FR 59161
et seq.
\3\ Axio comments to FIO ``Potential Federal Insurance Response to
Catastrophic Cyber Incidents'' as published in the Federal Register on
September 29, 2022, at 87 FR 59161 et seq.
\4\ Policies consistent with risk-based security measures could
include encouraging companies to adopt defense-in-depth strategies,
least-privilege access security model, and/or controls supporting the
NIST Cyber Security Framework key functions of govern, identify,
detect, protect, respond, and recover.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Creating a Federal backstop for the cyber insurance market is
proactive, practical, and cost-effective way to protect consumers and
manage growing cyber risks.
``Safe Harbor'' Statutes
Federal ``safe harbor'' statutes encourage companies to take
forward-leaning cybersecurity measures to bolster their own
cybersecurity as well as the cybersecurity of their peers. Two relevant
examples that could be woven into any catastrophic-type cyber insurance
program would be the DHS SAFETY Act program as well as the cyber threat
information sharing programs established in the Cybersecurity
Information Sharing Act of 2015 (``CISA 2015'').
SAFETY Act
The program offers companies the ability to minimize or even
eliminate specific types of tort liability following cyber attacks when
companies can demonstrate they have implemented robust and effective
security programs. Linking the obtainment and maintenance of SAFETY Act
protections to cyber insurance would be highly useful in promoting
effective cybersecurity as well as limiting the economic losses
associated with catastrophic cyber attacks.
Linking the SAFETY Act to any catastrophic cyber insurance program
could offer companies that have received a SAFETY Act award--and thus
have demonstrated that they offer a cybersecurity technology program
effective in deterring, defeating, responding to, or mitigating cyber
attacks--a specific path to receiving expanded catastrophic cyber
attack coverage and/or more favorable premiums.
CISA 2015
Congress sought to promote greater sharing of threat information
amongst companies and with their partners within DHS. Participation in
information-sharing programs (e.g., the DNG-ISAC) helps break down
barriers to effective threat intelligence analysis. Moreover, active
participation in public-private cyber information-sharing regimes and/
or ISACs should be considered part of any possible requirement for
owners/operators to obtain access to any future Federal cybersecurity
insurance backstop.
Natural Gas Cybersecurity and Operational Resilience
Cybersecurity
AGA members have been at the forefront of cybersecurity investment
and are continually seeking ways to raise their cybersecurity
readiness. The AGA Board of Directors passed a resolution in 2021 in
favor of reasonable cybersecurity regulations, and AGA and its members
engage in every opportunity to work with Federal Government partners
and regulators to promote risk-based cybersecurity programs that
support security measures that are attainable, sustainable, and
auditable. This includes extensive work with the Transportation
Security Administration (TSA) to help strengthen and add value to the
pipeline Security Directives (SDs)\5\ and reduce risk for the industry.
Overall, risk-based cybersecurity aligns with the National Security
Memorandum on Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Security Directive Pipeline 2021-01 (May 28): Enhancing
Pipeline Cybersecurity (SD1), and Security Directive Pipeline 2021-02
(July 19): Pipeline Cybersecurity Mitigation Actions, Contingency
Planning, and Testing (SD2). The SD's have been reissued annually since
2021. Per TSA Administrator David Pekoske, the SDs will continue to be
reissued until cybersecurity regulations are promulgated.
\6\ National Security Memorandum on Critical Infrastructure
Security and Resilience/The White House.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
AGA member natural gas utilities engage in a variety of
cybersecurity enhancement programs, including, but not limited to:

AGA cybersecurity peer-to-peer program, in which operators
evaluate their respective company cyber policies, procedures,
and practices.

AGA Biennial Cyber Metrics Survey, which helps benchmark
cybersecurity maturity across the natural gas utility
community.

Natural Gas Exercise (NGX), which is a national tabletop
exercise of physical security, cybersecurity, and business
continuity. NGX-2024 will be a hybrid exercise intended to
drill operators' cyber incident response plans and ``test''
provisions within the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, which
have been suggested by the Department of Energy to permit the
Federal Government to redirect natural gas from transmission
pipelines in times of emergency without regard to contractual
agreements.

Network monitoring technology, which tracks network traffic
for unusual cyber activity.

The DNG-ISAC (stood up by AGA and its members over a decade
ago), which provides the natural gas industry \7\ with a secure
platform for the trusted exchange of physical and cyber threat
information and analytics. Given the interdependence between
the natural gas and the electric subsectors, there is also a
great deal of coordination with the Electric Information
Sharing & Analysis Center.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Members of the DNG-ISAC include AGA member natural gas
utilities, transmission pipeline members of the InterState Natural Gas
Association of America, and utility and transmission members of the
Canadian Gas Association. Additionally, governmental members include
Fusion Centers, DHS Intelligence & Analysis, select State threat
offices and law enforcement groups.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Energy Sector Cyber Mutual Assistance Program administered
by the Edison Electric Institute.
It should be noted that while the threat landscape can appear
similar across most critical infrastructure sectors, natural gas
utility operations are increasingly needing to address new (and
unintentional) cybersecurity risks introduced by Federal and State
government actions intended to address pipeline safety. For example,
because Federal pipeline safety policies now mandate the installation
of remotely-operated valves, natural gas cyber professionals must now
plan accordingly to address new cyber vulnerabilities associated with
this new electronic equipment. Further, as State regulators evaluate
requiring operators to make detailed pipeline operations information
publicly available, consideration must be given to the potential
increased risk of adversaries leveraging such information to
strategically disrupt natural gas systems.
Operational Resilience
The operational characteristics of the natural gas transportation
network in combination with the physical properties of natural gas
effectively minimize the likelihood and severity of wide-spread service
disruptions.

Operators manage the internal pressure of the delivery
system by controlling the amount of natural gas that enters and
leaves the system; this process of increasing and decreasing
pressure happens relatively slowly because of the
compressibility of natural gas. Industrial control systems are
used to help monitor and, in some cases, operate the pipelines
and their components that move the gas.

Critical electronics generally have mechanical fail-safes
and can be operated manually, if necessary.

Natural gas physically moves slowly through a pipeline at an
average speed of 15-20 miles per hour, further allowing time
for pipeline operators to manage the flow and adjust operations
in the unlikely event of a disruption. Outages are rare, and
when they occur, they tend to be localized due to the
interconnected nature of the transportation network.

Few pipelines in the United States are single-sourced and
those that are single-sourced have back-up supply contingency
plans, which may include utilizing underground natural gas
storage, liquified natural gas, and/or other mechanisms to
support system resilience.
enhanced public/private partnerships: improving regulations and
strengthening engagement
AGA and its member utilities engage actively in public/private
partnership opportunities that add measurable value, while also
advancing cybersecurity. These opportunities include direct
participation with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), which has
several cybersecurity-related initiatives and programs across its
portfolio of agencies that regulatorily or voluntarily affect natural
gas utilities. DHS entities of particular relevance to natural gas
utilities include the:

TSA,

Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA)--
specifically, the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
(CFATS) and the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative (JCDC)
Pipelines Cyber Defense Planning Effort, and

United States Coast Guard.
Each entity/program has helped in varying degrees to move the
needle on natural gas utility cybersecurity. For example,

On the regulatory front, TSA continues to coordinate with
pipeline owners/operators to improve risk-based cybersecurity
requirements and achieve predetermined cybersecurity outcomes
while promoting flexibility. Despite the challenges associated
with the first generation of pipeline Security Directives (SDs)
in 2021, the credibility established between TSA and owner/
operators prior to the issuance of the SDs helped promote the
improvements to subsequent SDs. Particularly noteworthy, TSA's
leadership regularly hosts Inspection Forums to garner feedback
from owners/operators regarding ways to strengthen the SDs and
ensuing cyber regulations.

On the voluntary front, the JCDC Pipeline Effort continues
to lead an interactive community of government, oil & natural
gas pipeline owner-operators, and industrial control system
vendors--all driving toward a shared common goal of robust
pipeline sector cybersecurity. The inaugural product of this
collaboration was a Pipeline Reference Architecture tool and
accompanying principles to serve as a voluntary model to guide
cybersecurity investment, planning, and operations as pipeline
operators work to better segment their networks and mitigate
intrusion campaigns.
While cybersecurity regulation harmonization and zero trust
reporting appear to be the latest concepts of choice across the Federal
Government, Government action (and inaction) can hinder their
implementation. The Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical
Infrastructure Act's (CIRCIA) Proposed Reporting Requirements and the
recent CISA Chemical Security Assessment Tool (CSAT) cybersecurity
breach are indicative of the challenges that Government must resolve in
order to be a reliable industry partner. The challenges are described
as follows.
Harmonization
While the CIRCIA proposed reporting requirements speak of
harmonization between the Federal agencies, CISA does not have the
authority to require cross-agency harmonization. As a result, the
burden is on the owners/operators to determine gaps between agency
cybersecurity authorities. For a natural gas utility that operates
natural gas, electric, water, coastal facilities, and nuclear, the
operator must sort through cyber incident reporting requirements of
TSA, the North American Electric Reliability Corporation, the
Environmental Protection Agency, the USCG, and the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission. It is incumbent on CISA to ensure that its overall
cybersecurity reporting requirements account for and harmonize with
similar cybersecurity reporting schemes required by sector-specific
Federal agencies as much as possible in order to improve efficiency and
reduce costs to the covered entities.
Zero Trust
While the Federal Government is driving itself to a zero trust \8\
approach, the Government's collection and aggregation of security and
operational-related information from critical infrastructure to meet
security requirements prevent critical infrastructure owners/operators
from achieving zero trust. This is evidenced by the recent DHS CISA
cyber incident in which the Chemical Security Assessment Tool (CSAT),
which contains industry reporters' detailed security vulnerabilities
and plans,\9\ had been compromised for multiple days before being
recognized by CISA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Zero Trust Architecture/GSA.
\9\ Top-Screen Surveys, Security Vulnerability Assessments, Site
Security Plans/Alternative Security Programs, Personnel Surety Program
Data, and CSAT User Information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the significant implications of the CSAT breach, it is
imperative to address the necessity for Government accountability in
the collection, aggregation, and protection of sensitive operations
information. The inadequate cybersecurity measures that resulted in the
breach underscore the need for the Government to have stringent
safeguards and robust incident response protocols on the systems the
Government relies on to store critical infrastructure information.
Furthermore, the lack of communication from the responsible agencies
exacerbated the situation, leaving operators without crucial
information to effectively mitigate the damage. It is not sufficient
for agencies to express regret; there must be a concerted effort to
prevent recurrence and ensure operators are not left to bear the brunt
of the consequences. Effective oversight and enhanced security
frameworks on the Government's own networks are essential to restore
public confidence and protect national security interests.
Ensuring the proper security and handling of sensitive operational
information submitted by industry to Government partners supports
mutually beneficial collaboration. AGA and its member companies value
Government partnership, while also seeking to limit the vulnerabilities
introduced by demonstrated Government cybersecurity performance.
in closing
America's natural gas utilities recognize their attractiveness as a
vector and target for nefarious cyber actors. AGA member utilities
combat the threat daily by leveraging a cybersecurity management
portfolio of wide-ranging tools to include cybersecurity insurance,
risk-based cybersecurity measures, participation in the DNG-ISAC, and
active engagement in value-add public/private initiatives that advance
cybersecurity.
AGA encourages the Government to learn from the successes of TSA
and JCDC in their genuine collaboration with owners/operators--to
earnestly work with the owners/operators to seek solutions that are
risk-based, outcome-focused, and elevates security above compliance to
achieve a commonly-shared mission. Additionally, harmonization of
Government-imposed cybersecurity requirements should not be the burden
of owners/operators but rather the responsibility of the Government
agencies. Last, the Federal Government should hold itself to sensitive
information security standards and incident reporting at least as high
as required of owners/operators. This is particularly significant given
the Government's aggregation of our Nation's most critical
infrastructure operational information.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Ms. Denbow.
I now recognize Mr. Kudale for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JACK KUDALE, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, COWBELL

Mr. Kudale. Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell,
and Congressman Luttrell, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on cyber resiliency in the case of a major cyber
event.
In 2019, I founded Cowbell, a cyber insurance provider
using artificial intelligence headquartered in Pleasanton,
California. Over the last 5 years, Cowbell has scaled from a
small InsurTech to a leading provider of cyber insurance for
small- and medium-sized enterprises, SMEs. While we are first
and foremost a cyber insurer, we take an active role in helping
our policy holders decrease their cyber risk exposure by
sharing our cybersecurity tools and expertise with them. Our
continuous risk assessment of both our policy holders and the
aggregate SME market provides us with best-in-class
understanding and knowledge to mitigate and prevent potential
loss.
SMEs are one of the most underserved segments of the
American economy when it comes to cybersecurity and cyber
insurance. Any meaningful discussion surrounding the security
of our critical infrastructure requires an understanding of the
SME ecosystem. This segment represents over 99 percent of all
businesses, 40 percent of the American GDP, and a potential
major propagator of a wide-spread cyber contagion.
SMEs also have the most to gain from basic cybersecurity
majors. They hold the potential to either aggregate or
extinguish a cyber catastrophe at scale via the most simple
types of exploitations or software and hardware updates. Now,
this is due to both the size and level of digital connectivity
of the average SME. Unsophisticated types of vulnerabilities
can aggregate simply due to a lack of basic awareness and
security. Furthermore, an attack on an unsophisticated market
poses indirect threats to every entity in the cyber ecosystem.
Currently, 4 out of 5 SMEs in the United States are either
uninsured or underinsured when it comes to cyber insurance.
Awareness, education, and standardization of cybersecurity
hygiene are still lacking, most often in the small business
segment, and particularly, in the uninsured market.
Additionally, awareness without sufficient guidance does
not lead to appropriate action. In 2022, a survey on small
business cybersecurity trends highlighted that 51 percent of
small businesses did not have any cybersecurity measures in
place, and that 59 percent of those businesses considered
themselves too small to be targeted.
Cowbell teams have found notable differences in the
cybersecurity hygiene of the average uninsured or first-time
buyer of insurance to that of the insured market. Now, this
poses a compounding aggregation potential. The most uninsured
entities are the most overexposed. It also outlines a broader
truth regarding insurance gaps. Those with the least to lose
stand to lose the most in the event of a cyber catastrophic
event.
Now, market growth projections for the SME cyber have not
kept pace with the larger corporations. Now, this is outlined
by the World Economic Forum Cybersecurity Outlook,
demonstrating that while more high-revenue companies are
maturing into leaders of cyber resilience, more low-revenue
organizations are losing overall cyber resiliency than gaining
it.
Overall, Cowbell and cyber insurance providers alike have
unique visibility into the downstream impact of cyber incidents
where cyber meets financial, human, and physical consequences.
Cowbell especially gained such visibility when working with
secondary victims of supply chain attacks, which are increasing
in number and seek to damage an organization and its customers
through the single breach of one entity.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I look
forward to your questions and our continued conversation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kudale follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jack Kudale
June 27, 2024
i. introduction
Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on cyber
resiliency in the event of a major cyber event.
In 2019, I founded and launched Cowbell, a cyber insurance
provider, powered by artificial intelligence, headquartered in the
United States. Over the last 5 years, Cowbell has scaled from a small
InsurTech to a leading provider of cyber insurance for small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). While we are first and foremost a
cyber insurer, we take an active role in helping our policy holders
decrease their cyber risk exposure by sharing our cybersecurity tools
and expertise with them. Our continuous risk assessment of both our
policy holders and the aggregate SME market equips our risks with best-
in-class understanding and knowledge to mitigate and prevent potential
loss. We employ nearly 165 people, including data scientists, software
engineers, and cybersecurity and insurance industry professionals, who
research the overall cybersecurity posture of the comprehensive SME
ecosystem of risks.
The Cowbell team has supported cyber insurance and data initiatives
for the U.S. Government since 2020. We actively participate in public-
private partnerships, such as the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Agency's (CISA) Cyber Infrastructure and Data Working Group (CIDAWG),
through which we have worked over the past months with select industry
partners to address concerns over data governance standards. We have
engaged in on-going discussions regarding the possibility of a
Government Cyber Insurance Program through the Treasury's Federal
Insurance Office (FIO) and the Office of the National Cybersecurity
Director (ONCDE) and we continue to be an outspoken voice in the field
of SME cybersecurity risk and insurance. Cowbell is deeply committed to
educating, securing, and insuring the cyber risk of small and medium-
sized enterprises.
ii. smes as core cybersecurity risk
SMEs are one of the most underserved segments of the American
economy when it comes to cybersecurity and cyber insurance. Any
meaningful discussion surrounding the security of our critical
infrastructure requires an understanding of the SME ecosystem. This
segment represents over 99 percent of all businesses, 44 percent of the
American GDP, and a potential major propagator of a wide-spread cyber
contagion.
SMEs have the most to gain from basic cybersecurity measures; they
hold the potential to either aggregate or extinguish a cyber
catastrophe at scale via the most simple types of exploitations or
software and hardware updates respectively. This is due to both the
size and level of digital connectivity of the average SME.
Unsophisticated types of vulnerabilities can aggregate simply due to a
lack of basic awareness and security. Furthermore, an attack on an
unsophisticated market poses indirect threats to every entity in the
cyber ecosystem.
According to a World Economic Forum study,\1\ 41 percent of all
companies surveyed have been affected by a third-party cyber incident
with small and medium-sized suppliers being increasingly targeted to
later hack into their larger customers' systems. The expected rise in
costs incurred by businesses globally due to software supply chain
attacks is estimated to grow from US$46 billion in 2023 to US$60
billion in 2025.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www3.weforum.org/docs/
WEF_Global_Cybersecurity_Outlook_2024.pdf.
\2\ https://www.juniperresearch.com/press/study-reveals-staggering-
cost-of-software-supply/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The SME web of interconnected entities is critical to American
economic stability. Moreover, it is perfectly positioned to form a core
component of loss prevention if equipped with the appropriate tools for
cyber risk.
iii. cyber insurers as risk managers
Currently, the SME cybersecurity posture is widely varied.
Understanding for a moment that the average company in the United
States has revenues of less than $5 million, they can be forgiven for
overlooking cybersecurity as core to their business. Nearly 4 out of 5
SMEs in the United States are either uninsured or underinsured when it
comes to cyber insurance.
Awareness, education, and standardization of cybersecurity hygiene
are still lacking, most often in the small business segment.
Additionally, awareness without sufficient guidance does not lead to
appropriate action. A 2022 survey on small business cybersecurity
trends highlighted that 51 percent of small businesses did not have any
cybersecurity measures in place and that 59 percent of these businesses
considered themselves too small to be targeted.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://web.archive.org/web/20230322074906/https://digital.com/
51-of-small-business-admit-to-leaving-customer-data-unsecure/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cyber insurance providers such as ourselves are quickly becoming
the most significant force in educating SME policy holders on basic
cybersecurity. The degree to which these risks can change is key to
their insurability. The risk profile of cyber insurance shoppers can be
improved instantly through tech-enabled underwriting and purchasing
processes.
iv. insured vs uninsured market
Leveraging information from our risk pool, Cowbell teams have found
notable differences in the cybersecurity hygiene of the average
uninsured or first-time buyer of insurance vs the insured market. This
poses a potentially compounding aggregation potential; the most
uninsured entities are most overexposed. It also outlines a broader
truth regarding insurance gaps: those with the least to lose stand to
lose the most in the event of a cyber event.
Under these conditions, an increase in market penetration to the
SME cyber insurance market pays dividends to the security of the
overall cyber ecosystem. This is because every entity that is taught
appropriate cyber hygiene is a break in the chain when it comes to
cyber contagion and a reduction in aggregation potential for everyone.
It is also what is most commonly missed in discussions about the size
of the aggregate cyber exposure: every additional dollar of market
coverage is insuring a diminished amount of systemic risk.
With 80 percent of the SME market still uninsured and overexposed,
these entities need to understand that cyber risk is business risk, and
SME risk is a cyber aggregation risk.
v. understanding the downstream impact of cyber events
Cowbell and cyber insurance providers have unique visibility into
the downstream impact of cyber incidents, where cyber meets financial,
human, and physical consequences. Cowbell especially gains such
visibility when working with secondary victims of supply chain attacks.
Supply chain attacks seek to damage an organization and its
customers through a single breach of one entity. Since 2021, the number
of U.S. entities affected by supply chain attacks has increased year
over year. In 2021 521 U.S. organizations reported impact due to a
supply chain attack.\1\ In 2022 this figure tripled to 1,543 and
increased again in 2023 to 2,769. Research from Gartner predicts that
by 2025 45 percent of all organizations will have experienced
operational impact due to a software supply chain attack.\2\
Visibility into the downstream impact of cyber events can allow
cyber insurers to understand:

Incident types

Nature of impact

Amount of losses

Types of losses

Types of damages

Downtime

Recovery time

Impacted policy holders' size, sector, location

Relationship between impacted policy holders and breached
organization

If impacted policy holders had a backup vendor

If impacted policy holders had a business continuity plan

If there was lateral movement from the breached organization
on to the systems of impacted policy holders

Amount of policy holder data held by the breached entity.
vi. current state of the cyber insurance market
The global cyber insurance market has reached a size of US$14
billionn in 2023 and is estimated to increase to around US$29 billion
by 2027.\4\ Showing significant growth potential, the market is driven
by the awareness of the increasing frequency and sophistication of
cyber attacks, including the potential financial repercussions, as well
as by stricter State and national regulatory requirements. Further
growth factors continue to be the on-going digital transformation and
technological advances in all sectors and concrete requirements to be
satisfied by business partners within the supply chain. This overall
trend illustrates the importance of cyber insurance as a core component
of cyber risk management. However, large companies still account for
the majority of premiums; small and medium-sized enterprises bear most
of their cyber risks on their own.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.munichre.com/en/insights/cyber/global-cyber-risk-
and-insurance-survey.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Market growth projections for the SME cyber market have not kept
pace with the larger corporations. This is outlined by the WEF
Cybersecurity Outlook, demonstrating that while more high-revenue
companies are maturing into leaders in cyber resilience, more low-
revenue organizations are losing overall cyber resiliency rather than
gaining it.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www3.weforum.org/docs/
WEF_Global_Cybersecurity_Outlook_2024.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
vii. smes, cyber insurance, and critical infrastructure
Cowbell is committed to protecting and advocating for the
underserved, underrepresented market that is the SME market. SMEs are
the backbone of the U.S. economy and if they are vulnerable, the
national economy and all entities associated with critical
infrastructure are vulnerable. In the case of a systemic risk that
would lead to a catastrophic event, a significant percentage of the SME
market is extremely vulnerable.
The illustration below shows the SME sector report using patented
technology \6\--Cowbell Factors--comparing major industries' aggregate
cyber risk postures to each other.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ US PTO 11,870,800 Issued Jan 9, 2024 and US PTO 11,888,861
Issued Jan 30, 2024.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Today's hearing should serve as an urgent call to collective action
for our valued SMEs. Specifically:
1. Classification of SMEs as a subset of any cyber preparedness
measures
2. Increased calls for the SME ecosystem, particularly entities
that remain uninsured, to become cyber-resilient
3. Harmonization of SME cybersecurity and data governance best
practices.
Cyber insurers have constructed a viable framework for cyber
resilience. However, the limitations to both penetration and total
risk-bearing market capacity merit special attention. The damage from
catastrophic events could either exceed or fall squarely outside of the
scope of the current insured market. Insurers, particularly those in
the SME space, face a major challenge in closing this gap between
economic and insured losses. Given the dynamic growth of risks in a
digital world, higher insurance penetration for cyber risks is the
ultimate goal. In securing our most valuable SMEs from the digital
threats they face, we can collectively offer increased resiliency to
the economy and society.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, I look forward to
your questions and our continued discussion.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Kudale.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. Additional round of questioning may
be called after all Members have been recognized.
To start, I'm going to recognize the gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Luttrell, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Luttrell. Ms. Denbow, in your opening remarks, if I
picked up correctly, you blamed--the U.S. Government is at
fault for--can you elaborate or expand on that statement just
so I know exactly where we're sitting today?
Ms. Denbow. Yes, sir. So the Department of Homeland
Security Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards is
implemented by, at this point, CISA, the Cybersecurity
Infrastructure Security Agency. When CFATS, the Chemical
Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards, was first released, those
companies that held large quantities of chemicals, which were
considered chemicals of interest, appendix A, had to submit top
screen analyses, and in addition to that, security
vulnerability assessments, as well as other sensitive
information about their operations, chemical quantities, where
they're located, how they are used, and whatnot.
The database that contains that information was breached
last year and--in so many ways. Other than the fact that it was
very disturbing that owner/operators learned about that breach
months later through the media, rather than through the
Government, we recently were informed that though there has
been no demonstration or evidence that information was
exfiltrated from the database, that the database was accessed
for 3 days, which means that there is every opportunity that
screen shots or other ways that information, sensitive
operational information of our chemicals from across the United
States were accessible.
So, this is where I say the Government is trying very hard
to get a better handle on what needs to be secured. I will
say--let me step back and say, the CFATS program has been
phenomenal. They have done a great job in improving our
Nation's chemical security. But this goes to the part of
protecting the sensitive information, and it seems every
Government entity and the sister entities all want to have
access to operations sensitive information for one form or
another, and thought needs to be given to how that is going to
be protected. There needs to be a transparency with the owner/
operator of the information if that information is compromised
in any way.
Mr. Luttrell. Communication is always a huge deal when
you're dealing with siloed entities. Case in point, SMEs across
the board are very closed off. I think the ability for us to
operate between the seams, if you will, in order to communicate
properly, if we had an attack, or sharing information back and
forth with each other on, Hey, this is the inevitable result of
the attack, don't let this happen to you, is, I think,
something that we're inevitably working on daily around here.
Everybody is so close-hold with their daily information,
whether or not it's retrospective, prospective, aggregated,
where it lives and breathes. I'll never vouch for--well, maybe
I'll be careful how I'll say this. I don't think anybody is
completely protected from any sort of attack whatsoever where
we sit today, but thank you for clarification on that.
The--so sector-specific data or cyber insurance, and I'm
going to toss this one out to the bunch, anyone grab a hold of
it if you want to--if we want a public/private and a Government
relationship and the Government to come in and back fill when
necessary, if necessary, what does that look like? Because when
we're talking about cybersecurity and cyber space, inevitably,
a cyber attack can be a grid hit, it can be an agricultural
hit, or it can--you know, inevitably it can be life or death.
So how--on this committee, how do we--we're on the
receiving end of this. We're all ears here, OK, because you're
the subject-matter experts. But if we're going to play this
out--and believe me, I've got to pay insurance bills all the
time. But it's very laid out specifically on, Hey, here's what
it is and here's how we're going to do this. But we--in the
metaverse, in the cyber space, risk and threat changes every
half second of every second of every minute of every hour of
every day. What--how do we build the proper foundation and move
forward, so we, on this committee and the House, can understand
that and then provide the support needed? I'm tossing that out
to the group.
Mr. McCabe. Sure. I'm happy to jump on that. So it's got to
be done collaboratively with industry. There is a lot of
different elements to it. No. 1, you know, industry doesn't
speak with one voice. There's going to be all sorts of
insurance voices and opinions given on it. I think that there's
going to be some very crucial elements, like for the cyber
incident, that it shouldn't have a requirement of attribution
by the Federal Government, so it's too hard.
I think it should be determined by impact, and that's the
overall size of the loss. I think that that impact is going to
either be set on a percentage level of, you know, losses of 300
percent of an insurer's book or of perhaps a fixed dollar
number, but that's going to be a conversation back and forth.
We submitted a response to an RFI where we threw out, you
know, a suggested number where negotiations could begin, and we
put it around the 1- and 250-year event--when I say ``we,'' I
mean my company, Marsh McLennan--put it around the overall
impact of the 100- and 250-year event to just show the
magnitude that would have to be for the Federal backstop to
kick in.
I think it should be voluntary, because I don't think that
every insurance company is necessarily going to want to
participate, and that's a key distinction from TRIA, that TRIA
responded to a very specific problem, and we're talking about,
you know, building resilience here proactively, and I think
that, you know, it shouldn't be compulsory to force companies
into it, but I think there's a lot of interest out there.
My last point I think I would address is that trying to do
the entire industry at one time might be just too big of a bit
to chew, so I would approach sector-specifics. I think the
energy sector is a perfect one where you have a very cohesive
sector that interact with one another who are already very
highly regulated.
Mr. Luttrell. If we do start with that--and I'm sorry, Mr.
Chairman, for going over--if we do start with that in the
energy sector--I'm not going to say I disagree or agree with
you--remember, we represent 800,000 people with hundreds of
thousands of companies across the Nation, there's going to be
somebody that's going to argue with that statement.
Mr. McCabe. That's----
Mr. Luttrell. So imagine on the receiving end up here, who
we--we've got to wade through all this. So it's going to be the
collective group coming together for a stepping-off point. But
I'm sorry to close you off, sir.
Mr. McCabe. Yeah.
Mr. Garbarino. I'm 2 minutes over, Mr. Chairman. I
apologize.
Mr. Garbarino. That's fine.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Swalwell, for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Luttrell, do you want some time?
Mr. Luttrell. Do you mind, sir? Yeah, no, OK.
Yeah, please, sir, you continue with your closing, your
thought.
Mr. McCabe. I would just say, for those sectors that are
going to come back and say I don't understand why they're
first, I would say, are welcome at the table. I'm just naming a
sector that I think it particularly fits for. But if financial
institutions come forward and say, That's as important it is
for us that it is for them, by all means those discussions----
Mr. Luttrell. This is where the--and I hate to say the
masses, but this is where the independent agencies and
companies are going to have to come together and really
position themselves in order to address the Government on the
way forward. I may be speaking out of turn here, but if you
just could kind-of play out everything that happens in the
Continental United States that we're talking about here, which
every single--I mean, think about it. Everybody has an iPhone
in their pocket. Everything is digital today. Everything is
touched by the cyber space. So if we're going--if this is
something that we really want to expand on--which we do, we
wouldn't be having that hearing if it otherwise--we just--
you're going to have to help us.
Mr. McCabe. We are here to help.
Mr. Luttrell. OK. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Mr. Swalwell. Yeah.
Mr. Garbarino. Mr. Swalwell.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Kudale, in your testimony you observed
that 80 percent of small- and medium-sized businesses lack
cyber insurance and are overexposed, and that 59 percent of
small businesses consider themselves too small to be targeted.
Startling statistics that you cited for us.
But at the same time, I understand that small businesses
may find implementing baseline cybersecurity controls too
expensive and may be overwhelmed navigating the cyber insurance
market, particularly if we don't get this SEC rule right on,
like, what the reporting is, that could also bog them down.
What more should the Government be doing to educate small
businesses about cyber risks and incentivize implementation of
baseline cybersecurity controls?
Mr. Kudale. Ranking Member Swalwell, thank you for the
question. First and foremost, just us being here, this is a
big--great step. This hearing itself is a big event for us to
express and educate the general public about what's happening
in cyber insurance market.
Second, in my written testimony I recommended a 3-step
process when it comes to SMEs, small- and medium-sized
enterprises. I'll just read out the first one out of my written
testimony, and that's classification of SMEs as a subset of any
cyber preparedness measures, right. Too often, the focus is all
on large enterprises and corporations, and so, this is the
second thing we can do.
Third, education is the most critical when it comes to SME
market and cybersecurity, right. All it takes is one individual
to make their organization successful by not clicking on some
random link. All it takes is one person to take that entire
organization down. It is a business-ending event for small
businesses. So cybersecurity awareness training is where most
of the focus is for SMEs and a public/private partnership.
If I have to point my finger on one thing, is the
cybersecurity awareness training incentives--Government,
private universities, whatever it takes, right--being able to
educate those 33.5 million businesses that is 44 percent of our
Nation's GDP. It is mission-critical for us to focus on
education regarding cybersecurity.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Kudale, is the Government doing enough to
work with insurers to help standardize policy coverage and
terminology? Should we standardize coverage and terminology, or
as Mr. Luttrell alluded to, do we need to be mindful of kind-of
the sector-by-sector, industry-by-industry, critical
infrastructure versus noncritical infrastructure type of
complexity there?
Mr. Kudale. We do. Yes, it's not a straightforward yes-or-
no answer. Cyber is a very technical--it's the emerging
technical risk. It's unlike any other insurance line. In fact,
it's the only other line outside of life insurance that's
organically growing. In every other insurance line, you are to
replace another insurance policy. Being nature, it's an
evolving risk, coverage has to be innovative, you know. Over
the last 10 years, the terminology in coverage have been
evolving, and we're still not there, OK.
So by putting limitation and standardization, it might hurt
how nimble we are. Our purchasers really like a custom coverage
that insurance companies put together for their needs,
especially when there are new threats that are evolving every
second, every hour, every day, right.
At the same time, there are areas where we would love to
see some standardization, war, war-related exclusions. That is
what ITs exist in the marketplace today. So there are certain
areas we can improve on standardization, but this is an
emerging technical risk. We got it, you know, in this market
and coverage's terminology plays a very important role until
the time it matures. Four out of 5 small businesses do not have
cyber insurance. That is 80 percent market you just mentioned
as well. That's a tough one if there is--to achieve that type
of standardization in the current time, present time.
Mr. Swalwell. I think when you were referencing life
insurance and the comparison, were you saying that every other
type of insurance is essentially compulsory, that you have to
purchase it like legally, auto insurance or homeowners
insurance, or depending on what sector you work in, like, you
know, malpractice insurance, but it's cyber and life are the
only 2 that are not required?
Mr. Kudale. That's correct. That's exactly what I meant. As
in every other line of insurance, there is a mandate. There is
a requirement. There is an obligation. Not so much in cyber
insurance. Yes, there are places, large corporations that are
mandating their supply chain partners. Government contracts are
mandating their contractors to have cyber insurance policy, but
there is no uniform mandate for cyber insurance like an auto
policy or a home insurance.
Mr. Swalwell. OK. Thank you again, Mr. Kudale. I'll yield
back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Lee, for 5
minutes of questioning.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cilluffo, I'd like to start with you, please. In your
written testimony, you stressed the importance of identifying
and protecting systemically-important entities. You said you
would like to see this coordination go beyond information
sharing and see entities engage in joint threat analysis and
incident response coordination. What do you think, if any, are
the inhibiters to entities engaging in these kinds of
activities and getting beyond that information-sharing stage?
Mr. Cilluffo. Thank you, Ms. Lee, and that's an excellent
question. I think, just like any other environment, trust
really is the coin of the realm. It takes a very long time to
build, and it can evaporate in a nanosecond with one silly
comment, or one leak or what have you. So I think it really
does come down to trust, and also being honest enough to know
where one's strengths are and where one's weaknesses are.
So I make the case that the information sharing sets of
discussions--they're all important, but they're tired. Maybe
I'm just old and grumpy--I've been at this issue a long time--
but I kind-of feel like we have to go beyond all of that. The
only way you really go beyond that is if you play ball together
and you're actually going to start hunting together, you're
actually going to feel the pain together, and you're actually
going to respond together.
So I think, to me, that's where we need to go. All that
said and done, trust is still going to be--you don't want to
necessarily--if you're a company and you have intellectual
property, or if you have PII data that could be leaked in one
way or another, obviously that comes with consequences. So you
want to make sure that you minimize those to the greatest
extent possible.
Ms. Lee. Do you have any thoughts on how we might do that,
anything that you would recommend or think we should be
considering in how we could build that trust?
Mr. Cilluffo. Yeah. I think the JCDC is a starting point,
the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative out of CISA. I think it
needs to be scaled. The good thing about JCDC, if there's a
crisis, they come together well. So when something is going
boom in the middle of the night, or might go boom tomorrow,
they are able to galvanize and rally the troops. The problem is
that doesn't have sustainability in a day-to-day environment,
so we've got to figure out how to be able to transcend some of
that.
In my testimony, I touched on Project Fortress, which is a
new initiative. It's led by Department of Treasury financial
services sector. Then they have--they have publicly stated that
there's not--it's not only going to be a reactive defensive set
of issues, but you can turn to other tools that Treasury has,
such as OFAC and where they can start looking at unique ways to
be able to put some pain on some of our adversaries. Because,
quite honestly, we're never going to defend our way out of this
problem. We are going to have this same discussion in 10 years
if that's all we do.
Ms. Lee. Ms. Denbow, you mentioned both in your written
testimony and in your earlier discussion with Mr. Luttrell
CFATS program. So I know on this subcommittee we're very
committed to trying to get that legislation passed, but right
now, since it has not, I'd like to hear a little bit more from
you. First, let's start with, what are the benefits of the
program, and what do you find to be useful about it?
Ms. Denbow. Well, I will tell you that the program sets a
foundation for operators to work from, and one of the biggest
values of the program--when the program first came out, I was
around when the program first came out, and it was a very
different model than what it is now. It has actually migrated
to a model that is extremely functional, where we talked about
trust; trust cannot be mandated; trust must be earned, and that
requires an investment of resources on both sides, the operator
and the Government partner or the Government regulator
regardless. That's how we in the pipeline--with the pipelines
are achieving what we're achieving with TSA. It's that trust.
So, I will tell you that through the Chemical Facility
Anti-Terrorism Standards program, they have been able to help
operators learn what can they do to maybe minimize or reduce
the amount of quantities they have on-site, or to substitute
for that, but more importantly, to provide the securities in
place, the physical securities in place to protect, detect, and
mitigate. I think--and specifically--and, yes, we do want
reauthorization. We've been pushing for that for a long time,
so go, reauthorization of that.
At the same time, this is a black eye to that program that
there was this cybersecurity breach, but the breach should not
be looked at just as an issue of that program. It is a systemic
issue across the Government, because it's not just that group
that got hit and has been successfully compromised.
One thing I wanted to mention to something you mentioned
earlier, information sharing versus incident reporting. There
is a difference between the two, and you will get more
engagement from operators if they are invited to engage in
information sharing versus incident reporting. That actually,
with some cyber policies, triggers negative points for the
insured if they are incident reporting versus just information
sharing. That comes from myself, who leads the Downstream
Natural Gas Information Sharing Analysis Center. Thank you.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentlelady yields back.
I recognize myself now for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. McCabe, you looked like you were jumping out of your
seat when Mr. Swalwell asked Mr. Kudale a question about
standardization, and I wanted to let you--whether the Federal
Government should get involved in that. Because insurance is
usually a State issue. We let each State come up with their own
rules, and it's governed by the State.
So what was your response to that question?
Mr. McCabe. I was just leaning in to hear the answer.
[Laughter.]
Mr. McCabe. But I understand the issue around standardizing
language. I mean, when the policies are written differently and
it's not your 9-to-5 job to review cyber insurance policies, it
could be confusing, one to the other.
I can confirm that there's a wide amount of overlap for
every cyber insurance policy. They largely cover the same
thing, they largely have the same exclusions. A lot of the
language is very common.
The one thing about standardization that doesn't make me
feel particularly good is it's still an emerging line of
coverage. There's still a point of innovation where carriers
are coming out and trying to figure out how they want to
address the risk.
They're coming up--there is a very innovative approach by
one carrier where they've defined a wide-spread event that's
going to have many of their insureds impacted. They will
provide full limits for that event. But why they do it is they
design their own exposure mitigation behind it.
So they're thinking through what their aggregation risks
are, and sometimes that language is going to be reflected in
how they write the policy. You would hate to see some kind of
very regulatory effort to stymie that.
Mr. Garbarino. This is a follow-up question, because if we
do--if there is somehow--some people have said Federal
backstop. I'm not saying that's the answer, and I don't know
how deep we want to get into that today.
But if the Federal Government does do a backstop, should
we--and, again, I am a huge proponent of States doing
insurance. I do not want us taking over--the Federal Government
taking over any sort of insurance policy really.
But if we do have a backstop, how much--and, Mr. Kudale,
you can jump in on this, too--how much should we be involved,
though, in the issuing of policies, in the--what should our--if
we're going to get involved with the money, what else should we
get involved with?
Mr. Kudale. Thank you for the question. I can jump on it.
We had two examples today, TRIA, as well as NFIP. I mean,
they're designed for different purposes and the involvement of
Government in the private sector.
To the extent the issue of the private cyber insurance
market has the limitations, it's really the lack in the
coverage primarily into the realm of a catastrophic risk trade.
Although we have new players coming into ILS and the
reinsurance market recently, that market is still maturing.
It's not, they're good enough.
My personal opinion is a Government reinsurance facility
that's structured somewhat like TRIA is probably a much better
line approach so that the Government does not have to sit in as
an insurer alongside other insurance like the NFIP does.
Although the NFIP program has amazing risk management practices
and codes, there's obviously the best of both.
But most of the limitation on the primary cyber market is
because of a lack of maturity into the catastrophic risk trade
really.
Mr. Garbarino. Any other witnesses?
Mr. McCabe, you want to jump in?
Mr. McCabe. If I may, I just would resist any kind of
framing that said the backstop is about what we need to do for
insurance companies, because that's not true at all.
So insurance policies contain a war exclusion for nation-
state attacks, and they contain exclusions about disabling and
disrupting critical infrastructure.
The thought is that if we're going to have this big of a
catastrophic event, it's going to trigger one of these two
exclusions, and insurance carriers are not going to have to pay
on those losses. That's their way of managing their exposure.
What the backstop is about are the companies that are going
to be left with that risk on their own books, and how is the
Government going to help those small and medium-sized and large
businesses that are going to be impacted? It's a U.S. economic
security problem.
Mr. Garbarino. Absolutely. Look, we've seen Colonial
Pipeline change health care. These are small compared to what
we're talking about today. I mean, this is--I'm going to follow
up, because I'm going to do a second round of questions. But
this is--we're talking about things that people aren't even
expecting.
I know, Ms. Lee, you made the comment about we got to--we
might have to go on the offense against some of our--and that's
something Mr. Gimenez loves to talk about. I wish he was here
so he could talk about it further.
But this is not--when people think of cyber attacks here,
they think of Colonial Pipeline, think of change. That's
nothing compared to what could actually happen and where this
would really trigger.
So I'm going to go--come around for a second question, but
I know I'm out for this time.
So I'm going to recognize my friend from Mississippi, Mr.
Ezell, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here today and discussing this.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for getting this going here.
In recent years, the cyber insurance market has seen
significant growth largely driven by the rise in volume of
these cyber attacks. Businesses of all size have come to
recognize the importance of cyber insurance as a crucial
component of the risk management strategies.
However, the absence of a standardized policy and
underwriting process apparently has created some confusion and
leading to coverage limitations and high premiums.
Mr. McCabe, can you briefly describe how cyber insurance
varies by company and sector, including what is typically
covered under a cybersecurity policy and what is not?
Mr. McCabe. Sure. I would break down coverage on cyber
insurance into really three buckets.
You've had a cyber incident, and what are you going to pay
out of pocket. So you're probably going to have a forensic
investigation. You might have the costs associated with the
cyber extortion. You might have a data breach where you have to
afford credit monitoring to those who are impacted. There's
probably legal expenses involved with all this.
So it's those immediate incident response costs that you
have to pay for is the first bucket.
The second bucket, your business will be disabled for a
period of time, and there might be lost revenue and extra
expenses.
Then the third bucket, in case there's any litigation, it
would be the liability and the legal fees associated with that.
That's largely what cyber insurance does.
As far as what's not covered, we've talked about some--how
large events will be excluded. Then there's a very standard set
of exclusions.
But I think the confusion that often comes up is there will
be a claim about a cyber incident that might be put on a
commercial general liability policy that's declined. It will
say, well, cyber claim is--I mean, cyber insurance policies pay
claim after claim after claim.
People rely on these for those 3 buckets, they rely on them
for the incident response services, and they have great
benefits and incentives otherwise for improving cyber hygiene.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you.
What cybersecurity practices do cyber insurance providers
expect companies to implement to qualify for coverage?
Mr. McCabe. I mean, there are definitely war stories in the
industry associated with this.
So in 2018, 2019, when ransomware really became an epidemic
for companies, it was laser-focused about what the controls are
going to be most important for stymieing ransomware as a
threat, and those are now mandatory.
Those are things like end-point detection and response,
privileged access management to make sure that your user
credentials aren't compromised, multifactor authentication to
verify that the user who is coming on-line is actually that
person and not some threat actor, your patch cadence, to make
sure that vulnerabilities don't exist in your software.
At Marsh McLennan, we aggregated the 12 most crucial
controls that we ascertained through a polling of the carriers,
and we put out publications to all of our insureds and to the
market in general: These 12 controls are now mandatory for your
coverage for ransomware. They quickly became implemented.
Prior to that, there was a very similar exercise with
credit cards. Credit card breaches started happening in a big
way in 2014 and quickly we started using tokenization and chip
cards, and that went away.
So we are always--there's nothing novel that the insurance
industry invents. We just prioritize the standards, and we make
sure those are communicated to the insureds.
Mr. Ezell. Very good. Thank you.
Ms. Denbow, in May this subcommittee held a hearing on
private-sector perspectives regarding the proposed rule to
implement the cyber-incident reporting for Critical
Infrastructure Act.
While this rule aims to establish a standard for incident
reporting, several agencies have developed their own cyber-
incident reporting regulations.
How do entities within the gas sector view this regulatory
landscape in terms of their ability to respond to a
catastrophic cyber attack?
Ms. Denbow. Congressman, thank you very much for that
question.
What you're getting to is the topic or word du jour, which
is harmonization. We're hearing that everywhere. To be honest
with you, it's a pipe dream.
Mr. Ezell. Yeah.
Ms. Denbow. The reason why it is--no pun intended about
pipe.
Mr. Ezell. Got it. Got it.
Ms. Denbow. But the reason why it is, is because, No. 1,
CISA does not have the authority to incentivize the other
agencies to follow suit and to follow CISA's lead.
No. 2, the other agencies are not incentivized. They have
no incentive to follow CISA's lead.
No. 3, the problem is, at the end of the day it becomes the
responsibility of the operator to make sure all of these
Government entities are harmonized.
So it's almost like the teenager trying to get the parents
to act appropriately, and it is just not going to happen.
I speak from personal experience because at the American
Gas Association, through the Oil and Natural Gas Subsector
Coordinating Council, we intentionally tried to harmonize CFATS
with the Coast Guard's cybersecurity assessment plan. CFATS was
totally on board; the Coast Guard was not. End of story.
Mr. Ezell. Well, that's typical of the Federal Government.
Harmony and getting things done in a timely manner, in a
cooperative way, is very hard, to get things done with the
Federal Government.
Thank you very much.
Ms. Denbow. Yes, sir. Harmonization works as long as you're
singing the song of whoever that agency is.
Mr. Ezell. One hundred percent. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I wish we could get CFATS done, but there's a certain
Senator from Kentucky keeping us from getting it done. But
hopefully one of these days.
We're going to start our second round, and I'm going to
recognize Ms. Lee from Florida for her second round of
questions.
Ms. Lee. Ms. Denbow, I'd like to pick up right where you
and Mr. Ezell just left off. Because when we go out and talk to
stakeholders and corporations and people in Washington, DC, we
hear the request for harmonization all the time, that they
suffer trying to comply with multiple and inconsistent
regulatory schemes or reporting structures.
So if we are to accept that true harmonization is a pipe
dream, are there nonetheless things we could be doing better?
Are there things that we, as Members of Congress, could still
do to try to diminish or alleviate some of that burden of those
inconsistent systems?
Ms. Denbow. I believe that when I say that it is a pipe
dream, I mean trying to harmonize the entire Government is a
pipe dream. It would be great if DHS could just harmonize
within its own walls.
This is why, when we did this practice of CFATS with the
Coast Guard, that's both DHS, it's within the same family, and
we could not get that to happen.
So I think if you could start local and then go wider, that
would be valuable.
I think--I will say that, specifically for natural gas
utilities, not only are we TSA, we are CFATS, we are Coast
Guard, and for our combination gas and electric we are NERC.
That doesn't count for other energy sources.
So it is a lot. So we are wanting to be a player to help
bring all of this together. This is why we keep trying to drive
this.
Do I have a solution for Congress on this? I'll have to go
back and think harder on that.
Right now, I have just been trying to figure out how we,
industry, can help drive to bring Government together.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Cilluffo, did you have thoughts on that
question?
Mr. Cilluffo. First, I agree with everything that has been
said here inasmuch as I understand it. But I do think the
Office of the National Cyber Director could be a little bit of
a bellybutton to drive at least the cyber piece.
Now, my view is it should all be outcome-based. We always
have these check the boxes and everyone is going to have their
own boxes they want to check, and it ends up being just a
massive knot that never comes together.
But if you can go to outcome-based approaches, and if you
can get NCD, that Office of the National Cyber Director, to
play the quarterback role it can play, I think we can actually
make some progress.
We're never going to get there 100 percent. But it should
be outcome-based. That's just not the way most of the
approaches are right now, because it is a headache. If you're a
company, you can have 15 different regulators you got to go to,
all of whom disagree.
So the point is, is I think there--I normally say a
pessimist is an optimist with experience. I'm a little more
optimistic on this one, which is nice. So I think it can move,
but not on its own. It's going to have to take some pushing
from industry and Congress.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentlelady yields back.
I recognize myself now for 5 minutes.
There are 16 critical infrastructure sectors. Energy sector
has a very good--they're very good at their cyber, pretty well,
and financial sector has a very good cyber defense.
There are areas like the water sector that really they
could do a lot better because there's so many different small
water agencies across--water utilities across the country.
In 2023, Iranian-backed threat actors infiltrated a water
utility in Pennsylvania affecting about 7,000 people. That's
not what we're here to talk about. We're here about if they
shut down the Northeast or the State of Florida or somehow shut
down all of it.
What do we do? I mean, Mr. Cilluffo, what's the next--
what's the day after tomorrow in that situation? Like, if all
of a sudden they can shut off every water utility in New York
State, what do we do next?
By the way, water utility--shutting down the water affects
other critical infrastructure sectors.
So what do we do? Are we prepared?
I'm going to start with you, but I'm going to open it up to
everybody else.
Mr. Cilluffo. OK. First bite of the apple. I'm sure others
have many ideas.
But, first, you're goading me a little bit on the 16
critical infrastructures because I do feel space should have
been designated a critical infrastructure. Whether it's
positioning, navigation, timing, signaling, space and cyber are
inextricably interwoven. To me it's kind-of ludicrous that
people haven't recognized that. But that's besides the point.
In terms of the sectors themselves, if everything is
critical, nothing is critical. You're absolutely right. You've
seen one water system, you've seen one water system. In part,
you're going--you'll have some that are municipalities, some
that are industry, some that are State government, and the
like, and that is a weak point.
I think it's also, though, the committees on Capitol Hill--
not to point it back to both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue--but
your committee has the horsepower to get things done and the
sectors that are, in part, there are doing some of their work.
I can't say the same when you look at water in particular.
When you think cyber, you're going to think what? You're
going to think Homeland Security, Armed Services, and
Intelligence. That's the reality of it.
So part of it, I think, is you've got a little bit of a
disconnect between both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue on that
one. I really do think there is--the public safety concerns
around water are massive and the resources aren't.
Mr. Garbarino. Anybody else want to----
Mr. Cilluffo. Policy without resources is rhetoric. Sorry.
I had to throw that in there.
Mr. Garbarino. Anybody else want to jump in on that?
Ms. Denbow. If I may, Congressman.
There's a lot to protect, and we have to get it right 100
percent of the time, and they just have to get it right once.
I'm talking about the adversary.
So trying to protect everything 100 percent of the time
makes absolutely no possible sense for anyone. So this is why
we at the American Gas Association, natural gas utilities, and
the oil and natural gas subsector, we're driving risk-based
approach because this way the most critical operations are the
ones that are getting the immediate attention.
Then, once those are secured, then we pay attention to the
small and medium enterprise because, again, they are so
critical to us as well, just at a different level. So we
almost, without having it written in this way, there's a
tiering where we expect the large utilities to help the small
utilities and bringing them along.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. All right.
Mr. McCabe, I do want to ask you a question.
One of the aspects of cyber insurability is developing
robust cyber hygiene that helps both deterrence and recovery
from cyber attacks. Accumulation of vulnerabilities and the
growing number of threat vectors and actors require ever-
increasing vigilance.
What lessons has the insurance industry learned about
resilience efforts and risk management strategies?
Mr. McCabe. So thank you very much for the question.
I would reiterate the point around for when there were
credit card breaches of actually the cyber insurance renewals,
pushing those standards on to industry, the retail industry,
for ransomware, how there was responding with the 12 critical
controls. This has taken effect.
So just to throw some stats out at you. In 2023, 77 percent
of companies declined to pay the ransoms for Marsh clients.
That is way up from 2021 where only 37 percent of our clients
with ransomware claims had declined to pay them.
So that's showing a much greater cyber hygiene evolving. A
lot of it has to do with, are you segmenting your back-up data,
are you keeping immutable back-up data, are you doing best
practices?
I think the trick about cybersecurity is constant
assessment. There's always a changing landscape of the attack.
It's always a matter of looking for new threat intelligence,
seeing how the threat actors are behaving, and being able to
adapt to that.
I think with the continuous monitoring that's really
becoming more prevalent within our industry, we have the
opportunity to feed more information to insureds, especially
small and mid-sized businesses. I think for incident response
services, those will always be important.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much.
I'm out of time. I'm going to yield now to the Ranking
Member. I'll let you go and then I'm going to--no, it's fine.
I'll go to you and then I'll finish with him.
Ranking Member, 5 minutes.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Chairman.
I want to talk about the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative.
Ms. Denbow, I know you brought it up. I think others have
brought it up as well.
Can we first talk, Ms. Denbow, about your experience with
the JCDC and how its work has helped drive resilience in the
pipeline sector?
Ms. Denbow. Thank you, Ranking Member.
So I will tell you that my first encounter with the JCDC,
they met with the Oil and Natural Gas Subsector Coordinating
Council, and they came in and they had this grand plan of what
they were going to do. By the end of the hour, they had
realized that they had completely missed the mark.
The Oil and Natural Gas Subsector Coordinating Council is
not a very quiet council. So we made it very clear to them that
we're not going to play because what they plan on doing is
going to waste everyone's time.
So they came back, and they sat and they listened. Out of
that came probably, I would say, one of the most functional and
effective tools and engagement that the pipeline sector could
have with the Federal Government from a voluntary perspective.
They came out with a pipeline reference architecture overview
where they convened not only Government with the industry, the
private sector, owners and operators, but also with the
vendors.
That was where we said--they said, ``Why don't you just do
this with the vendors?'' We said we cannot because of antitrust
reasons.
They found a solution, and they addressed that, and they
brought us all together. They came up with tools. We all worked
on tools, a network diagram and principles, that could then be
publicly available to help others.
So that is an example of where coming together to find out
what are the fences and the hurdles that are in the way,
bringing those down, because we need the Government to do that,
so that we can all come together and get the solutions.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. I appreciate that. That's what we hope
it is and how it operates, and you just animated that. That's
incredibly helpful.
But, of course, like any Government agency, it's not
perfect. I'd be interested, Mr. Cilluffo--pronounce that for me
again. Cilluffo?
Mr. Cilluffo. Perfect. I've been called whatever it is
worse. Frank is great.
Mr. Swalwell. I have concerns that you risk with JCDC,
without having more structure and scaffolding, that it is only
a collection of the people that its directors know best. We are
fortunate that the past 2 directors, Mr. Krebs and Ms.
Easterly, have been dynamic.
However, say you have a director who brings one skill but,
like, their network or their relationships is not necessarily
their best skill, and they're not able to as quickly stand up
membership into JCDC.
So I'm hoping that--and I'd like to do it in a bipartisan
way--we could put together membership criteria, so to speak,
and also exit criteria in the event that you have a member who
is not faithful or not participating.
The one complaint I hear from people who are not in JCDC
is, ``We don't know how the hell you get in. It's not clear how
you get into it.''
The complaint I hear the most from people who are in it is
that, while it is supposed to be a 2-way sharing exercise of
intelligence, it too often feels like it's one way, of private
sector to CISA, and not enough the other way.
So I was hoping you could just speak to any efforts to, as
I said, formalize JCDC in a way that has structure and
scaffolding and more transparency about who is in, who is out,
what's shared, what's not.
Mr. Cilluffo. Congressman Swalwell, I think you bring up a
number of very important and valid points. As with anything, it
needs to move from individuals to institutions and
personalities to processes, and I think you're spot-on there.
Criteria is essential.
The concern I have is also small, medium-sized--other
entities that don't have an appropriate way to plug into all of
this should still be beneficiaries, especially if there are any
tax dollars thrown to some of those issues.
So I think you're spot-on with looking at what some of that
criteria can look like. I mentioned it briefly earlier, JCDC
does work well when they have something to galvanize around.
It's, what are they doing every other day when something isn't
going boom? That's what we've got to figure out.
That is what I think. You're not going to work well
together when something goes boom if you're exchanging business
cards when the bomb goes off. It's just not the way it works.
It takes time, it takes trust, it takes fighting the same
fight.
So I do think with any collaborative entity with the
Federal Government, there are two things. First, you need
trust. Second, there can't be free riders. There's a lot of
that where sometimes industry just wants to be. What you put
into it will be directly applicable to what you get out of it.
The reality is, is when it comes to JCDC, I think it's
early. For transparency, this was a Solarium Commission
recommendation, so I'm biased toward it, and we called it--we
had the worst acronyms. We had good outcomes in terms of
legislative success, but we called it JCPO and JCE, the Joint
Cyber Environment and the Joint Cyber Planning Office, so bad
acronyms.
But the points that you raise, I think, will help it mature
and, quite honestly, are probably normal in terms of where its
trajectory is.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
They just called votes for us, but I know attendance is a
little sparse today, so I'm going to--I'll start with Mr.
Kudale before we end.
This is a very important hearing. I think this is the first
time cyber insurance has been discussed this in-depth at any
hearing on the House side. I don't know if they've done it on
the Senate side.
So I want to let--I want to have each one of you have
another minute, if there was something you wanted to get on the
record that you didn't get to say today. Believe me, there's
going to be a lot of questions that we're going to submit after
this for you all to respond to.
But I want to give you all at least another opportunity, a
minute each, to just put something on the record that you
wanted to get on that you haven't been able to get on yet.
Mr. Kudale.
Mr. Kudale. Chairman Garbarino and Ranking Member Swalwell,
thank you for having me here.
I do want to just spend maybe 20 seconds addressing your
previous question regarding lessons learned. I think it will be
a miss for me if I don't state that for the record.
First and foremost, cyber crime. No one is immune to that.
In a supply chain, interconnectivity and interdependency,
someone else's cyber problem could be my problem as an SME. I
think that's the biggest learning, that no one is immune,
especially our SME community. That's No. 1.
No. 2, our learning is for SMEs, if they didn't have cyber
insurance in place, it would have been really hard for them to
navigate the incident that took place, and they will be--it
would have been a business-ending event for them. That's the
second.
The third lesson that we learned big time is all the
components that some of the witnesses mentioned here with
respect to forensics, incident response, risk council, risk
engineering, these services, SMEs don't get it on their own.
So we believe that, and also my opinion, is cyber insurers
can play an amazing role in helping risk mitigation for the
businesses, the 80 percent that are uninsured today.
So that would be the last point I would make, and I really
appreciate you having me here. Thank you.
Mr. Garbarino. I agree with you about that.
Ms. Denbow.
Ms. Denbow. Just as there is a role for practical
regulations, reasonable regulations, there is a role for
quality cyber insurance, to not just help provide the financial
backstop for someone, for an organization, but to help that
organization get better at what it's doing so that it can
actually qualify for the insurance.
So there's many aspects to be looking at when it comes to
cyber insurance and how we can use that as a tool to leverage,
to help organizations become better, owner-operators become
better at just simple cyber hygiene, I think that that's where
we want to be headed.
Thank you.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you.
Mr. McCabe.
Mr. McCabe. Thank you very much.
I think I would just emphasize that cyber insurance is
truly a critical component for organizations in their risk
management strategy.
Every now and again you hear a voice come out of a policy
maker that will say, gee, if it wasn't for cyber insurance,
ransomware actors wouldn't be quite so active at this point and
you're encouraging it. That is the furthest thing from the
truth.
I mean, cyber insurance really provides the tools for
companies to get better. It's the incentives for organizations
to get better. It's the education for organizations to get
better. We're interested in partnership. We're interested in
distributing threat intelligence information and working with
the Government in finding solutions.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much.
Mr. Cilluffo.
Mr. Cilluffo. I'll be very brief. Never had an unspoken
thought.
But bottom line is, is outcome-based. I'm a big believer in
market forces, but where they do fall short, that's where we
titrate, and we get that partnership going together. Because
truth is, is companies didn't think they had to defend
themselves against the PLA and the SVR, and we do need to get
our arms around what that looks like and, ultimately, build the
business case.
So try to unleash the strengths and get it done.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate it.
I thank all the witnesses for your valuable testimony today
and the Members for their questions. The Members of the
subcommittee will have additional questions for the witnesses
and we would ask the witnesses to respond to these in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will be
held open for 10 days.
Without objection, this subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:37 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X  I

----------

Questions From Chairman Andrew Garbarino for Frank J. Cilluffo
Question 1. How can the Federal Government better incentivize
private-sector investment in advanced cybersecurity measures and
encourage the adoption of cyber insurance as a key component of risk
management?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. The Biden administration did not change any of the
critical infrastructure sectors under National Security Memorandum 22
(NSM-22), which replaced the 2014 Presidential Policy Directive 21
(PPD-21).
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Knowing that today's threat landscape is different from when the
critical infrastructure sectors were named, and recognizing that the
risk of a catastrophic cyber attack is elevated, do you agree with this
decision? Why or why not?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. How would cyber insurance help mitigate the impact, and
what conversations would need to happen in advance of this major
attack? Are there unique aspects of the water sector that may prevent
water utilities from securing insurance that would give them assurance
in this instance?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4a. Colonial Pipeline and Change Healthcare were both
ransomware attacks. How would you assess the recovery responses and
time lines in these two instances?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4b. Are there lessons we can apply across sectors about
preparedness, response, and recovery? Do you think that Sector Risk
Management Agencies (SRMAs) currently share these lessons sufficiently,
and are there lessons they should incorporate into their rewrites of
their Sector-Specific Plans?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4c. Colonial Pipeline would have been much more damaging
if the attack had impacted the operational technology (OT). Knowing
that OT is a target because it is often outdated, what best practices
can owners and operators implement to ensure impacts are isolated to IT
environments, which can be easily taken off-line and patched?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. From your perspective, what would a Terrorism Risk
Insurance Program (TRIP) for cyber look like?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. From your perspective, at what point is the risk of a
cyber attack ``systemic'' and what does this mean for insurability?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Andrew Garbarino for Matthew McCabe
Question 1. How does the size of the business impact risk calculus
in the eyes of a cyber insurance and reinsurance provider, and
consequently the coverage plans that are offered?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. How much do cyber insurance providers for critical
infrastructure entities base their coverage on Sector-Specific Plans?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. National Security Memorandum 22 (NSM-22) reinforced the
need to identify ``systemically important entities (SIEs)'', which
Director Easterly described as a list that prioritizes Federal
activities based on the potential for ``disruption or malfunction''
that would have nationally significant impacts.
How are cyber insurance providers thinking about providing coverage
to these entities, which are inherently high-risk due to their
designation?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. Do you agree with FBI Director Wray that Volt Typhoon
is ``the defining threat of our generation''? Why or why not?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. How does the cyber insurance industry track and factor
emerging threats, such as Volt Typhoon, into its coverage? Would you
distinguish coverage plans for sectors that have historically weak
cybersecurity practices from those with historically strong ones, even
though it is the same, sophisticated threat actor?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. From your perspective, what would a Terrorism Risk
Insurance Program (TRIP) for cyber look like?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Andrew Garbarino for Kimberly Denbow
Question 1. Please discuss the experiences your member companies of
differing sizes have with cyber insurance providers. What do they look
for in cyber insurance policies?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. The Biden administration did not change any of the
critical infrastructure sectors under National Security Memorandum 22
(NSM-22), which replaced the 2014 Presidential Policy Directive 21
(PPD-21).
Knowing that today's threat landscape is different from when the
critical infrastructure sectors were named, and recognizing that the
risk of a catastrophic cyber attack is elevated, do you agree with this
decision? Why or why not?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. Do you see any knowledge gaps within your sector's
cyber workforce regarding:
a. cyber insurance, which would need to be addressed in order to
improve organizational preparedness?
b. the convergence of information technology (IT) and operational
technology (OT), which would help secure their development and
maintenance?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. The energy sector was identified as one of the most
impacted sectors by Volt Typhoon. Please expand on how companies in the
gas industry are viewing and responding to this threat actor.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. What are the unique difficulties that the gas industry
faces that may make securing cyber insurance more challenging?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. Please describe how your interactions with the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) have been when
your sector has experienced cyber attacks.
Do you think this relationship will change with the final Cyber
Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act (CIRCIA) rule and
the release of NSM-22? Why or why not?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 7. Does the Federal Government provide clear guidance and
mechanisms for assistance should your sector face a sector-wide cyber
attack? If not, what can the Federal Government provide that would be
useful to your sector?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 8. From your perspective, at what point is the risk of a
cyber attack ``systemic'' and what does this mean for insurability?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Andrew Garbarino for Jack Kudale
Question 1. How much do cyber insurance providers for critical
infrastructure entities base their coverage on Sector-Specific Plans?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Cyber insurance protects against man-made events.
However, the frequency and impact of cyber attacks vary substantially,
and we currently do not have the historical records nor the same level
of detailed metrics available as man-made events to quantify trends.
How do these factors impact the cyber insurance market?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. How do carriers currently manage the gap between
customer expectations and coverage terms and conditions? For example,
if a ``smart vehicle'' could be hacked, should consumers anticipate
having cyber insurance in addition to automobile insurance?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. What knowledge gaps in the cyber workforce, if any, do
you currently see about cyber insurance that need to be addressed in
order to improve organizational preparedness?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. How does the cyber insurance industry track and factor
emerging threats, such as Volt Typhoon, into its coverage? Would you
distinguish coverage plans for sectors that have historically weak
cybersecurity practices from those with historically strong ones, even
though it is the same, sophisticated threat actor?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. From your perspective, at what point is the risk of a
cyber attack systemic and what does this mean for insurability?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

A P P E N D I X  I I

----------

Statement of Lucian Niemeyer, CEO, Building Cyber Security.org
July 6, 2024
Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide
written testimony for the record. On behalf of the national non-profit
organization, BuildingCyberSecurity.Org (BCS), we appreciate your
leadership and attention to critical cyber risk management matters. I
am Lucian Niemeyer, the chief executive officer of
BuildingCyberSecurity.org, a collective of private-sector companies
committed to enhancing human cyber security and physical safety in the
built environment. Previously, I served 11 years as professional staff
on the Senate Armed Services Committee. I also served as an assistant
secretary of defense responsible for managing the Department's
enterprise facility, energy, and environmental programs. At the request
of the Secretary of Defense, my tenure also focused on mitigating cyber
threats to operational technologies across the DoD's global assets with
the understanding that the homeland is no longer a sanctuary, and that
our Nation is vulnerable to cyber attacks. I also served as a senior
official on national security matters in the White House's Office of
Management and Budget. In my current role at BCS, I work closely with
insurance brokers, actuaries, and underwriters to offer risk assessment
and pricing strategies for property and casualty policies.
BuildingCyberSecurity.org (BCS)\1\ was formed in 2020 to offer
solutions to the growing cyber threat to public safety by establishing
performance frameworks across multiple critical infrastructure sectors
to mitigate cyber risk to operational technologies (OT). Given the rise
of smart homes, communities, and cities, our goal of enhancing the
physical safety and security in the built environment is ever more
urgent. BCS is focused on human safety globally by incentivizing
investments in OT, processes, training, and recovery plans to enhance
the security of cyber-physical systems against rapidly-evolving threats
in technologically advancing societies. BCS has established the first
cyber risk performance framework for the commercial facility sector in
partnership with the International Society of Automation (ISA), the
Center for Internet Security (CIS), and building industry associations.
The BCS framework incorporates standards from IEC/ISA 62443 and the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the MITRE
ATT&CK Framework, and other publicly-available standards in an
assessment and certification process tailored explicitly to commercial
facilities' connected systems and technologies. The BCS framework
prioritizes protecting systems and technologies impacting occupants'
lives, safety, or health. BCS has benefited from the strong support of
cybersecurity experts in the insurance industry to develop an incentive
for asset owners to invest and take action to reduce the risk to human
safety.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For more information, please see www.buildingcybersecurity.org.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A series of extensive hearings and reporting, including in front of
your subcommittee, showcased that we have reached an unprecedented risk
to our way of life from cyber threats. The threats to the OT
environment, including targeting critical infrastructure sectors of
water, grid, ports, hospitals, and transportation systems, have been
broadly documented, and the threat landscape--fueled by the use of AI
by adversaries--expands each day exponentially. We must take action now
to address the threats of OT, the internet of things (IoT), and
insecure assets pose to our Nation. The unique challenges of risk to
the OT in our national infrastructure pose a direct threat to the
lives, safety, and health of every American. A catastrophic cyber
attack on a water system can be carried out from a keyboard anywhere in
the world at a moment's notice. We've already experienced this attack
more than once in the United States from different adversaries.
Bottom Line.--We cannot continue to treat digital threats to OT
systems (that support critical infrastructure assets) and the insurance
mechanisms to transfer risk the same way we address information
technologies (IT) data breaches and network attacks. Attacks on life-
essential operational technologies managing all 16 critical
infrastructure sectors can threaten public safety, destroy property,
and kill people. Public policy must recognize the difference in
consequences, and distinguish the effects of cybersecurity of data/
software, from the public need for ``cyber safety'' as a separate and
more compelling risk. Adherence to public safety guidelines and
programs are mandatory responsibilities for owners and c-suites.
Cybersecurity programs offer a great range of risk management options.
The fundamental question for a CEO of ``How much is enough to invest in
cybersecurity'' continues to a subject of litigation. The global
insurance industry is well-suited to incentivize investments to reduce
the risk for both of these threats.
When assessing cyber risk, an asset owner has three choices:

Assume the risk of a cyber attack and the resulting response
and recovery costs.

Transfer the risk partially to share costs of response and
recovery with an insurance entity.

Mitigate risk through targeted decisions and investments to
reduce exposure and enhance protection.
The choices are informed by basic risk assessments each asset owner
must make regarding the impact on human/public safety, business
operations, financial exposure, brand reputation, asset ratings, and
investor/shareholder confidence. The risk assessment for most critical
infrastructure asset owners must also extend beyond the asset owner's
direct control to broader impacts on the safety and economics of
customers, communities, and the general public.
delineating consequences for critical infrastructure
The cyber risk assessment conducted for the exploitation of data,
the ransom of software or IT systems, distributed denials of service,
or other virtual activities must be a separate activity from a risk
assessment of a cyber attack to cyber-physical systems (CPS) in
critical infrastructure, such as operational technologies, industrial
control systems, SCADA, etc. An IT attack primarily results in business
disruption or data exploitation. The first response for a company is to
gather the IT team, assess the damage, and initiate actions to respond
to the threat and recover business operations with the assistance of an
insurance company if covered.
In most cases, a CPS attack immediately threatens human life,
safety, or health. From the initial indication of an intrusion or
attack on the CPS in an asset, the owner has the ultimate
responsibility, first and foremost, to protect public health and
safety. As experienced in the Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack of
May 2021,\2\ the seizure of IT systems quickly resulted in the complete
shutdown of pipelines, not only because of billing disruptions, but as
a safety precaution to confirm that the attack had not migrated to the
automated valves and meters controlling product distribution. Had the
bad actors seized the controls for the pipeline, the threat could have
been more than a monetary loss, including an environmental or human
disaster. That attack prompted the Federal Government, under the
regulatory oversight of the Transportation Security Administration
(TSA), to bring together more than 25 major pipeline operators and
industrial control systems partners to strengthen security practices to
safeguard the operational technology networks critical to pipeline
operations, efforts that complement the Security Directives TSA issued
in the aftermath of the attack on Colonial Pipeline.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.energy.gov/ceser/colonial-pipeline-cyber-
incident#:?:text=Colonial%20Pipeline-
%20Company%20issued%20a%20'statement%20noting%20it,is%20working%20quickl
y%20get- %20its%20pipeline%20back%20online.
\3\ https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/news/attack-colonial-pipeline-
what-weve-learned-what-weve-done-over-past-two-years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Written testimony for this hearing by Kimberly Denbow, vice
president of security and operations American Gas Association,\4\ has
recommended the use of the DHS SAFETY Act program to offer companies
the ability to minimize or even eliminate specific types of tort
liability following cyber attacks when companies can demonstrate they
have implemented robust and effective security programs. We agree that
linking the obtainment and maintenance of SAFETY Act protections to
cyber insurance would be highly useful in promoting effective
cybersecurity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://homeland.house.gov/2024/06/25/media-advisory-chairman-
garbarino-announces-subcommittee-hearing-on-critical-infrastructure-
resilience-cyber-insurance/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To implement this proposal, each industry must have a shared
understanding and agreement of the cybersecurity standards needed for
protecting assets and public safety. Since all infrastructure systems
are engineered, a cyber safety ``Standard of Care'' must be developed
by engineering professionals for the safe design of a system and then
maintained through to system design, construction, and life-cycle
operations. care''[sic] must be tailored to each critical
infrastructure sector. For example, BCS assembled the top experts from
across the engineering, system manufacturing, and automation industries
to develop a standard of care ``profile'' for commercial facilities. A
specific cyber safety standard of care profile must be developed for
each of the 16 critical infrastructure sectors. A cyber safety standard
of care can then serve as the legally-recognized basis for determining
a ``robust and effective cybersecurity program,'' the insurance
industry has a common framework for each critical infrastructure sector
to assess IT and CPS risk.
Standards of Care for the built environment have historically been
developed by private-sector academic/industry associations and
promulgated through voluntary adoption or public policy (licensing,
building codes, statute, etc). BCS has created a performance framework
to offer a Standard of Care for cybersecurity and safety in the $34
trillion global commercial facilities sector that insurance
underwriters can use as an assessment and certification instrument to
assess and mitigate risk. We have used our framework to perform a cyber
commissioning process for new facilities on behalf of insurance
companies to evaluate the safety and security of the connected building
systems. National architectural/engineering companies are also using
the BCS framework to inform the design of new or modernized buildings
to be cyber-secure and safe for occupants.
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) released the Congressionally-
directed National Cyber-Informed Engineering Strategy \5\ in 2022
outline the core concepts that place cybersecurity considerations at
the foundation of engineering and energy systems design. The CIE
integrates cybersecurity considerations into the conception, design,
development, and operation of any physical system, energy or otherwise,
to mitigate or even eliminate avenues for cyber-enabled attacks. CIE
concepts use design decisions and engineering controls to prioritize
defense against the worst possible consequences of cyber attacks facing
critical infrastructure systems and asset owners.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.energy.gov/ceser/cyber-informed-engineering.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The CIE strategy recognizes that protecting human safety from cyber
threats in critical infrastructure is more than developing a ``secure
by design''\6\ standard for software and technologies. A cyber safety
Standard of Care must include additional sensors and technologies to
protect the IT/OT interface and to warn humans if a system or device is
being exploited to create an unsafe condition.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.cisa.gov/securebydesign.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Other critical infrastructure sectors have varying degrees of
Federal regulation to protect the public, rely on industry-derived
standards, or fall back to the determinations by each asset owner on a
range of risks to be assumed, transferred, or mitigated. For a rapidly-
evolving landscape of cyber risk, the lack of industry standards for
cyber safety exacerbates the ability to obtain comprehensive coverage.
global insurance trends
Munich Re estimates that global cyber crime costs will reach $13.8
trillion by 2028.\7\ The global cyber insurance market is projected to
expand by $42.81 billion from 2022 to 2027, with a forecasted CAGR of
35.92%. In 2023, the market grew 30.9% on a year-on-year (YoY) basis,
according to Technavio.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://insuranceasia.com/insurance/news/cyber-risks-escalate-
ransomware-rise-munich-re.
\8\ https://insuranceasia.com/insurance/news/global-cyber-
insurance-market-skyrocket-4281b-2027.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At the same time, insurers initiated rules to reduce exposure,
including limiting or eliminating coverage if the cyber attack is
conducted as part of or related to an ``act of war,'' or carried out by
nation-states or their affiliates.
As of March 31, 2023, when coverage begins or is renewed,
syndicates have begun excluding state-backed cyber attacks from
policies that protect against physical and digital damage caused by
hacks; the terms of these exclusions vary widely and are difficult for
asset owners/operators to evaluate and for Federal agencies or the
courts to verify.
As a result, public policy for the insurance industry must address
the exposure not only for the cyber insurance market but for other
policies that a cyber attack on critical infrastructure may trigger.
The effects of ``silent cyber''\9\ risk (potential cyber-related losses
stemming from traditional property and liability policies that were not
explicitly designed to cover cyber risk) are being litigated in courts
for policies covering:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://www.insurancebusinessmag.com/us/guides/what-is-silent-
cyber-risk-117150.aspx#:?-
:text=Silent%20cyber%20refers%20to%20potential%20cyber-
related%20losses%20'stemming-
,were%20not%20'specifically%20designed%20to%20cover%20cyber%20risk.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Property--material damage and business interruption from
physical loss or damage to tangible property.

Casualty--Third-party bodily injury and property damage
liability.

General liability--Third-party bodily injury, property
damage liability, advertising, and personal injury.

Directors and Officers--Coverage for litigation or
regulatory action arising from failure to disclose,
misrepresentations, or breaches of fiduciary duty.
Cyber policies generally cover loss, theft, or damage to electronic
data and violations of privacy laws with a suite of first-party
coverage to help the insured get systems back on-line, deal with the
threat actors, and provide identity theft notification, prevention, and
remediation service as required by law. A traditional cyber policy will
not cover physical damage to property or equipment caused by a cyber
attack. Critical infrastructure owners are left with significant gaps
in coverage and few options to transfer the risk of physical loss or
harm. The real question for policy makers should be--how easy should it
be to transfer public safety risk versus being required to mitigate the
risk from ever happening? Critical infrastructure owners/operators are
using automation and the convergence of IT, IoT, and OT to reduce
operating costs and improve efficiencies. A portion of those savings
must be reapplied to mitigate the cyber risk and reduce the
vulnerability assumed from those actions.
The Federal Government is considering a program \10\ to address
this risk by offering the cyber insurance industry a Federal backstop,
modeled on existing programs (Terrorism Risk Insurance Program (TRIP)
or FEMA's National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)). The taxpayer would
be the reinsurer of last resort if a cyber attack proves too
catastrophic for insurers to cover. While this may offer the insurance
industry some stability, we contend that for public safety risk in
critical infrastructure, every dollar spent on transferring cyber risk
and recovery costs to an insurer or the Federal Government is a lost
opportunity to invest in risk mitigations and exposure reduction. For
the public safety risk posed by cyber threats to our Nation's critical
infrastructure, public policy must prioritize actions and investments
to protect systems from attack and minimize the impact on lives,
health, and property. The qualifications for any Federal backstop
program for a major cyber incident must require documented and
confirmed actions by the insurance entity that a cyber risk mitigation
program meeting industry standards was in place and actively managed or
monitored at the time of an attack.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\  https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/311/
ACRSM%20Update%20on%20Catastrophic-
%20Cyber%20RFI%20%2826%20Jul%202023%29.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
insurance industry responses
Throughout our society, home and automobile owners are required by
financing institutions or local/State agencies to maintain property and
casualty policies in the case of an accident or event. The cost and
types of coverage for those policies vary by asset value, area, risk
assessment, and the behavior of the insured entity. Many underwriters
reward investments for home security systems or reward good driving
behavior. In both cases, insurance is a tangible incentive for the
insured to reduce risk. More importantly, these insurance incentives
are focused on preventing the claim instead of recovering from the
event. The same reasoning for risk reduction drove the mandatory use in
automobiles of seatbelts, the installation of airbags, and other safety
features. (It's still a wonder to me why a modern car with over 2,000
micro-processing chips managing critical safety performance features
does not have a warning light for drivers alerting them of an unsafe
data malfunction. We have sensors for temperature, pressure,
inflations, and hazards, but nothing to warn of a threatening cyber
action).
Bottom line--the insurance industry has a history and continues to
promote programs to proactively reduce risk to human safety in addition
to assisting with the costs of response and recovery.
Cyber Insurance industry expert Tom Finan, senior vice president of
Willis Towers Watson (Former DHS senior strategist, former U.S. H.R.
subcommittee director, Former FBI assistant general counsel) and Annie
McIntyre, chief security officer at EverLine offered a critical
observation in 2021 on the insurance industry's value to cyber risk.
``Simply having a cyber insurance policy does not make a company safer.
Instead, an enhanced cybersecurity posture results from going through
the cyber insurance application and underwriting process. That process
provides a huge opportunity for better cyber collaboration and, as a
result, enhanced risk management. Stated another way, cyber insurance
can bolster a critical infrastructure company's cyber preparedness
across the board in the face of unpredictable threats and unknown
potential consequences.''\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.wtwco.com/en-us/insights/2021/03/cyber-risk-and-
critical-infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As an example of the insurance industry in action in 2024, AON, the
world's largest insurance broker, offers clients solutions to assess
cyber resilience using cutting-edge technologies with analysis by
experienced risk professionals.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ https://www.aon.com/en/capabilities/cyber-resilience.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Adversary Simulation--Security experts impersonating the
actions and behaviors of skilled cyber threat actors to attack
an organization's information technology or operational
technology environment.

Carrier-Aligned Security Assessment of potential exposures
in critical security domains affecting insurability.

Cyber Impact Analysis to evaluate an organization's risk
exposure through the financial quantification of relevant cyber
scenarios.

Cyber Quotient Evaluation (CyQu) is a proprietary
eSubmission platform that helps clients identify, measure, and
manage their cyber risk exposure.

Cybersecurity assessments are tools and services designed to
test an organization's cyber risk, maturity, compliance
readiness, and data privacy standards.

CyberScan: Full Stack Cyber Vulnerability Platform that
scans networks, applications, and APIs for known security
issues.

Cyber Threat Intelligence Services convert tactical and
strategic cyber threat intelligence into actionable insights to
protect your business and people.

Insider Threat Assessment evaluates an organization's
ability to prevent, identify, and mitigate risks from employees
and third parties, including malicious and non-malicious
insiders.

Penetration Testing for proactively identifying and
exploiting vulnerabilities across applications and networks to
produce actionable guidance to improve your security posture.

Red Team Assessments evaluate organizational preparedness,
including technical prevention controls, detection
capabilities, and incident response planning.
Aon also oversees a targeted and cost-effective remediation program
to ensure that controls are implemented in alignment with best
practices. This builds cyber resilience and improves the underwriting
criteria for cyber insurance.
Recent research on cyber insurance trends confirms the incentives
to invest in mitigations. Sophos, a global leader in innovative
security solutions for defeating cyber attacks, on June 24, 2024,
released findings from its vendor-agnostic survey of 5,000
cybersecurity/IT leaders, ``Cyber Insurance and Cyber Defenses 2024:
Lessons from IT and Cybersecurity Leaders.'' According to the report,
97% of those with a cyber policy invested in improving their defenses
to help with insurance, with 76% saying it enabled them to qualify for
coverage, 67% to get better pricing, and 30% to secure improved policy
terms.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ https://www.sophos.com/en-us/press/press-releases/2024/06/76-
companies-improved-their-cyber-defenses-qualify-cyber-insurance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Insurance companies must continue to prioritize risk mitigation,
vice transfer as the most effective method to manage risk. To respond
to an ever-changing cyber threat landscape, actuaries and underwriters
must move beyond periodic audits and surveys at the initial policy
writing process to require from their customers confirmation of
programs to enhance cyber hygiene and continuous, effective management
of cyber protections based on accepted industry standards.
conclusion
Underpinning the insurance industry are globally-accepted
engineering standards of care that were implemented after catastrophic
physical disasters as mechanisms and practices to address financial and
human safety risk. The physical engineering and insurance industries
came together to address the risk by first developing standards to
prevent the catastrophe from occurring or by implementing proactive
measures to reduce the impact. Both evolved and matured their
protections to match the progression of the industrial world. Today,
critical infrastructure sectors are rapidly adopting new IT, IoT, and
OT to improve services and reduce costs. The resulting cyber risk must
be managed with an emphasis on reducing the risk of catastrophic
events. Critical infrastructure owners/operators in each sector and
their insurers must agree on cyber safety standards, starting with a
shared understanding and development of cyber engineering, or the
``standard of care.'' To address the unique characteristics of an
evolving cyber threat, the standards of care must include risk
management frameworks that offer tiered protection levels as opposed to
minimum compliance standards. Those tiered protection levels should be
based on the standard of care profile developed to address the unique
threats for a specific industry sector. In the evolution of insurance
instruments to cover a range of cyber threats, cyber-related risks to
physical safety must first be mitigated and treated as mandatory
programs before any decision is made to invest in risk transfer
mechanisms. Public policies and future Federal actions to reduce risk
for insurers must require the confirmation of programs in place between
an insurance company and their customer that industry-adopted standards
for cyber safety and security are being continuously managed and
monitored. Every company and asset owner prioritizes and invests in
physical safety programs to reduce employee risk across every aspect of
operations. Cyber safety must also be part of that culture and included
in the prioritization of action and priorities.
I thank you again for your leadership and consideration.

[all]
