- EXAMINING FIRE HAZARDS: LITHIUM-ION BATTERIES AND OTHER THREATS TO FIRE SAFETY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING FIRE HAZARDS: LITHIUM-ION BAT-
TERIES AND OTHER THREATS TO FIRE SAFETY

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND
TECHNOLOGY

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

FEBRUARY 15, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-52
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

57-374 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY

Anthony D'Esposito, New York, Chairman
Nick LaLota, New York                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana, Ranking
Dale W. Strong, Alabama                Member
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Daniel S. Goldman, New York
officio)                           Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Diana Bergwin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Lauren McClain, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Anthony D'Esposito, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Troy A. Carter, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................     5
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Ms. Lori Moore-Merrell, U.S. Fire Administrator, U.S. Fire
Administration (USFA):
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
Mr. Daniel E. Flynn, Chief Fire Marshal, Fire Department of the
City of New York:
Oral Statement.................................................    13
Prepared Statement.............................................    15
Mr. Stephen Kerber, Vice President & Executive Director, Fire
Safety Research Institute, Underwriters Laboratories Inc.:
Oral Statement.................................................    16
Prepared Statement.............................................    17
Mr. Fire Chief John S. Butler, President and Board Chair,
International Association of Fire Chiefs:
Oral Statement.................................................    20
Prepared Statement.............................................    22

For the Record

The Honorable Anthony D'Esposito, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Letter From DoorDash...........................................    35
Article, New York Daily News, December 10, 2023................    42

Appendix I

Statement of the American Burn Association.......................    51

Appendix II

Question From Ranking Member Troy A. Carter for Daniel E. Flynn..    53
Question From Ranking Member Troy A. Carter for John S. Butler...    53
Question From Honorable Donald Payne, Jr. for John S. Butler.....    54

EXAMINING FIRE HAZARDS:  LITHIUM-ION
BATTERIES AND OTHER THREATS TO FIRE
SAFETY

----------

Thursday, February 15, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Emergency Management
and Technology,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 10:16 a.m.,
in room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Anthony
D'Esposito [Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives D'Esposito, Carter, Payne, and
Goldman.
Also present: Representatives Pfluger and Torres.
Chairman D'Esposito. The Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology will come
to order. Without objection, the subcommittee may recess at any
point.
The purpose of this hearing today is to examine the various
hazards that our Nation's first responders face daily and will
allow Members to better understand the particular dangers posed
by lithium-ion batteries.
Without objection, the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Gimenez;
the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Pfluger; and the gentleman from
New York, Mr. Torres, are permitted to sit on the dais and ask
questions to the witnesses. I recognize myself for an opening
statement.
I want to begin by thanking our witnesses for testifying
before the Emergency Management and Technology Subcommittee. In
today's hearing, we will examine the hazards that first
responders and fire departments across this country are
confronting daily, and more specifically, the threat that
lithium-ion batteries pose to fire safety. We look forward to
hearing from each of you on this very important and vital
topic.
Every day, our Nation's first responders embody the best of
civil service. In fact, with over 70 percent of our Nation's
firefighters serving as volunteers, they demonstrate true
selflessness, compassion, and courage. Regardless of the danger
they may face, firefighters, both career and volunteer, choose
to put themselves before anything else when they put their
uniforms and their bunker gear on each day.
As a former chief of the Island Park Fire Department back
on Long Island, I know first-hand that successful emergency
management requires collaboration and teamwork with
stakeholders at every level of Government to prepare for,
protect against, and respond to natural or man-made disasters.
As Members of this subcommittee, we also have a role to play in
supporting our Nation's first responders.
In recent years, new technologies have come with new risks.
Fire departments across this country have reported how the
increasing use of lithium-ion batteries has diminished fire
safety in major United States cities. In fact, injuries caused
by lithium-ion battery fires involving e-bikes or e-scooters
have increased by 1,000 percent over the last 5 years just in
New York City alone. In 2023, brave members of the FDNY
responded to 268 lithium-ion battery fires, which caused 150
injuries and 18 deaths. To illustrate this increasing trend,
there were only 10 deaths associated with lithium-ion battery
fires for the combined years of 2021 and 2022.
These batteries may be found in daily household items and
cell phones, laptops, power tools, and more. However, compared
to smaller items with lithium-ion batteries, the power in e-
scooters and e-bikes contain around 50 times that of a
smartphone. As a result, an explosive and long-lasting fire can
occur after overcharging, damage, overheating, poor
maintenance, or more of the lithium-ion batteries in an e-bike
or scooter.
In January 2023, 17 children were injured and 1 was
hospitalized after an e-bike caused a fire in a building that
housed a daycare back in Queens, New York. In November 2023, an
e-scooter caught fire in a Brooklyn home, unfortunately killing
a grandmother, her son, her grandson, and injuring more than 12
others. With the increased use of e-scooters, e-bikes, electric
vehicles, and mopeds, stories like these have become all too
common.
However, despite the increasing danger, New York City is
faced with potential budget cuts and reduced firefighting staff
in 20 engine companies to accommodate the growing migrant
crisis. We are all concerned about the future of first
responders and fire service throughout this country.
Not only is manpower needed to immediately respond to these
fires, extinguishing lithium-ion battery fires has proven
difficult for fire services across this great Nation. For
instance, in 2021, after a Tesla caught fire following a crash
in a Houston suburb, 8 firefighters spent over 7 hours and
28,000 gallons of water, an amount the department normally uses
in a month, before the fire was fully extinguished. The reality
is that some lithium-ion battery fires can reignite hours
later, some even days later, and traditional fire extinguishing
methods do not always work by them.
The Biden administration has sought to incentivize more EV
purchases through its $7,500 tax credit. However, we need to
ensure that we fully understand the dangers or risks associated
with high-voltage lithium-ion batteries and the safest way for
individuals and our constituents, emergency managers and first
responders, to handle any potential fires. We have a duty on
this committee to investigate how certain policies addressing
the purchase, use, and maintenance of lithium-ion batteries
impact emergency responders and fire suppression.
Americans should be aware of the risks associated with
using electric vehicles, scooters, and mopeds, and every-day
devices. They should also ensure that their purchase is from a
reputable manufacturer that complies with United States safety
standards.
Last week, FDNY shut down an illegal lithium-ion battery
operation in Queens and confiscated hundreds of individual
lithium-ion cells, 25 e-scooters, and 25 electric or gas
mopeds. Federal, State, and local governments must take
measures to prevent unsafe manufacturers from endangering the
public with cheap lithium-ion batteries.
Last, as Members of Congress, we must ensure that
firefighters and first responders have the protective gear,
equipment, and training needed to respond to lithium-ion fires
and other threats. The U.S. Fire Administration and the
National Fire Academy, the Assistance to Firefighters grant
program, and the Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency
Response grant program all aim to strengthen and equip fire
emergency medical services throughout this country.
As a first responder myself and Chairman of this
subcommittee, I remain committed to supporting FEMA's suite of
preparedness grant programs, and I'm hopeful for a successful
reauthorization of the fire grants later this year. This is a
committee here in the House of Representatives that works in a
bipartisan fashion. Emergency management shouldn't be partisan.
We are here to keep you safe, to keep us safe, and to keep the
United States of America safe.
I look forward to hearing from each of our witnesses today
on how to address these challenges and improve first responders
and fire safety across this great country.
[The statement of Chairman D'Esposito follows:]

Statement of Chairman Anthony D'Esposito

February 15, 2024

I want to begin by thanking our witnesses for testifying before the
Emergency Management and Technology Subcommittee. In today's hearing,
we will examine the fire hazards that fire departments across the
country are confronting daily, and more specifically, the threat that
lithium-ion batteries pose to fire safety. We look forward to hearing
from each of you on this important topic.
Every day, our Nation's firefighters embody the best of civil
service. In fact, with over 70% of our Nation's firefighters serving as
volunteers, they demonstrate true selflessness, compassion, and
courage.\1\ Regardless of the danger they may face, firefighters choose
to put their communities first when they put on their uniforms each
day.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.usfa.fema.gov/statistics/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As the former chief of the Island Park Fire Department, I know
first-hand that successful emergency management requires collaboration
and teamwork with stakeholders at every level of government to be able
to prepare for, protect against, and respond to natural or man-made
disasters. As Members of this subcommittee, we also have a role to play
in supporting our Nation's firefighters and first responders.
In recent years, new technologies have come with new risks. Fire
departments across the country have reported how the increasing use of
lithium-ion batteries has diminished fire safety in major U.S. cities.
In fact, injuries caused by lithium-ion battery fires involving
electric (E) bikes or E-scooters have increased by 1,000% over the last
5 years in New York City.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.thecity.nyc/2024/01/30/how-to-safely-charge-store-
maintain-e-bike-and-batteries/
#:?:text=Dangerous%20fires%20caused%20by%20the,through%20the%20end%20of%
- 202023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2023, the FDNY responded to 268 lithium-ion battery fires which
caused 150 injuries and 18 deaths.\3\ To illustrate this increasing
trend, there were only 10 deaths associated with lithium-ion battery
fires for the combined years of 2021 and 2022.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.cbsnews.com/newyork/news/fdny-busts-lithium-ion-
battery-manufacturing-operation-in-queens/.
\4\ https://www.firerescue1.com/lithium-ion-battery-fires/articles/
fdny-lithium-ion-battery-fire-fatalities-in-2023-will-likely-surpass-
last-2-years-combined-Vzg1OAj79Ob061j9/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These batteries may be found in daily household items and
cellphones, laptops, or power tools, as well. However, compared to
smaller items with lithium-ion batteries, the power in E-scooters and
E-bikes contains ``around 50 times'' that of a smartphone.\5\ As a
result, an explosive and long-lasting fire can occur after
overcharging, damage, overheating, or poor maintenance of the lithium-
ion battery in an E-bike or scooter.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.cnn.com/2023/03/09/tech/lithium-ion-battery-fires/
index.html.
\6\ https://www.nyc.gov/assets/fdny/downloads/pdf/codes/dangers-of-
lithium-ion-batteries.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In January 2023, 17 children were injured, and one was
hospitalized, after an E-bike caused a fire in a building that housed a
daycare in Queens, New York.\7\ In November 2023, an E-scooter caught
fire in a Brooklyn home, killing a grandmother, her son, and her
grandson, and injuring more than 12 others.\8\ With the increased use
of E-scooters, E-bikes, electric vehicles, and mopeds, stories like
these have become all too common. However, despite this increasing
danger, New York City Mayor Eric Adams, implemented budget cuts to the
FDNY and reduced firefighting staff in 20 engine companies to
accommodate the growing migrant crisis,\9\ and I am concerned about the
state of New York City's fire services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/local/e-bike-battery-sparked-
fire-at-nyc-daycare-center-badly-hurting-child-fdny/4069524/
#:?:text=A%20lithium-ion%20battery%20from%20an%20e-
bike%20'sparked%20the,a%20'series%20of%20blazes%20linked%20to%20'such%20
units.
\8\ https://www.cnn.com/2023/11/14/us/brooklyn-fire-family-killed-
lithium-battery-scooter/index.html.
\9\ https://www.cbsnews.com/newyork/news/fdny-budget-cuts-fifth-
firefighter-reduced-staffing/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not only is manpower needed to immediately respond to these fires,
extinguishing lithium-ion battery fires has proven difficult for fire
services across the country. For instance, in 2021, after a Tesla
caught fire following a crash in a Houston suburb, 8 firefighters spent
over 7 hours and 28,000 gallons of water--``an amount the department
normally uses in a month''--before the fire was fully extinguished.\10\
The reality is that some lithium-ion battery fires can reignite hours
later--some even days later; and traditional fire extinguishing methods
do not always work on them.\11\ The Biden administration has sought to
incentivize more EV purchases through its $7,500 tax credit, however,
we need to ensure that we fully understand the dangers or risks
associated with high-voltage lithium-ion batteries, and the safest way
for individuals, emergency managers, and first responders to handle any
potential fires.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.nbcnews.com/business/autos/federal-regulators-
warn-risks-firefighters-electrical-vehicle-fires-n1271084.
\11\ https://www.nyc.gov/assets/fdny/downloads/pdf/codes/dangers-
of-lithium-ion-batteries.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have a duty to investigate how certain policies addressing the
purchase, use, and maintenance of lithium-ion batteries impact
emergency responders and fire safety. Americans should be aware of the
risks associated with using electric vehicles (EV), scooters, and
mopeds, and other every-day devices. They should also ensure that their
purchase is from a reputable manufacturer that complies with U.S.
safety standards.
Last week, the FDNY shut down an illegal lithium-ion battery
operation in Queens, New York and confiscated hundreds of individual
lithium-ion cells, 25 E-scooters, and 25 electric or gas mopeds.\12\
Federal, State, and local governments must take measures to prevent
unsafe manufacturers from endangering the public with cheap lithium-ion
batteries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ https://www.cbsnews.com/newyork/news/fdny-busts-lithium-ion-
battery-manufacturing-operation-in-queens/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Last, as Members of Congress, we must ensure that firefighters and
first responders have the protective gear, equipment, and training
needed to respond to lithium-ion fires and other threats. The U.S. Fire
Administration (USFA), the National Fire Academy (NFA), the Assistance
to Firefighters Grant (AFG) program, and the Staffing for Adequate Fire
and Emergency Response (SAFER) grant program all aim to strengthen and
equip fire and emergency medical services throughout the Nation.\13\ As
a former first responder, and Chairman of this subcommittee, I remain
committed to supporting FEMA's suite of preparedness grant programs,
and am hopeful for a successful reauthorization of the fire grants
later this year.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ https://www.usfa.fema.gov/about/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I look forward to hearing from each of our witnesses today on how
to address these challenges and improve U.S. fire safety. Thank you.

Chairman D'Esposito. I now recognize the Ranking Member of
this subcommittee, Mr. Carter, for his opening statement.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before I begin my remarks, I want to say that yesterday,
while many of us were reflecting on the 6 years since the
Marjory Stoneman Douglas school massacre, another mass shooting
took place at the Super Bowl parade. My heart goes out to all
those impacted by yesterday's shooting. For those of you who
first responders were there to respond, to protect, we say
thank you. To the families that had to endure the atrocities
and the terror of having an active shooter, our thoughts and
prayers are with them. For those who were wounded and for the
one that we know of at this point that lost their life, we
rededicate ourselves to supporting law enforcement to make sure
that this doesn't happen again. We rededicate ourselves to
providing resources to make sure that people are able to come
and gather at celebrations, at places of worship, at schools,
at concerts without fear of someone with a weapon, with
nefarious actions and thoughts might plague our community. So
if we would just all remember those lives that were lost and
those people that were challenged.
These acts of violence are horrific. Next year, my home
district in Louisiana, New Orleans, will be the host of the
Super Bowl. We owe it to our communities, our first responders,
and our children to do more. We have a serious gun violence
problem in our country, and I hope my colleagues will work
together to pass common-sense reforms.
Now, turning to our hearing, I want to thank our witnesses
for being here today. To our first responder witnesses, I want
to say thank you in particular for your on-going commitment to
protecting all of our communities. The threat posed by lithium-
ion batteries is growing and is one that we should certainly be
monitoring. The fires caused by lithium-ion batteries pose
unique challenges, and New York City seems to be ground zero
for these types of fires, with over 250 incidents last year
alone.
Last year, while docked in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, a part
of my district, a fire broke out on an oil tanker due to the
thermal runaway of a cell within a lithium-ion battery in a
hand-held radio, which caused $3 million in damage. My dear
friend Brian Adams, who is the State fire marshal for the State
of Louisiana, brought this to my attention, and we have been
working on proposed legislation to deal with this. Brian Adams
is a lifelong firefighter, a career firefighter who has
demonstrated his love for people, his love for policy, and his
love for doing what is right, as you do as a first responder.
My colleague, Congressman Richard Torres, has been leading
in the legislative work on addressing the threats from lithium-
ion batteries in the House of Representatives, and I want to
thank him for his leadership on this issue. I hope that the
Energy and Commerce Committee will continue its work on
Congressman Torres' bill in Setting Consumer Standards for
Lithium-Ion Batteries Act.
I fully anticipate today's conversation with the panel to
mostly be related to lithium-ion batteries, but I hope that we
will also focus on the range of fire threats and oversight of
programs that support firefighters. One such fire threat is
climate change.
Climate change has significantly increased the frequency,
intensity, and destructiveness of wildfires. Last week marked 6
months since the fires in Maui, where over 100 people died.
While Maui was the deadliest wildfire we have experienced in
modern history, in recent years there have been a string of
wildfires that have been deadly and caused mass destruction.
Six of the last 7 years, 2017 to 2023, have had catastrophic
fires which resulted in fatalities, loss of infrastructure,
resulting in displacement of thousands of families.
In Louisiana, last year we had an unprecedented wildfire
season. Yes, Louisiana, wildfires. Doesn't usually go together
in the same sentence, but, yes, we had fires in our marsh,
fires going along the interstate system, fires in places we
have never had them before. In August alone, we had more than
550 fires that destroyed homes and forced several evacuations.
As climate change continues to escalate, urgent actions to
mitigate its impact and implement effective wildfire management
strategies becomes imperative to safeguard the environment and
community at risk. These wildfires are not happening in a
vacuum. They are occurring simultaneously as other disasters
and adding strain on Federal, State, and territorial, Tribal,
and local emergency managers and first responders.
I look forward to speaking to our witnesses today about
fire hazards, but also broadly about the need to prepare our
communities against all threats. Our subcommittee has
jurisdiction over the Department of Homeland Security grants
program, which also helps first responders prepare their
communities against all threats. I look forward to hearing from
our witnesses on how these various grants can help fire
departments improve community resilience, and how we, as a
committee, as Members of Congress can use our voices and our
resources to aid you in doing the job that we greatly
appreciate you doing.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Carter follows:]

Statement of Ranking Member Troy Carter

February 15, 2024

Before I begin my remarks, I want to say that yesterday, while many
of us were reflecting on the 6 years since the Marjory Stoneman Douglas
school massacre, another mass shooting took place at the Super Bowl
parade. My heart goes out to all those impacted by yesterday's
shooting.
These acts of violence are horrific. Next year, my home district
will host the Super Bowl. We owe it to our communities, our first
responders, and our children to do more. We have a serious gun violence
problem in our country and I hope my colleagues will work together to
pass common-sense reforms.
Turning to our hearing, I want to thank our witnesses for being
here today. To our first responder witnesses, I want to thank you, in
particular, for your on-going commitment to protecting your
communities.
The threat posed by lithium-ion batteries is growing and is one
that we should certainly be monitoring. The fires caused by lithium-ion
batteries pose a unique challenge, and New York City seems to be ground
zero for these types of fires, with over 250 incidents just last year.
Last year, while docked in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, a fire broke out on
an oil tanker due to the thermal runaway of a cell within a lithium-ion
battery in a handheld radio, which caused $3 million in damage.
My colleague, Congressman Ritchie Torres, has been leading the
legislative work on addressing the threats from lithium-ion batteries
in the House of Representatives and I want to thank him for his
leadership on this issue. I hope that the Energy and Commerce Committee
will continue its work on Congressman Torres's bill, the Setting
Consumer Standards for Lithium-Ion Batteries Act.
I fully anticipate today's conversation with the panel to mostly be
related to lithium-ion batteries, but I hope that we will also focus on
the range of fire threats and oversight of programs that support
firefighters. One such fire threat is climate change.
Climate change has significantly increased the frequency,
intensity, and destructiveness of wildfires. Last week marked 6 months
since the fires on Maui, where 100 people died. While Maui was the
deadliest wildfire we have experienced in modern history, in recent
years there have been a string of wildfires that have been deadly and
caused mass destruction. Six of the last 7 years (2017-2023) have had
catastrophic fires which resulted in fatalities, loss of
infrastructure, resulted in displacement of thousands of families.
In Louisiana, last year we had an unprecedented wildfire season. In
August alone, we had more than 550 fires that destroyed homes and
forced several evacuations. As climate change continues to escalate,
urgent action to mitigate its impacts and implement effective wildfire
management strategies becomes imperative to safeguard the environment
and communities at risk. These wildfires are not happening in a vacuum.
They are occurring simultaneously as other disasters and adding strain
to Federal, State, territorial, Tribal, and local emergency managers
and first responders.
I look forward to speaking to our witnesses today about fire
hazards, but also more broadly about the need to prepare our
communities against all threats. Our subcommittee has jurisdiction over
the Department of Homeland Security Grant Programs, which also helps
first responders prepare their communities against all threats. I look
forward to hearing from our witnesses how these various grants help
fire departments improve community resilience.

Chairman D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Ranking Member
Carter.
Other Members of the subcommittee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]

Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson

February 15, 2024

I want to start by thanking our witnesses for appearing before the
subcommittee today. I also want to extend my gratitude to all
firefighters and fire safety personnel for the work you do to manage
fire response and keep communities safe across the United States.
Earlier this month, New York Governor Kathy Hochul announced a
State-wide campaign banning the sale of uncertified lithium-ion
batteries. These uncertified batteries have resulted in fires with
numerous deaths in New York City and across the Nation.
These batteries pose a relatively new hazard, and the development
of standards is an important step toward solving this important safety
issue. However, we must keep in mind that micromobility devices such as
e-bikes, e-scooters are credited with reducing traffic congestion,
alleviating parking issues, and providing affordable transportation
options especially in urban areas.
I applaud Rep. Ritchie Torres's leadership on this important issue.
His bill, H.R. 1797, the Setting Consumer Standards for Lithium-Ion
Batteries Act, was reported out of the Committee on Energy and Commerce
with a 42-0 vote in December.
In New York last year alone, at least 18 people lost their lives
from fires ignited by lithium-ion batteries. This issue extends outside
of New York as well; cities across the country are grappling with fires
caused by uncertified lithium-ion batteries. Setting consumer standards
through H.R. 1797 is a clear step in preventing further fatalities.
More remains to be done on this issue and to address the myriad of
other fire safety threats, including wildfires, as well.
Extreme wildfires across the United States, such as the tragic
fires in Hawaii, have caused devastation in many communities. Early
2024 is predicted to bring above-normal wildfire risk to the northern
Midwest and the western coast of Alaska. This threat continues not only
in the near-term but will persist in the decades to come.
Unfortunately, many of my Republican colleagues continue to
disregard the climate change risks confronting our country. Their lack
of belief in climate change comes at a time when action is critical to
mitigating climate risk. Sadly, the lack of will to address climate
change comes at the expense of front-line workers, such as
firefighters, who battle fires flamed by the effects of climate change
every day.
In my home State of Mississippi, a combination of severe drought
and other conditions resulted in an early and relentless 2023 wildfire
season. In just 4 months, over 1,000 wildfires consumed 16,000 acres. I
thank the Mississippi Forest Commission's wildland firefighters for
battling these fires and saving nearly 2,000 structures.
I am also grateful for all the other wildland firefighters in the
United States who have risked their lives to keep people safe from
these devastating fires. With that, I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses on how to mitigate threats from fire hazards.

Chairman D'Esposito. I am very pleased and thankful to have
such an important panel of witnesses before us today. I ask you
to all please rise and raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you. Please be seated. Let the
record reflect that the witnesses have answered in the
affirmative.
I would now like to formally introduce our very talented
panel of witnesses. Dr. Lori Moore-Merrell was appointed by
President Biden as the U.S. Fire Administrator on October 25,
2021, and oversees the United States Fire Administration's
mission to strengthen fire services, emergency medical
services, and stakeholders as they prepare for, prevent,
mitigate, and respond to all hazards. Prior to joining the U.S.
Fire Administration, Dr. Moore-Merrell has over three decades
of experience in researching and working in the fire service
and in emergency management and response, including founding
the International Public Safety Data Institute.
Chief Dan Flynn was appointed chief fire marshal of the
FDNY Bureau of Fire Investigation in 2021. In this role, Chief
Flynn oversees approximately 150 fire marshals who are
responsible for investigating the cause and origin of more than
7,000 fires in the city of New York each year, as well as
arresting those who commit arson and other crimes in the city
of New York. Chief Flynn joined the FDNY in 2005 and prior to
that served as a police officer with the NYPD.
Mr. Stephen Kerber is vice president and executive director
of the Underwriters Laboratories' Fire Safety Research
Institute, where he leads a fire safety research team dedicated
to addressing the world's unresolved fire safety risks to
prevent future fire fatalities, injuries, and loss. Mr. Kerber
is also a 13-year veteran of the fire service and served as
deputy chief at the College Park Fire Department in Prince
George's County, Maryland.
Chief John Butler serves as International Association of
Fire Chiefs president and board chair, as well as the chief of
the Fairfax County Fire and Rescue Department. Not only has
Chief Butler served in the fire service, but he is also a
retired U.S. Marine with 20 years of active and reserve
service, including two combat tours. Sir, thank you for your
service.
I thank the witnesses for being here today. Again, thank
you all for the work that you do in keeping this country safe.
I now recognize Dr. Moore-Merrell for 5 minutes to
summarize her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF LORI MOORE-MERRELL, U.S. FIRE
ADMINISTRATOR, U.S. FIRE ADMINISTRATION (USFA)

Ms. Moore-Merrell. Let me turn on the mic and try that
again. Good morning, again, Chair D'Esposito and Ranking Member
Carter. Thank you both for your well-prepared, well-informed
opening statements.
To the Members of the subcommittee, my name is Lori Moore-
Merrell, and I serve as the United States Fire Administrator in
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. I thank you for the
opportunity to testify today and to discuss the continuous and
evolving threats of fire to the Nation.
The USFA's mission, as you've noted, is to support and
strengthen the fire and emergency medical services to prevent,
mitigate, prepare for, and respond to all hazards. Since 1974,
the USFA has led national efforts to reduce the impacts of fire
and disasters on our communities through education, advocating
for building codes and standards, conducting data collection
research, and providing subject-matter expertise for Fire Act
grants, and there is more to do.
Millions of Americans witness first-hand how fire
continuously poses a substantial risk across the United States.
Fire is a public health and public safety problem of great
proportion, and firefighting remains one of the Nation's most
hazardous professions. On average, there are more than 1.2
million structure fires, 3,000 deaths and injuries, scores of
injuries and displacements annually from fires.
These impacts are further compounded by poor implementation
and enforcement of our national building codes and standards
and the fire risk associated with evolving technology that
makes fires more intense and more destructive. These challenges
pose heightened risk to the public and to first responders who
safeguard our communities, and the challenge continues to
evolve.
Lithium-ion batteries, as you've noted, are found
everywhere in common everyday devices; battery-powered,
everyday items such as cell phones, computers, e-bikes, e-
scooters, and, of course, electric vehicles. Fire risks from
these devices occur when this ordinarily stable
electromechanical system is destabilized and the batteries
begin damaged--become damaged, used, stored, or charged
incorrectly, or when they've had manufacturing defects, all
which can cause a phenomenon we know as thermal runaway.
Thermal runaway typically occurs when damaged battery cells
experience uncontrolled increases in temperature and pressure,
often leading to fire. These batteries are changing the fire
risk environment for us across America. In a traditional fire,
it typically takes about 3 minutes for a room to become
engulfed, but now, with the increased prevalence of lithium-ion
batteries, in fires where these devices are involved, there is
often only 15 seconds from the first sign of smoke to thermal
runaway and explosion, with windows blown out and fire burning
in homes, apartments, and businesses.
These rapid changes in fire dynamics lead to shorter escape
times and shorter times to structural collapse, often bringing
unknown hazards to firefighters. USFA priorities in this regard
include determining the risk to the public and firefighter
health from lithium-ion battery incidents, conducting consumer
education campaigns about those risks, and advocating for
necessary research to inform these risks as they evolve.
As you noted, the National Fire Academy is also increasing
our training curriculum in order to include lithium-ion
incident scene safety and suppression tactics in our
increasing, existing courses.
Moving to another threat to firefighters, namely their on-
the-job exposure to the products of combustion, diesel exhaust,
building materials, asbestos, chemicals, and ultraviolet
radiation, and certain PFAS chemicals. PFAS and other toxicants
often lead to wide-ranging negative health impacts for
firefighters, including cancer, heart disease, as well as sleep
and reproductive disorders. To address these exposures, the
Protecting Firefighters from Adverse Substances Act, or the
PFAS Act, directs the FEMA administrator, through the USFA, to
make available curriculum designed to reduce and eliminate
these exposures, prevent the release of PFAS in the
environment, and educate firefighters and emergency response
personnel on PFAS alternatives, creating a public repository of
tools and best practices to reduce, limit, and prevent the
release to exposure of PFAS. USFA is actively working on these
requirements.
Across the board the USFA is seeking new ways to address
these evolving challenges by improving how we conduct, analyze,
collect, and report relevant information in a timely manner.
Our legacy National Fire Incident reporting system data are
inadequate to do so. So the USFA is working with the Department
of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate to
develop a new, modern, cloud-based data capture system that
will be known as NERIS, the National Emergency Response
Information System, and will ensure that USFA and the fire
service at large will ensure that we have the interoperable,
secure information to better inform issues discussed today and
those that arise in the future.
As we consider these challenges ahead, such as those posed
by the prevalence of structure fires, wildfires in our
communities, the increasing risk of emerging technology, and
these forever chemicals, the USFA looks forward to working with
our firefighting partners and with the Members of this
committee to build a fire-safe Nation.
Thank you again for the opportunity to talk with you, and I
look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Moore-Merrell follows:]

Prepared Statement of Lori Moore-Merrell

February 15, 2024

Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and Members of the
subcommittee: My name is Lori Moore-Merrell and I serve as the
administrator of the United States Fire Administration (USFA) within
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today and to discuss the continuous and evolving
fire threats to the Nation.
The USFA's mission is to support and strengthen fire and emergency
medical services to prevent, mitigate, prepare for, and respond to all
hazards. Since 1974, the USFA has led national efforts to reduce
impacts of fire and other disasters in our communities through
education, promoting building codes and standards, fire safety
advocacy, data collection, research, and grants--yet there is much more
to do.
Millions of Americans witness first-hand how fire continues to pose
a substantial risk across the United States. Fire is a public health
and safety problem of great proportions, and firefighting remains one
of the Nation's most hazardous professions. On average there are more
than 1.2 million structure fires, nearly 3,000 deaths, thousands of
injuries, and scores of individuals displaced annually from fires.
Although disasters such as fires can affect everyone, fires can also
exacerbate pre-existing challenges in underserved communities across
the country. These impacts are further compounded by poor
implementation and enforcement of national building codes and fire
risks associated with technology that make fires more common, more
intense, and more destructive.
These challenges pose heightened risks to the public and to first
responders who safeguard our communities, and the challenge continues
to evolve. For example, emerging technologies like Lithium-ion (Li-ion)
powered devices and harmful chemicals including polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) introduce new and continued risks to our communities
and firefighters.

emerging technology

Li-ion batteries are a type of rechargeable battery that contain
numerous Li cells. This ordinarily stable electrochemical system
provides stored electrical energy, but mechanical, electrical, and
thermal abuse and manufacturing defects can destabilize the system and
cause thermal runaway. Thermal runaway typically occurs when damaged
cells experience uncontrolled increases in temperature and pressure.\1\
Thermal runaways can rapidly produce extremely high temperatures in a
chain of chemical reactions, and this can induce thermal runaway to
propagate to adjacent cells in a battery pack. In addition to heat, Li-
ion cells produce flammable gases during thermal runaway that drive Li-
ion fires and explosion hazards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Safety Risks to Emergency Responders from Lithium-Ion Battery
Fires in Electric Vehicles. National Transportation Safety Board.
November 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Li-ion batteries are found nearly everywhere. These batteries power
everyday items such as cell phones and computers and they are found in
e-bikes, e-scooters, and electric vehicles. Li-ion battery energy
storage systems are increasingly prevalent at outdoor installations
supporting utility operations and installations are expected outside
commercial structures and within residences.
While Li-ion batteries are an attractive power option, fire risk
increases when they are damaged or used, stored, or charged
incorrectly. Combined with what we know of their complex fire risk,
their recurring presence requires the fire service to turn research and
data into operational considerations quickly.
Li-ion batteries and emerging alternatives constitute a significant
component of the drive to reduce emissions world-wide. They are part of
a complex global ecosystem of multinational agreements and
organizations, geopolitical security questions, and finite natural
resources. While a daunting task, the fire service has a central and
critical role in ensuring policy decisions address fire safety risks.
Li-ion batteries bring complex operational challenges. Firefighters
must consider the presence of Li-ion batteries in all operations,
including a risk of faster flashover rates and increased temperatures.
Current research shows that Li-ion batteries present four hazard
scenarios for firefighters: flammable gas release, flaming, vented
deflagrations, and explosions.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Science of Fire and Explosion Hazards from Lithium-Ion
Batteries. UL/Fire Safety Research Institute (FSRI). https://fsri.org/
lithium-ion-battery-guide.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These batteries are changing the fire risk environment. In a
``traditional'' fire it typically takes about 3 minutes or more for a
room to be engulfed but now--with the increased prevalence of Li-ion
batteries--there is often only 15 seconds from the first sign of smoke
to thermal runaway and explosion, with windows being blown out and fire
burning in homes, apartments, and businesses. These rapid changes in
fire dynamics lead to shorter escape times, shorter time to collapse,
and other new and unknown hazards for everyday consumers and for
firefighters.
Li-ion batteries also present unusual response challenges. While
Li-ion batteries are engineered to be safe, the nature of these devices
means they may continue to hold a charge after being damaged, even if
fully submerged in water. This phenomenon is known as stranded
energy.\3\ Therefore, firefighters should always consider whether
engineered safety systems are nonfunctional. Li-ion battery fires also
can require personnel and water resources far exceeding normal
expectations, thereby stressing a department's ability to maintain
resources for other emergencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Safety Risks to Emergency Responders from Lithium-Ion Battery
Fires in Electric Vehicles. National Transportation Safety Board.
November 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While our communities are generally aware of risks associated with
their ordinarily benign devices, it is important for the fire service
to develop and deploy fire safety messaging regarding safe usage,
storage, and charging of Li-ion batteries and their unique risks. As
policy decisions are made regarding what can be sold in U.S. markets,
the fire service must play a role in discussing the safety of these
items, with a specific focus on components directly affecting the fire
safety of U.S. communities.
Although research is being conducted to better understand hazards
associated with Li-ion batteries and means for mitigation, more
research is needed to understand the new and complex hazards Li-ion
batteries can present (including exposure to toxic chemicals these
batteries release), and to provide firefighters with data and
information to inform operational procedures.
Driven by an urgency to meet these risks head-on and save lives, in
coordination with the leadership of national fire service
organizations, the USFA recently held the second national summit in 2
years, on fire prevention and control. Together, we assessed the fire
problem and challenges faced by firefighters in the United States
expanding our 2023 national strategy to address emerging tech. This
strategy includes plans to lead and inform discussion on the fire
safety of Li-ion batteries and other alternative energy sources within
our communities, at all levels of government, and with industry
partners utilizing the following priorities:

Priority 1: Determine risk to the public and firefighter
health from lithium-ion battery incidents.

Priority 2: Conduct a consumer education campaign.

Priority 3: Conduct necessary research to inform priorities
and fire service response organizations in collaboration with
our national labs, research institutes, and State and local
partners.

pfas and firefighter cancer

PFAS and other toxicants disrupt an individual's fundamental
physiology, leading to wide-ranging negative health impacts for
firefighters, including cancer and heart disease, as well as sleep and
reproductive issues.
Certain PFAS are known to be carcinogenic, and degrade very slowly,
earning the label ``forever chemicals.'' PFAS are often found in a
firefighter's blood, their firehouses, some firefighting foams, and
bunker gear. Next-generation PFAS-free personal protective equipment,
along with science and risk-based mitigation programs, can lessen these
risks. Firefighters are also exposed to products of combustion, diesel
exhaust, building materials, asbestos, chemicals, and ultraviolet
radiation.

usfa actions--priorities

The 2022 Fire Prevention and Control Summit was the beginning of a
comprehensive and strategic approach to addressing impacts of fire on
the Nation and PFAS as contributing factors to firefighter cancer. The
2023 Summit added fire risks from emerging technology to the National
Fire Service Strategy.
As we look to the future, we need data to inform policy and
regulation. We must continue our partnerships across the whole-of-fire
services, across local, State, and Federal Governments, our research
partners, our non-profit partners, and the industries in the electric
vehicle space to determine appropriate regulations to stop deadly
tragic events from occurring. Events like those in New York City since
2021 where e-bikes with damaged batteries were left to charge overnight
and placed in hallways and doors--trapping people inside a burning
apartment. Or incidents where people buy aftermarket chargers on-line--
because they are less expensive--leaving battery cells to overcharge,
which leads to thermal runaway and fire. New York has pushed forward on
regulation of aftermarket chargers because of lessons learned from
these incidents. It is our hope that the rest of the Nation takes heed
and follows suit.
USFA is seeking new ways to address evolving challenges by
improving how we collect, analyze, and report relevant information in a
timely manner. Legacy National Fire Incident Reporting System (NFIRS)
data is inadequate; therefore, USFA is working with the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) Science and Technology Directorate to develop a
modern cloud-based data capture system and a streamlined data standard
for interoperability and maximum efficiency. The new platform will be
known as NERIS (National Emergency Response Information System) and
will ensure the USFA and the fire service at-large will have access to
secure, interoperable live data that contains outputs from the most
authoritative sources. Data scientists and engineers can leverage data
from this platform to conduct research and disseminate reports to both
the fire service and decision makers at all levels of government.
Additionally, the National Fire Academy (NFA) is increasing its
training curriculum to include lithium-ion incident scene safety and
fire suppression tactics in existing courses. Major insights were
gained from Li-ion batteries found in debris from wildfires in Lahaina
on Maui. FEMA and USFA met with the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) to evaluate a process for de-energizing cells with sustained
energy after the fire. Once EPA thoroughly documents the cell de-
energization, crushing, and packaging process, the USFA will develop
firefighter training curriculum to include this information. NFA
curriculum also incorporates training and education for the full
spectrum of community risk reduction, and the NFA offers training in
multiple mediums to ensure broad access. In fiscal year 2023, the NFA
delivered training to over 70,000 students.
Regarding PFAS, the ``Protecting Firefighters from Adverse
Substances Act'' (Pub. L. No. 117-248) (PFAS Act) directs the FEMA
administrator (through USFA) to develop guidance for firefighters and
other emergency response personnel on best practices to protect them
from exposure to PFAS and to limit and prevent release of PFAS into the
environment. Section 2 of the PFAS Act, requires DHS in consultation
with the EPA, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National
Institute for Occupational Safety & Health (NIOSH), and the heads of
other relevant agencies, to:
1. Develop and publish guidance for firefighters on training,
education programs, and best practices;
2. Make available a curriculum designed to reduce and eliminate
exposure, prevent release of PFAS into the environment, and
educate firefighters and emergency response personnel on PFAS
alternatives; and
3. Create a public repository on tools and best practices to
reduce, limit, an prevent the release of and exposure to PFAS.
USFA is actively working on these requirements.
As we look to the challenges ahead, such as those posed by the
prevalence of structure fires, the increasing risks of emerging
technology, and forever chemicals, USFA looks forward to working with
both our firefighting partners and the Members of this committee to
build a fire-safe and more resilient Nation. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify. I look forward to answering your questions.

Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you, Doctor.
I now recognize Chief Flynn for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL E. FLYNN, CHIEF FIRE MARSHAL,
FIRE DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK

Chief Flynn. Good morning, Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking
Member Carter, and the Members of the Subcommittee on Emergency
Management and Technology. As chief fire marshal of the New
York City Fire Department, I want to express gratitude to the
Members of the subcommittee for holding today's hearing and to
Chairman D'Esposito for inviting me to discuss the dangers of
fires involving lithium-ion batteries in micromobility devices.
In 2023, New York City experienced 268 fires caused by
these batteries in e-bikes, e-scooters, and other micromobility
devices. As a result, 150 people were injured and 18 people
were killed. These staggering numbers reflect the crisis that
has ballooned over a very short period of time.
We've seen the problem most acutely in New York. The city
has a thriving delivery culture and thousands of delivery
workers and messengers who use e-bikes. Many of the deadliest
fires have been caused by e-devices being kept in residential
homes and apartments. We have begun to see similar issues
coast-to-coast in communities of all sizes. I speak with my
counterparts in fire departments across the country, and many
report the emergence of lithium-ion battery fires and ask for
guidance on how to grapple with these issues.
To grasp the urgency of this problem, it is important to
understand that fires caused by lithium-ion batteries are more
intense and more dangerous than traditional fires. Upon
ignition, unsafe batteries enter a process called thermal
runaway. They undergo a series of explosions, releasing highly
toxic gases and projecting flaming cells that can travel great
distances, increasing the likelihood that the fire will spread.
These fires instantly create severely dangerous conditions,
rendering an escape for anyone nearby significantly
challenging. This is especially true if fires occur at night
when an occupant is sleeping.
Additionally, lithium-ion battery fires require large
volumes of water to suppress and can reignite spontaneously,
making them extremely difficult for firefighters to extinguish.
They also pose uniquely grave dangers for the first responders
who respond to these fires and risk their lives every day to
protect life and property.
One example of the detrimental results of these fires
occurred last November, killing three generations of one family
in one fire. Eighty-one-year-old Albertha West, her son, 58-
year-old Michael West, and her grandson, 33-year-old Jamiyl
West, perished in that deadly fire because an e-bike containing
an uncertified lithium-ion battery erupted in flames.
Unfortunately, these fires continued to plague our city and
our Nation. In my nearly 20-year-career with the fire
department, I would be hard-pressed to identify another
instance in which a new cause of fires originated and in only a
few years became one of the leading causes of fatal fires.
The FDNY has adjusted quickly, creating new operational
procedures for responding, ensuring that devices are fully
under control, and disposing of uncertified batteries and
hazardous materials. We created task forces of inspectors who
proactively inspect bike shops, respond to complaints, and
frequently visit locations most likely to experience problems.
We amended department policies enabling administrative
companies to respond immediately to reports of hazardous
conditions. We also created robust informational campaigns to
educate members of the public about best practices for avoiding
problems with their devices.
Most importantly, we have extensively engaged with our
local, State, and Federal legislators seeking support for new
laws to help curb the effect of these devices. At the Federal
level, New York City respectfully asks Congress to pass H.R.
1797, the Setting Consumer Standards for Lithium-Ion Batteries
Act, which would require the Consumer Product Safety Commission
to issue a mandatory national standard for these devices. This
legislation has bipartisan support and unanimously passed the
House Energy and Commerce Committee, which is fitting as these
deadly fires do not discriminate. We see them in large cities
and small rural areas, in red and blue States alike. Americans
need the protection of Congress, and we hope that this bill is
called to an early vote on the House floor.
As we look forward, the experience of lithium-ion batteries
serves as a critical reminder of the importance of having
public safety entities and first responders at the table when
policy is made. Electrification technology is exciting, and
there is no shortage of innovators striving to find better
solutions. However, it is essential that we implement new
technology in concert with an appropriate focus on public
safety.
I thank you for your attention to this issue. I'm
appreciative of the work that you are doing to pass this
important legislation, and I know that I share the sentiment
with the brave members of the FDNY and grateful firefighters
and emergency responders across the country. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Chief Flynn follows:]

Prepared Statement of Daniel E. Flynn

February 15, 2024

Good morning, Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and the
Members of the subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology.
As chief fire marshal of the New York City Fire Department
(``FDNY''), I want to express gratitude to the Members of the
subcommittee for holding today's hearing and to Chairman D'Esposito for
inviting me to discuss the dangers of fires involving lithium-ion
batteries in micromobility devices. In 2023, New York City experienced
268 fires caused by these batteries in e-bikes, e-scooters, and other
micromobility devices. As a result, 150 people were injured and 18
people were killed. These staggering numbers reflect a crisis that has
ballooned over a very short period. We've seen this problem most
acutely in New York. The city has a thriving delivery culture and
thousands of delivery workers and messengers who use e-bikes. Many of
the deadliest fires have been caused by e-devices being kept in
residential homes and apartments. We have begun to see similar issues
coast to coast, in communities of all sizes. I speak with counterparts
in fire departments across the country and many report the emergence of
lithium-ion battery fires and ask for guidance on how to grapple with
the issue.
To grasp the urgency of this problem, it's important to understand
that fires caused by lithium-ion batteries are more intense and more
dangerous than traditional, smoldering fires. Upon ignition, unsafe
batteries enter a process called thermal runaway. They undergo a series
of explosions, releasing highly toxic gasses, and projecting flaming
cells that can travel great distances, increasing the likelihood that
the fire will spread. These fires instantly create severely dangerous
conditions, rendering escape for anyone nearby significantly
challenging. This is especially true if a fire occurs at night when an
occupant is sleeping.
Additionally, lithium-ion battery fires require large volumes of
water to suppress and can reignite spontaneously, making them extremely
difficult for firefighters to extinguish. They also pose uniquely grave
dangers for the first responders who respond to these fires and risk
their lives every day to protect life and property. One example of the
detrimental results of these fires occurred last November, killing
three generations of a family in one fire. Eighty-one-year-old Albertha
West, her son, 58-year-old Michael West, and her grandson, 33-year-old
Jamil West perished in that deadly fire because an e-bike containing an
uncertified lithium-ion battery erupted in flames. Unfortunately, these
fires continue to plague our city and Nation.
In my nearly 20-year career, I would be hard-pressed to identify
another instance in which a new cause of fires originated and, in only
a few years, became one of the leading causes of fatal fires. The FDNY
has adjusted quickly, creating new operational procedures for
responding, ensuring that the devices are fully under control, and
disposing of uncertified batteries and hazardous materials. We created
task forces of inspectors who proactively inspect bike shops, respond
to complaints, and frequently visit locations most likely to experience
problems. We amended department policies, enabling administrative
companies to respond immediately to reports of hazardous conditions. We
also created robust informational campaigns to educate members of the
public about best practices for avoiding problems with their devices.
Most importantly, we extensively engaged with our local, State, and
Federal legislators, seeking support for new laws to help curb the
deadly effects of these devices.
At the Federal level, New York City respectfully asks Congress to
pass H.R. 1797, the Setting Consumer Standards for Lithium-Ion
Batteries Act, which would require the Consumer Product Safety
Commission to issue a mandatory National standard for these devices.
This legislation has bipartisan support and unanimously passed the
House Energy and Commerce committee, which is fitting, as these deadly
fires do not discriminate: we see them in large cities and small rural
areas, in red and blue States alike. Americans need of the protection
of Congress, and we hope that this bill is called to an early vote on
the House floor.
As we look forward, the experience of lithium-ion batteries serves
as a critical reminder of the importance of having public safety
entities and first responders at the table when policy is made.
Electrification technology is exciting, and there is no shortage of
innovators striving to find better solutions. However, it is essential
that we implement new technology in concert with an appropriate focus
on public safety.
I thank you for your attention to this issue. I am appreciative of
the work that you are doing to pass this important legislation, and I
know that I share that sentiment with the brave members of the FDNY and
grateful firefighters and emergency responders across the country.

Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you very much, Chief.
I now recognize Mr. Kerber for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN KERBER,  VICE PRESIDENT & EXEC-
UTIVE DIRECTOR, FIRE SAFETY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, UN-
DERWRITERS LABORATORIES INC.

Mr. Kerber. Good morning, Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking
Member Carter, and other Members of the subcommittee.
Since January 1, over 375 Americans have died in home
fires, including 50 children, mostly under the age of 5.
Americans should feel the safest in their homes, but that's
simply not the case. FSRI research shows that we have the least
amount of time ever to escape as fires spread faster, due in
part to the synthetic furnishings and finishes around us. We
have seen a 25 percent rise in fire deaths in this country
since 2012, a disturbing trend that's going to be a challenge
to reverse.
The fuels we bring inside our homes are increasingly
complex. Though innovative, lithium-ion batteries, for example,
as you've heard, can overheat, catch fire, emit toxic smoke,
and create explosive environments. From the first sign of a
problem, there could be less than a minute to escape a battery
fire. We must act now to address these escalating fire dangers.
Lithium-ion batteries are increasing and have resulted in
injuries, fatalities, and property loss. If damaged or misused,
a lithium-ion battery can transition from smoking to explosive
fire growth within a matter of seconds. Even when not the
initial cause of the fire, lithium-ion battery involvement can
increase the intensity and magnitude of any incident.
Over a thousand documented incidents have occurred in the
United States since 2021. The real number is likely
underreported because lithium-ion batteries are not well-
captured by the current national fire incident reporting
system.
FSRI is investigating multiple facets of lithium-ion
battery fires to close knowledge gaps around topics like home
energy storage systems, e-mobility fire hazards, and electric
vehicle fires. Further study will help us understand the fire
dynamics, characterize risks, and advance emergency response
protocols around lithium-ion batteries. But technology is
outpacing us and we can't do it alone. The Government must
collaborate with fire service stakeholders to direct research
toward top safety priorities and provide increased funding to
improve battery safety.
As the use of lithium-ion batteries grows, emergency calls
will expose first responders to explosive events and toxic
emissions beyond traditional experience. Supporting the safety
of fire service personnel requires governmental and
nongovernmental partners to discover effective solutions and
funding for research to equip departments with advanced tactics
for battery incidents, protective equipment designed to shield
against lithium-ion battery exposure risks, critical equipment
otherwise unavailable due to budgetary constraints. An
immediate way that we can support these asks is the
reauthorization of programs like the Assistance to Firefighters
grant program and the Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency
Response, or SAFER, program. We also need to reauthorize the
U.S. Fire Administration, and that's incredibly important for
us to handle this topic and move forward.
Additionally, laws and regulations should integrate current
codes and standards. To remain effective, current codes and
standards must not be cherry-picked outside of the voluntary
consensus process, and they need to incorporate the latest fire
safety research. This research shows us that fire sprinklers
are effective in protecting lives with the changes we see in
the fire environment, including lithium-ion batteries.
The Government must work with fire service stakeholders to
educate the public on lithium-ion battery fire safety practices
and empower consumer regulators on product safety, including
setting mandatory standards for lithium-ion batteries and e-
mobility devices and closing outdated loopholes that enable
uncertified devices to infiltrate our communities. Passing H.R.
1797, the Setting Consumer Standards for Lithium-Ion Batteries
Act is a very important next step.
As innovations transform our world, public safety must
become a top priority. We must acknowledge the need for
research on risks, resources for first responders, public
awareness, codes and standards, and governance so lithium-ion
batteries can fulfill their purpose responsibly. By acting now
on these priorities, we can address critical issues and create
a safer world even as it grows more complex. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kerber follows:]

Prepared Statement of Stephen Kerber

February 15, 2024

introduction

Good morning, Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and other
Members of the subcommittee. I am Steve Kerber, executive director of
the Fire Safety Research Institute, part of UL Research Institutes. The
Fire Safety Research Institute (FSRI) advances fire safety knowledge to
address the world's unresolved fire safety risks and emerging dangers.
Along with our colleagues in the Electrochemical Safety Research
Institute (ESRI), we take on the safety challenges associated with
energy technologies. As part of UL Research Institutes, we are
committed to sharing our safety insights with everyone to advance UL's
public safety mission of providing safe living and working environments
for people everywhere. Personally, I have been studying fire safety,
with a focus on firefighter health and safety for more than 20 years. I
am a third-generation volunteer firefighter having served more than a
decade in the College Park Fire Department in Prince George's County,
Maryland.

fire is fast--and getting faster

So far this year, just 6 weeks in (1/1-2/9), we have lost more than
348 people in home fires. At least 50 of those deaths were children,
many under the age of 5. All these deaths are preventable. Americans
should be the safest in their homes, but that is simply not the case
when it comes to fire safety. Research conducted by FSRI has shown
that, during a fire today, you have the least amount of time to safely
exit your home than at any time in history.
This is partially because of the synthetic materials used in our
furnishings and interior finishes today. It is possible that a fire
starting in a bedroom or living room could go from a small flame to
flashover--which is when the room becomes fully engulfed with fire--in
just 3 to 5 minutes. The heat and smoke generated by flashover make
conditions unsurvivable in the room where the fire starts and in
adjacent rooms or hallways that are open to the fire room. This has
contributed to fire deaths steadily increasing over the last decade in
the United States. USFA data estimates this increase to be almost 25
percent since 2012.
The other items, or the fuels, that we bring inside our homes
continue to change as well--lithium-ion batteries for example. Lithium-
ion batteries have brought essential innovation to our vehicles, our
grids, our communities, and everyday products that we rely on. And they
are being deployed at a massive scale to drive a reduction in emissions
and to improve the resilience of our national electrical grid. But they
can overheat, catch fire, and cause explosions with disturbing
intensity while emitting toxic smoke. From the first sign of a problem,
there could be less than a minute to escape a battery fire.
Fire keeps getting faster as most of the Nation's fire departments
are ill-equipped to face the threats lithium-ion battery fires pose.
That's why we must act now to address escalating fire dangers posed by
modern materials and new technologies.

research is essential

Despite on-going safety improvements such as smoke alarms and
sprinklers, fires involving lithium-ion battery-powered products are
increasing at an alarming rate and have resulted in injuries,
fatalities, and property loss. Even when the initial cause of a fire is
not the lithium-ion device, the involvement of lithium-ion batteries
can increase the intensity and magnitude of any incident. FSRI is
honored to support the U.S. Fire Administration and our Fire Service
One Voice partners by developing actionable insights through
collaborative research on this subject; however, additional research is
imperative to reverse the mounting risks presented by this technology.
Experiments and fire investigations have shown that, if damaged or
misused, a lithium-ion battery can transition from smoking to explosive
fire growth within a matter of seconds. In 2022, a high-profile fire in
New York involving lithium-ion batteries injured almost 40 people. The
fire was one of hundreds of documented incidents caused by lithium-ion
batteries in the United States since 2021. The actual number is likely
higher because lithium-ion battery fires are not yet captured by the
national fire incident reporting system. These incidents drive the need
to better understand the physical phenomena of thermal runaway and the
associated hazards.
As Dr. Moore-Merrell described, thermal runaway is one of the
primary risks related to lithium-ion batteries. It is a phenomenon in
which the lithium-ion cell enters an uncontrollable, self-heating
state. We know through our research that thermal runaway can occur
undetected until the situation becomes dire and there is an immediate
danger of fire. This ultimately translates into shorter escape times
and unknown hazards for consumers and first responders.
FSRI is actively investigating multiple facets of battery fires,
including:

Fire service considerations with lithium-ion battery Energy
Storage Systems (ESS).\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Fire service considerations with lithium-ion battery ESS
(https://training.fsri.org/course/104/fire-service-considerations-with-
lithium-ion-battery-energy-storage-systems).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The potential impacts when lithium-ion battery storage
systems fail in homes.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Impact of Batteries on Fire Dynamics (https://fsri.org/
research/impact-batteries-fire-dynamics).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The hazards posed when e-mobility devices (such as e-bikes
and scooters) go into thermal runaway.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Fire Safety Hazards of Lithium-Ion Battery Powered e-Mobility
Devices (https://fsri.org/research/examining-fire-safety-hazards-
lithium-ion-battery-powered-emobility-devices-homes).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The fire dynamics and suppression challenges of electric
vehicle fires.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Fire Safety of Batteries and Electric Vehicles (https://
fsri.org/research/fire-safety-batteries-and-electric-vehicles).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While this research is already under way, knowledge gaps remain in
determining how hazards develop during lithium-ion battery incidents
and creating strategies to mitigate the associated risks for Americans
and first responders. Further study of materials, construction methods,
and computational tools will improve our understanding of the fire
dynamics in buildings so that building systems can provide increased
protection from lithium-ion battery fires. Experiments focused on
lithium-ion battery incidents will characterize risks and advance
emergency response protocols. We can't do it alone.
The Federal Government must collaborate with fire service
stakeholders to direct lithium-ion battery research efforts toward the
highest-priority safety needs. Increased Federal funding is imperative
to drive research in improving battery safety as technologies advance,
ensuring safe functionality of battery systems across electric
vehicles, energy storage and other uses of lithium-ion batteries, and
equipping fire departments to respond to battery incidents through
refined tactics, specialized tools, and reduced chemical exposure risk.
Targeted research initiatives and funding in these domains will provide
vital progress toward comprehensive lithium-ion battery safety for both
the public and first responders.

safeguarding fire responders is fundamental

Lithium-ion batteries present a dynamic challenge to the fire and
emergency services. As use of these devices accelerates through
communities, emergency responses will expose first responders to
explosive thermal events and toxic emissions beyond traditional
protocols. Bravery alone cannot sufficiently protect our fire service.
We must have the support of the Nation's leaders to ensure the safety
of America's communities and fire service personnel. Addressing these
challenges will require a multi-faceted process working with a variety
of partners (Governmental and non-Governmental) across many issue
areas.
Congress must urgently deliver specialized resources that match the
novel threats proliferating. This includes funding:

Targeted research to equip departments with advanced tactics
for battery incidents and integrating the latest science into
customized training.

Modern protective equipment and tools designed specifically
to shield against exposure risks distinct to lithium-ion
battery chemistry and future chemistries.

Additional personal protective equipment and tools otherwise
out of budgetary reach for resource-starved departments.
It is within your power to direct vital funding so first responders
have every chance to prevail over the ever-evolving risks confronting
communities across this country. Renewing support for programs like the
Assistance to Firefighters Grant (AFG) and Staffing for Adequate Fire
and Emergency Response (SAFER) grant programs--as well as the U.S. Fire
Administration--will provide access and accountability Nation-wide. The
safety of Americans begins with securing the safety of our emergency
services.

education is critical

Both public awareness and first responder training are insufficient
regarding lithium-ion battery hazards. Most Americans do not realize
the fire risks the ubiquitous devices present if damaged or
overcharged. And most fire teams lack the specific protocols needed
when battery storage or electric vehicle fire occur.
Leaders must work with fire service stakeholders to prioritize
national outreach to address these knowledge gaps. Impactful education
includes:

Mass campaigns conveying battery fire prevention through
departments uniquely positioned to connect local
constituencies.

Turnkey campaigns like FSRI's Take C.H.A.R.G.E. of Battery
Safety \5\ initiative designed to promote best practice
consumer behaviors and potentially life-saving emergency
planning through memorable guidelines.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Take C.H.A.R.G.E. of Battery Safety (https://
batteryfiresafety.org; https://vimeo.com/884565314).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Accessible training materials for fire service instruction
covering lithium-ion fire dynamics distinct from
``traditional'' fires and tailored suppression methods that
integrate containment, suppression, scene turnover
requirements, PPE needs, disposal, and more.
Effective messaging requires distilling cutting-edge research for
public comprehension and fire service training customization. We urge
officials at all jurisdictional levels to commit resources allowing
departments to inform, instruct, and intervene against preventable
high-risk battery incidents in the communities they serve. Hazard
mitigation begins with awareness.

governance is essential

Governance mechanisms around safety standards, trade enforcement
measures, and legislative initiatives remain disconnected and outpaced
by swiftly-evolving technologies. Holistic implementation and
enforcement of current codes and standards at Federal, State, and local
levels will provide the foundation required to properly ensure the fire
and life safety ecosystem, especially as codes and standards continue
to be updated in response to new and evolving knowledge about
technologies, including lithium-ion batteries.
Commercial readiness should never undermine public safeguards. The
Federal Government must look to existing codes and standards
organizations like UL Standards & Engagement, the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA), and the International Code Council (ICC)
to ensure that laws and regulations consider the work already being
done in this space. Applicable codes and standards \6\ exist; however,
to remain effective, they must constantly integrate manufacturer
insights with the latest fire safety research on battery hazards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ For e-mobility, the applicable standards are: UL 2054,
Household and Commercial Batteries; UL 2272, Electrical Systems for
Personal E-Mobility Devices; UL 2849, Electrical Systems for eBikes; UL
2850, Outline of Investigation for Electrical Systems for Electric
Scooters and Motorcycles; UL 2271, Batteries for Use in Light Electric
Vehicle (LEV) Applications; UL 2580, Batteries for Use in Electric
Vehicles.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Federal Government must work with fire service stakeholders to
empower consumer regulators with product safety mandates. H.R. 1797/S.
1008, the Setting Consumer Standards for Lithium-Ion Batteries Act,
would require the Consumer Product Safety Commission to set a mandatory
safety standard for lithium-ion batteries in micro-mobility devices.
Closing outdated loopholes that enable uncertified devices into
communities is also paramount.
With coordinated governance, the promise of battery technologies
can properly and safely accelerate. By infusing regulation with current
competence, no innovation outpaces our ability to integrate it
responsibly. We urge officials at all levels to partner with
researchers and industry in establishing safety protocols.

conclusion

Public safety must become the top priority as innovations central
to our 21st Century lifestyles introduce increasing fire hazards.
Technologies already promising to transform our vehicles, grids, and
communities are now threatening them absent a new paradigm centered on
safety.
But with deliberate governance, robust safety standards, and
coordinated consumer education, lithium-ion batteries can fulfill their
highest purpose responsibly. Implementing the necessary safeguards
begins by acknowledging the urgent need for modern research, first
responder resources, and public awareness reflective of contemporary
risks.
Through immediate action centered on current codes, centralized
funding, and community empowerment against preventable risks, we will
pass to the next generation safer homes, infrastructure, and the
emergency services relied upon to be ever-vigilant against hazards both
known and still obscure.
Thank you again for the opportunity to share my perspective and I
am happy to help this committee address these critical issues.

resources

Other important standards and codes include:

UL 9540, Standard for Safety of Energy Storage Systems and
Equipment

NFPA 1, Fire Code

NFPA 70, National Electrical Code

NFPA 855, Standard for ESS and Lithium Battery Storage
Safety

International Fire Code, ICC

International Residential Code, ICC.

Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you very much, Mr. Kerber.
I now recognize Chief Butler for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF  FIRE CHIEF JOHN S. BUTLER,  PRESIDENT
AND BOARD CHAIR, INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FIRE
CHIEFS

Chief Butler. Good morning, Chairman D'Esposito. Let me
start over. Good morning, Chairman D'Esposito and Ranking
Member Carter. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss lithium-
ion batteries and other threats to fire safety.
The most important sentence I can summarize with is
America's fire service is approximately 5 years behind the
curve in this problem. We request Federal assistance to catch
up.
Lithium-ion batteries can provide an alternate source of
energy to Americans. However, they present fire safety
challenges when not used or disposed of properly. A fire
involving a lithium-ion battery requires a longer response
time.
In addition, the fire department must package the damaged
device and prepare it for transportation. The response and
mitigation of these incidents requires new training for fire
departments. Also, it can create a burden on fire department
staffing and resources, as you mentioned earlier, with 7 hours
on a fire.
We are not just challenged in the EV and mobility space
with completed products. Local fire departments also must
respond to incidents in warehouses, manufacturing, and
recycling facilities, as we've seen. We also must respond to
incidents involving the transportation of lithium-ion batteries
by road, rail, and waterways.
The battery is not the lone concern. The charging
components, use of third-party replacement lithium-ion
batteries and large home energy storage systems, also poses
challenges. Unfortunately, the increase of these batteries in
our society has not led to increased response to capabilities
of the fire service or rapid adoption of current fire and
building codes. We need more help. I would like to thank my
partners at FDNY for their leadership in this effort.
In addition, I note that this problem is not isolated to
one region. It is affecting communities Nation-wide, small
communities, smaller departments other than FDNY and Fairfax
County. For example, in Fairfax County, we had 17 incidents
involving lithium-ion batteries in 2023. They were in a variety
of devices, including vehicles, mobile phones, portable
chargers, and laptop computers.
As the Nation deals with an increase in lithium-ion battery
fires, we need to be able to track and better understand their
occurrences. Currently, the National Fire Service utilizes the
National Fire Incident Reporting System to track fire-related
incidents. However, this system is antiquated and must be
replaced by the National Emergency Response Information System.
We ask Congress to pass H.R. 4090, the Fire Grants and Safety
Act. It would authorize $95 million for the U.S. Fire
Administration through fiscal year 2028. This increase in
funding will allow the USFA to replace NFIRS with the new NERIS
that I spoke of and will allow real-time data collection about
incidents involving lithium-ion batteries Nation-wide.
H.R. 4090 also will allow increased funding for the U.S.
Fire Administration and the National Fire Academy to train
firefighters to respond to fires caused by lithium-ion
batteries and how to safely manage and clean up the incident
scene afterwards. Also, the USFA will be able to fund public
education programs to promote the safe use and disposal of
lithium-ion batteries.
We also urge Congress to pass H.R. 1797, the Setting
Consumer Standards for Lithium-Ion Batteries Act. This
legislation would require the Consumer Product Safety
Commission to issue safety standards on lithium-ion batteries
in micromobility devices. In addition, we ask for support for
efforts to educate States, Tribes, territories, and local
communities about the importance of adopting model codes and
standards.
Thank you for the opportunity to address the challenge of
lithium-ion batteries and other fire safety issues. Congress
can play a role in ensuring the Nation's preparedness by
passing legislation like Setting Consumer Standards for
Lithium-Ion Batteries Act. In addition, it can pass the Fire
Grants and Safety Act. This legislation will allow the USFA to
track lithium-ion batteries, develop firefighter training, and
conduct public education programs.
Finally, we ask that Congress create a grant program to
help local communities and fire departments prepare for
incidents involving lithium-ion batteries. The International
Association of Fire Chiefs looks forward to working with the
committee to ensure the safe adoption of this revolutionary
technology.
Thank you for giving me some time.
[The prepared statement of Chief Butler follows:]

Prepared Statement of John S. Butler

February 15, 2024

Good morning, Chairman D'Esposito and Ranking Member Carter. I am
John S. Butler, fire chief of the Fairfax County (Virginia) Fire and
Rescue Department and president and board chair of the International
Association of Fire Chiefs (IAFC). I appreciate the opportunity today
to discuss lithium-ion batteries and other threats to fire safety.
The IAFC represents the leadership of over 1.1 million firefighters
and emergency responders. IAFC members are the world's leading experts
in firefighting, emergency medical services, terrorism response,
hazardous materials (hazmat) incidents, wildland fire suppression,
natural disasters, search and rescue, and public-safety policy. Since
1873, the IAFC has provided a forum for its members to exchange ideas,
develop best practices, participate in executive training, and discover
diverse products and services available to first responders.
America's fire and emergency service is an all-hazards response
force that is locally situated, staffed, trained, and equipped to
respond to all types of emergencies. There are approximately 1.1
million men and women in the fire and emergency service--consisting of
approximately 300,000 career firefighters and 800,000 volunteer
firefighters--serving in over 30,000 fire departments around the
Nation. They are trained to respond to all hazards ranging from
earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, and floods to acts of terrorism,
hazardous materials incidents, technical rescues, fires, and medical
emergencies. We usually are the first at the scene of a disaster and
the last to leave.

dangers posed by fires from lithium-ion batteries

America's fire and emergency service is approximately 5 years
behind the curve in addressing problems relating to lithium-ion
batteries and we request Federal assistance to catch up. Fires
involving lithium-ion batteries present unique challenges to local fire
departments. As a result, local communities must plan for a number of
complicated factors. For example, the duration of the fires can be
longer: an incident involving an electric vehicle can take 4 hours and
one involving a power storage unit can take approximately 24 hours to
extinguish the fire and complete post-fire mitigation. Firefighters
must not only extinguish the fire. They also have to pack the device
and prepare it for storage to prevent secondary fires. In addition,
fire departments also must plan to decontaminate their gear and address
concerns about the exposure of firefighters to the toxic smoke caused
by a lithium-ion battery fire. All of these characteristics of fires
involving lithium-ion batteries can be a burden for fire departments'
limited staffing and resources.
Thermal runaway occurs in lithium-ion batteries when the individual
cells become destabilized and enter a state of uncontrollable warming.
The reaction is the root cause of the fires we see from lithium-ion
batteries. Often this phenomenon begins with little to no warning,
which can create later complications regarding the removal of any
active lithium-ion batteries from an incident scene. Thermal runaway
typically presents with large amounts of smoke or gas, which is highly
flammable and toxic.
These fires are not just contained to the devices they power. They
can engulf the location of the initial fire, along with the surrounding
dwellings. The risks posed by lithium-ion fires cannot be understated.

the source of fires involving lithium-ion batteries

There is a great chance everyone in this room has some sort of
lithium-ion battery on their person. These power the devices which many
of us rely upon. Without question, lithium-ion batteries are part of
the future of a greener, cleaner society. However, our Nation's fire
and emergency services have been responding to an increased number of
incidents caused by fires involving lithium-ion batteries. Lithium-ion
batteries are used to power electric scooters; electric bikes;
hoverboards; wheelchairs; personal computers; cell phones; landscaping
tools; electronic cigarettes; golf carts; energy storage systems used
to power homes; all-terrain vehicles; electric vehicles (EV);
commercial buses; trucks; and much more.
Our fire service is not just challenged in the EV and mobility
space with completed products. With the rapid increase of cell
manufacturing in the United States, many of our communities are
struggling with new facilities that are part of the rapidly-growing
manufacturing sector. This may be a battery plant; manufacturing
facility; automobile assembly; or even a battery laboratory. Our
firefighters are challenged with not just the buildings, but the
transit of these materials as part of the complete ecosystem. This can
include the safe transport of products by rail, road, and waterways.
The battery is not the lone concern with the operation of many of
these devices. The charging components, use of third-party replacement
lithium-ion batteries, and large home energy storage systems also pose
great concerns. It is also worth noting the growing prevalence of home
energy storage systems that use lithium-ion batteries to power an
entire home. Unfortunately, the increase of these batteries in our
society has not led to increased response capabilities for the fire
service or rapid adoption of current and model fire and building codes.
The fire service is at the initial stages of exploring the best and
safest methods to respond to fires caused by these batteries. Several
things need to happen to make these devices safe for all. We need more
help.

lithium-ion battery fires are a national problem

I would like to thank my partners at the FDNY for their leadership
in this effort. Without a doubt, New York City has experienced a high
number of these fires. Over the last 4 years in New York alone, there
were more than 400 fires related to lithium-ion batteries. These fires
resulted in more than 300 injuries, 12 deaths and damage to more than
320 structures and more than 100 non-structures. As a response to these
fires, the FDNY is one of the most proactive voices calling for the
necessary enactment of laws and regulations to try and remedy this
situation.
Nonetheless, I would like to call attention to how lithium-ion
battery fires are affecting communities all over our Nation.

In Fairfax County (VA), we had 17 incidents involving
lithium-ion batteries in 2023. They were in a variety of
devices including vehicles, mobile phones, portable chargers,
laptop computers, and remote-controlled cars.

In March 2021, the Harrisburg (PA) Bureau of Fire
experienced a line of duty death due to a fire caused by
lithium-ion batteries found in hoverboards.

In March 2023, the Brighton (MI) Area Fire Authority
experienced 3 fires in 1 week, which involved a plug-in hybrid,
a cell phone battery; and a mobility-based device.

On March 2023, a lithium-ion battery from a hoverboard
ignited a basement fire in Lodi, NJ.

During 2023, Houston (TX) experienced more than 60 fires
involving rechargeable lithium-ion batteries. These fires
included lithium-ion batteries in hoverboards, scooters, and
motor vehicles.

Gainesville (FL) experienced several fires due to devices
powered by lithium-ion batteries. In 2023, 2 of these fires
involved surrounding structures and dwellings.

Washington, DC experienced 8 fires in 2023 that were
attributed to lithium-ion batteries. Three of these fires
involved e-bikes and scooters and one involved a hoverboard.

the need for better data on lithium-ion fires

As the Nation deals with an increase in lithium-ion battery fire
incidents, it is important that we can track and better understand
their occurrences. We need to know the answers to questions like ``What
devices cause these incidents? Who are the operators of these devices?
Where are these incidents occurring, and how often?'' These metrics
will help us better understand how and where to allocate resources.
Some representatives of the fire service are tracking this data and
some States, like Florida, are beginning to require their fire
departments to report lithium-ion battery fires. Yet, we still need a
national understanding of the scope of the problem of lithium-ion
fires.
Currently, the national fire and emergency service utilizes the
National Fire Incident Reporting Systems (NFIRS) to track fire-related
incidents. The United States Fire Administration (USFA) is developing a
replacement for NFIRS that will include real-time data on fires. The
IAFC supports the USFA's effort to develop the National Emergency
Response Information System (NERIS) and urges Congress to fully fund
its development. The development of NERIS will give our communities the
necessary tools to track information about incidents involving lithium-
ion batteries. With a better understanding of the scope of the problem,
Congress and the administration will be able to allocate resources to
help local fire departments respond to this growing problem.

the need to develop codes and standards

To prohibit the further entry of faulty lithium-ion batteries into
our communities, model codes and standards must be developed, updated,
and adopted. This will involve collaboration between many stakeholders,
such as the fire service; Federal, State, and local agencies; research
organizations; and manufacturers. There are several ways this can be
achieved:
(1) Look to notable fire service organizations that are leaders in
the code and standard space, such as Underwriters Laboratories
(UL), the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), and the
International Code Council (ICC). The fire and emergency
service needs strong partners that not only work to reduce
these events from happening, but encourage the industry to
develop solutions for post-incident mitigation of a fire where
lithium-ion batteries are involved. Organizations such as UL,
NFPA, and ICC are leading the effort to adapt codes and
standards to adapt to technology using lithium-ion batteries.
Further support of their work will lead to increased safety for
not just consumers, but also first responders, who respond to
lithium-ion battery fires. While we all know the power of using
modern building and fire codes, States and communities also
need support in adopting the most current codes and standards
to address this rapidly-changing industry.
(2) Pass and enact the Setting Consumer Standards for Lithium-Ion
Batteries Act (H.R. 1797/S. 1009). This legislation would
require the Consumer Product Safety Commission to issue safety
standards on lithium-ion batteries in mobility devices. A high
percentage of the fires caused by lithium-ion batteries are in
devices like e-bikes, e-scooters, and hoverboards. With the
increased use of micro-mobility devices powered by lithium-ion
batteries, it is paramount that we set safety standards to
ensure that consumers are not subject to harm. H.R. 1797, as
amended, advanced out of the House Energy and Commerce
Committee by a total of 42-0. I urge the full House of
Representatives to swiftly consider this legislation and pass
it without delay. In the mean time, I urge the Senate Committee
on Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee to begin
consideration of S. 1009. The sooner Congress acts, the faster
we can start to prevent unsafe lithium-ion batteries from being
on America's streets and in American homes.

the need for more training, resources, and increased public education

Fire departments should work with organizations like the UL's Fire
Safety Research Institute, the New York City Fire Department (FDNY),
the USFA, and the IAFC to prepare for lithium-ion fires. The USFA can
use the National Fire Academy and its relationship with the State and
local fire training academies to train firefighters about how to
respond to fires caused by lithium-ion batteries and how to safely
manage and clean up the incident scene after the fire. In addition, the
USFA can develop public education campaigns to educate the public about
the safe handling and storage of devices and vehicles using lithium-ion
batteries.
The Assistance to Firefighters Grant (AFG) and the Staffing for
Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER) grants provide matching
grants that can be used to help local fire departments with incidents
involving lithium-ion batteries. However, both programs already cannot
meet the current demand for their funds. In addition, unless Congress
passes the Fire Grants and Safety Act (H.R. 4090/S. 870), these
programs will expire on September 30, 2024.
We recommend that Congress develop a new program that will help
communities prepare for incidents involving lithium-ion batteries. The
program should fund code adoption efforts; planning, training, and
exercises; and equipment. The program also should fund research into
issues like firefighter exposure to toxic fumes from lithium-ion fires
and how to effectively decontaminate gear that has been used in a fire
involving lithium-ion batteries.

conclusion

I thank you for the opportunity to address the threat of lithium-
ion batteries and other threats to fire safety. While lithium-ion
batteries present a promise in providing power to new forms of
technology, we must take steps to prepare for accidental fires caused
by them. Congress can play a role in ensuring the Nation's preparedness
by passing legislation like the Setting Consumer Standards for Lithium-
Ion Batteries Act (H.R. 1797/S. 1009). In addition, it can pass the
Fire Grants and Safety Act (H.R. 4090/S. 870) to preserve programs like
the AFG and SAFER programs and also create a program to help local
communities work with their fire departments to prepare for incidents
involving lithium-ion batteries. We also support increased funding for
the USFA to ensure that it can improve data collection efforts and
distribute training and public education to help local communities
prevent fires involving lithium-ion batteries. The IAFC looks forward
to working with the committee to ensure the safe adoption of this
revolutionary new technology.

Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you, Chief Butler.
Members will now be recognized by order of seniority for
their 5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of
questioning may be called after all Members have been
recognized. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Chief Flynn, thank you again for being here today. Just
last week, the FDNY shut down an illegal lithium-ion battery
business in Queens that was building battery packs for
individual battery cells and replacing old lithium-ion
batteries, which is in violation of the fire code. Can you
explain to us and to people listening at home how you are
inspecting and tracking which companies are making those unsafe
batteries?
Chief Flynn. Thank you for that question. We have a robust
inspection program within the city. We team up with our fire
prevention inspectors on a daily basis and go out and inspect
every location that we become aware of that is selling,
servicing, leasing, renting of these devices. We believe we
inspected every single one within the city that we are aware
of. We've conducted over 500 of these inspections just last
year. Many of these businesses we've actually inspected several
times.
So when we do become aware of them, we get out there and
inspect them immediately. We've urged the public within New
York City to call 311, which is our nonemergency number, for
concerns from the public, and we pledge that we will get out
there to inspect and address their concerns within 12 hours.
We've also utilized our field units, our firefighting units, to
help in those inspections. We want to make sure that every
location in the city is safe from these devices.
One thing that limits our ability, though, is we can really
only inspect these commercial locations. We cannot get inside
people's homes to inspect for the safety of the lithium-ion
batteries inside their homes. So, in that respect, we've moved
to an informational campaign where we've had a robust
informational campaign on social media, getting out to public
events, meeting with religious leaders, working with our
housing authority to get that word out about lithium-ion
battery safety.
We want to make sure people are storing them properly. We
don't want them by people's front doors or their primary means
of egress of their apartment. We just want people to be safe,
charge them properly, store them properly when they're damaged,
dispose of them properly.
Chairman D'Esposito. Now, you mentioned that you guys are
confident that you have inspected every single location,
obviously specific to the commercial, because, as you said, it
is sometimes difficult to get into the residential. While you
are investigating these locations, have you found or identified
any specific trends to the lithium battery fires, for instance,
perhaps batteries that are manufactured in China or ones that
are repurposed? What are the patterns that you are seeing as to
the cause of these deadly fires?
Chief Flynn. We are tracking that. We are trying to track
the brands of the devices that are failing, most often in the
city. Unfortunately, when we do conduct our investigations,
many of these products are damaged beyond recognition. A lot of
that goes into interviews with the owners of these devices.
We do share that data. We have a very strong relationship
with the CPSC already, and we speak to them on a daily basis.
Every time we do have one of these fires and we collect
evidence from that fire, we allow them the opportunity to
inspect that device, to record what products are failing on a
national level so they have that information. Our data
collection, I think we're doing a great job of that right now.
But it's pretty early on to make that determination as to where
these products are coming from and what specific devices are
failing.
Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you. Mr. Kerber, we have heard
reports from the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission of
unsafe lithium-ion batteries being sold on sites like Amazon by
Chinese manufacturers. How are industry and Government partners
working together to establish safety standards, and what more
can we do to assist in that process?
Mr. Kerber. So, our fellow organization, UL Standards and
Engagement, has worked diligently over many years to create
voluntary consensus standards that cover many of these lithium-
ion battery-powered products. So the standards are there, but
they are voluntary. So by moving forward with the act that's
currently in play right now would force CPSC to make a
mandatory requirement in order to make sure that these devices
are, in fact, meeting these standards and being certified as
such.
Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you. My time is just about up.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Carter, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chief Butler, your testimony mentions challenges with
collecting accurate data from lithium-ion fires, and you note
that such data are not currently maintained in the national
database. You also mentioned that we're 5 years behind. How are
fire departments tracking these lithium-ion battery fires, and
are there plans to develop a means to track them nationally?
Can you give an example of the types of national data that
would give a better picture of where and why these incidents
occur?
Chief Butler. Thank you for the question. There are over
30,000 fire departments in the United States, and some have
resources that others don't. In the community I'm in, we are
able to track fires related to lithium-ion at the company level
and input into our local database. We have the abilities to do
that. Many other places don't. Many other places don't have
those resources, and, therefore, even more the reason for a
national information system such as NERIS.
We can't address an issue until we understand the issue,
and we're continuing to learn about lithium-ion challenges, and
we need to see it from a national and international level.
That's where NERIS would come into play. I'm fortunate to be in
an organization that we can do a lot and feed NERIS. Many
places need to start from the ground up.
I think that's the end of my response to that question.
Mr. Carter. Yes, thank you very much.
U.S. Fire Administrator Merrill, how does the U.S. Fire
Administration plan on tracking lithium-ion batteries
statistically nationally? The statistics nationally, rather.
Ms. Moore-Merrell. Yes, sir. Thank you for that question.
At present, we are limited to media scrapes. This is how
we're learning. I mentioned in my testimony our antiquated
NFIRS system does not have the capability for tracking. So,
local fire departments, much like Chief Butler just referenced,
are tracking them either as a hazardous material incident or an
electrical fire. So there's no consistency because the data
system can't contain it.
So the new cloud-based platform that's being constructed
now will be onboarding several departments for testing within
the next couple of weeks. We will onboard an additional 50
departments in the summer, and then opening up for the Nation-
wide fire departments to self-onboard to the new system. The
new system will absolutely be able to not only track lithium-
ion, but other emerging technologies as they arise, so that we
can better understand any fire risk associated as these
emerging technologies that are going to make our lives better,
but they also may carry fire risks that we don't understand. So
we will track them in the new system.
They'll be able to be tracked straight from the scene.
We'll be able to upload videos or photos right from the scene
as well, so we'll understand better about the products into the
new system. So understanding data input for firefighters across
the Nation is going to change once we have the new system
operational this year.
Mr. Carter. So we know that many of the every-day products
that we use, from cell phones to my kids' hoverboards to all of
the various things that are out there, have lithium-ion
batteries. Where are the majority of these batteries
manufactured?
Ms. Moore-Merrell. Sir, I'm afraid that's something I'd
have to get back to you on. Perhaps----
Mr. Carter. Does any panelist have an answer or no?
Ms. Moore-Merrell. UL may have an answer.
Mr. Carter. No, it's OK if you don't. You can get back with
me.
The other question associated with that is we know that we
get on the airplane every day with lithium-ion batteries. The
risk of explosion, or if, God forbid, a terrorist use of some
nefarious act. Are we tracking these kind of things to make
sure that we're ahead of the game in dealing with this being
used in a more nefarious act versus an accidental one?
Ms. Moore-Merrell. No, that's a great question, sir, and
it's something that is extremely concerning. As you have noted
there, this part of the tracking would be able to be able to
identify would that be a behavior that might evolve? Certainly,
as we learn from every single incident, we're still in research
mode here, very much in research mode, and incident by
incident, unfortunately, is how we're learning.
There is some research funding around this that my
colleagues from UL and other institutes are looking at.
Lithium-ion, how the runaway happens, how these explosions
happen, how the cells evolve. But also, we are learning post-
incident. Every event that FDNY responds to, we learn
something. So as they evolve, we're trying to track that
information, compile it so we have information to carry
forward.
Mr. Carter. Great. I have got about 17 seconds left. I want
to ask one other question that is very important to me.
While we are focusing on lithium-ion batteries, I don't
want us to lose focus on fire threats. In August, we saw brutal
firefighters--fires destroy parts of Maui, which tragically
lost--led to 100 confirmed deaths. As we prepare the Nation's
future threats, such as climate change, it is imperative that
we prioritize community investments to improve preparedness
measures against all forms of hazards. U.S. Fire Administrator,
can you share with us that ensuring that climate change is
being factored into all fire preparedness across the Nation.
Ms. Moore-Merrell. Absolutely, sir. Climate change is in
the forefront of our mind. What is happening across, as you
pointed out earlier in your opening statement, wildfires in
Louisiana. This is a first. We're seeing the changes,
everything from the atmospheric rivers in California to
wildfires in places that have not historically experienced
them.
One of the things that we note is that we continue as a
Nation to build toward risk. In other words, we are clearing
fire-prone lands, lands that have burned for hundreds of years,
perpetuating the vegetation. Yet today, we're clearing them and
putting structures there, people there, often with one way in
and one way out. So as we build toward that risk, we must take
a stand on building codes and look to the science that we know
can make a difference. Fire-resistant building materials, all
of those things must be upheld, and that's how we'll reduce the
risks.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. My time is far expired.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you, ma'am.
Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Carter.
I now recognize from New Jersey, Mr. Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Administrator Moore-
Merrell, in your testimony, you mentioned the next generation
PFAS-free personal protective equipment, along with science and
risk-based mitigation programs, can lessen the health risk for
first responders. My bill, H.R. 3254, the First Responder
Assesses the Innovative Technologies Act, would expedite the
process for getting this next generation equipment into the
hands of first responders and firefighters, ensuring they have
the equipment they need to do the job safely and effectively. I
want to thank the International Fire Chiefs Association for
endorsing the bill.
What is FEMA doing to change its process to get equipment
and systems onto the authorized equipment list and into the
hands of first responders?
Ms. Moore-Merrell. That's a great question, sir.
As you know, PPE, or the gear, turnout gear, is a Priority
1 level for the Fire Act grants, and so it already remains
there. One of the issues with having PFAS-free gear is that we
need the manufacturers to actually produce it. Often the
manufacturers don't produce until there's a demand, and the
demand has not arisen yet because most fire departments are
held to purchase based on an industry standard. So the NFPA
standard that directs and is over the gear itself still has a
test that the test requires PFAS in the gear in order to pass
the vulnerability test for the gear. So we're working to change
the standard so that we can have the departments who have to
comply with the standard be able to purchase in order to drive
the demand for the manufacturers to make the gear.
So right now, we're in a bit of a circular issue. It is not
a grant. Grants will cover the gear that can be purchased.
One of the things that we do want to put on your radar
going forward is how are we going to not only purchase gear for
the Nation, but how do we dispose of the gear that has PFAS in
it that exists now for every firefighter in the Nation?
Mr. Payne. So basically, we have a chicken-or-the-egg
situation.
Ms. Moore-Merrell. We do currently, sir. Yes, sir.
Mr. Payne. OK. Thank you.
Chief Flynn, while we are discussing safety training and
equipment for first responders and firefighters, I wanted to
quickly discuss one of FDNY's training facilities. As you are
aware, there was a shipboard fire at Port Newark in my district
last July. Sadly, two brave firefighters with the Newark Fire
Division lost their lives. Augusto Acabou and Wayne Brooks
succumbed to the fire on a smoke-filled deck full of vehicles.
The FDNY has a ship simulator on Randall's Island that I
understand is utilized throughout the year. Could you tell me
more about the facility, including how many firefighters and
first responders can be trained at this facility annually, and
whether the number of firefighters trained annually can be
increased in the costs associated with training?
Chief Flynn. Certainly. Thank you for that question. My
condolences to the community and the loss of those brave
firefighters in that shipboard fire.
We do have a shipboard simulator at Randall's Island. We
have many different simulations there. We even have a fuselage
of a plane, so we train on all potential threats at our fire
academy. We also train our probationary firefighters there. We
train about 400, close to 400 in a class. So it's a very, very
busy facility, but certainly we can try to address any cross-
training.
I know our chiefs from special operations were in very
close contact with the fire chiefs out in Newark at the time,
and I know we are still in discussions with them to share how
we train and the way that we train. I would be certain that we
would be open to hosting others to show them our training
methods and our facilities to try to benefit the fire service
as a whole.
Mr. Payne. So right now, only FDNY is utilizing your
facility?
Chief Flynn. We train a lot of our firefighters there. We
have, you know, close to over 10,000 firefighters, so it is
very busy that location. But I know we do train with other
agencies from time to time, and I can bring that back to the
commissioner and try to reach out and get some more training
for others.
Mr. Payne. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I'll yield back.
Chairman D'Esposito. OK, the gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize from New York, Mr. Goldman.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
convening this hearing. I thank you for the witnesses for being
here. As a Member from New York City, this is obviously of
great importance to me.
Chief Flynn, I had the pleasure of meeting with you and
Commissioner Kavanaugh a few weeks ago to discuss this issue,
which, I think you even noted in your opening testimony, has
risen in such dramatic fashion, where 150 people were injured
last year, 18 were killed, 268 fires caused by lithium
batteries, which is over 1,000 percent increase from just 2019.
I wanted to discuss a little bit a concern that I have in
terms of the pathway toward some of these problems which, you
know, my district in last June faced. Four people died. I was a
little surprised, and I don't want to put you on the spot, I'm
a little surprised that none of the witnesses know where these
lithium-ion batteries are manufactured, because if we don't
know where they are manufactured, how are the new mandatory
regulations that the Consumer Safety Protection Bureau would be
required to issue if my colleague to the left of me,
Congressman Torres' bill is passed?
Chief Flynn. So if I may, sir, we do have an answer to
that. The United States does get most of its lithium-ion
batteries from China, South Korea, and Japan, but there's a
huge unregulated market within the United States that poses the
challenge to regulators, for sure.
Mr. Goldman. Right. That is where I wanted to go next,
because something struck me in the meeting that we had, Chief
Flynn, which is that a lot of the danger of these lithium-ion
batteries comes from those who purchase them, messing with them
or rejiggering them, mostly to allow them to go faster, which
provides a whole other set of problems that we deal with in New
York City, but it also increases the danger. Is that right?
Chief Flynn. Absolutely. By opening these up, it creates a
tremendous danger. There's really no regulation for people to
repair them, so they're engaged in extremely dangerous
practices. We've had several fatalities related to the repair
or reconditioning of these devices throughout the city. The
incident that you mentioned on Madison Street a few months ago,
we believe that they were working on batteries at that location
as well, which killed 4 people, tragically, in Manhattan.
It's important to note in that incident as well, there was
no fire that extended to the apartments of the people that were
killed there. The smoke from these devices is so toxic that if
it reaches your apartment, you're immediately overcome by this
toxic gas.
Mr. Goldman. Right. It is important to note that that fire
started at an e-bike store, so it wasn't just a charge
situation.
So this raises the next question, which is, there is no
question I am a cosponsor of Congressman Torres' bill, and it
is essential that we get that passed. I hope my colleagues on
the other side of the aisle will push their Speaker to put it
on the floor so that we can get it passed. But I am worried
that this black market that we are talking about, the
unregulated market, is not going to be affected by this.
So, you know, I guess Chief Flynn or perhaps Chief Butler,
because you guys are on the ground, what do we need to do or be
thinking about to address this black unregulated market of
turning up these batteries so they go faster, which causes more
risk?
Chief Flynn. Well, as I mentioned earlier, we do have an
excellent inspection process within the city. So anytime we're
alerted to any of these shops or makeshift commercial
locations, which we've seen them pop up within housing
communities----
Mr. Goldman. Do you think you have enough authority and
resources to be able to tackle this issue?
Chief Flynn. We could always use more resources, of course.
Our inspectors are stretched very thin when it comes to the
inspecting locations that are engaged in these practices. But
the reconditioning of batteries currently within New York City
is currently not legal. So when we do observe these shops
conducting in those practices, we do close them down or issue
violations.
Mr. Goldman. Well, I think you raise a very important
point, which is that, yes, we can regulate, but enforcement has
to be a priority. I know it is for the fire department, and I
know that you are working with a task force of other city
agencies, but there needs to be enforcement not only of the
regulations and law as it relates to these batteries, but there
needs to be enforcement of our traffic laws to prevent people
from using these e-bikes going 25 miles per hour or more, often
wrong way on one-way roads, which causes a tremendous public
safety risk. So I thank you for being here.
Thank you for your indulgence, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman D'Esposito. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize my good friend from Texas and the Chairman
of the Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and
Intelligence, Mr. Pfluger.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
letting me waive on here and thank the witnesses for being
here.
I will pick up where my colleague from New York left off,
and that is, where are these batteries being made? Who is
making them?
Mr. Chairman, I have got a document here that I would like
to insert for the record that talks about, ``Beijing's Power
Play: Safeguarding U.S. National Security in the Electric
Vehicle and Battery Industries.''
Chairman D'Esposito. Without objection.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The information has been retained in committee files and is also
available at: https://www.fdd.org/analysis/2023/10/23/beijings-power-
play/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Pfluger. This document talks about the Contemporary
Amperex Technology Company, or otherwise known as ``cattle''--
CATL--and the potential, because of their outsized influence on
making lithium-ion batteries, to have nefarious actions inside
the United States, including dependencies on them and also
including the potential use for battery storage, to be able to
insert malware and connect to charging stations. So that is
really where I would like to go right now, is talking about EVs
and the fire hazard.
Recently, in my district, there was a traffic accident that
shut down a pretty major highway system for about 12 hours. So
I will start with Chief Flynn. Talk to me about the risk of
fires in EVs and how that impacts your organization and the
impacts to other motorists and communities.
Chief Flynn. Thank you, sir. We investigate approximately
7,000 fires a year, 2,000 of those fires within the city are
car fires. So we inspect every single car fire that occurs
within New York City, and we have really not seen fires in EVs
up until this point.
We're aware of incidents across the world with EV fires,
and we train to extinguish those fires, which is extremely
difficult, of course. So we are aware of the issues in other
areas. But specific to New York City, the fires we're really
seeing that are killing our citizens in New York City are fires
related to the batteries that are powering micromobility
devices.
Mr. Pfluger. Chief Butler.
Chief Butler. When a fire engine is dispatched to an EV
fire on a roadway or elsewhere, potentially we could require a
whole lot of water, a lot of--a high volume of water to
suppress any stranded energy in the batteries or the electric
vehicle, and also a protracted amount of time on the scene. So
the converse of that is a community that doesn't have a fire
engine or its crew in that community in its primary role and
responsibility. So there is a community ripple effect with
regard to EV fires. We still don't know what we don't know, and
requiring a lot of water, a lot of resources for a protracted
amount of time.
Mr. Pfluger. Why does it take so long to put out fire with
a lithium-ion, it is hard to say, battery?
Chief Butler. Dr. Kerber and others could probably get more
in the weeds with regard to the science, but it's that it's a
reaction that creates heat and fire and flames, and that
reaction is almost perpetual at times, so that stranded energy
feeds upon itself. I'm probably not saying it well, but he can
say it better.
Mr. Kerber. No, Chief Butler, you're starting out very
well.
So it's a lot of energy in a very small space. All of those
cells, if one goes into thermal runaway, it then heats all the
cells that are touching it and imagine hundreds, if not
thousands of these cells together. When we put them in an EV,
we highly protect them. So we typically put them in a container
and bury it as low and into the middle of the car as possible
and encase it so that we don't have other problems. That's what
makes it so difficult to get to, to get water to in order to
cool it off. Then as lithium-ion batteries go into thermal
runaway, they also produce oxygen, which allows them to burn in
this closed compartment and release these toxic gases. The fire
department can't get to that, and we don't want them tearing it
apart either, because of the high voltage concerns.
Mr. Pfluger. Definitely some things we need to think about.
I would like to give a shout out to my home district, to
Goodfellow Air Force Base, for the progress that they are
making on these. They are the only--DOD's only joint fire
training center. They train hundreds of fire professionals each
year and are doing a great job.
The last question I will ask, and for any of you, is the
nexus between terrorism, nefarious actors, and lithium-ion
batteries. Anybody in the last 20 seconds, Dr. Moore-Merrell or
Dr. Kerber.
Ms. Moore-Merrell. Is the potential there? The answer is
yes. If the understanding happens and the mechanism to be able
to put these batteries into thermal runaway and then leave a
device in a public place, then can it explode? Of course it
can. So is the potential there if that becomes known? Yes.
Mr. Pfluger. I thank the witnesses for your time. Chairman,
thanks for letting me waive on. Yield back.
Chairman D'Esposito. Mr. Pfluger, thank you for joining us.
I now recognize my friend from New York, Mr. Torres. Thanks
for joining us.
Mr. Torres. I want to thank Chair D'Esposito and Ranking
Member Carter for allowing me to waive on.
Poorly-manufactured and poorly-handled lithium-ion
batteries are ticking time bombs in American homes and
businesses. A lithium-ion battery can cause not just a fire,
but an instantaneous explosion. The sheer speed and scale of
the destruction it brings is nothing short of staggering. For
proof, look no further than the ruins of 2096 Grand Concourse,
a neighborhood supermarket in the Bronx, one of the few reduced
to rubble at the hands of a five-alarm fire caused by a
lithium-ion battery.
Lithium-ion battery fires are happening in America and
happening with greater frequency and intensity. The growth of
these fires in New York City has been exponential, from more
than 30 in 2019 to more than 40 in 2020, to more than 100 in
2021, to more than 200 in 2022. In the span of 4 years, there
has been a 900 percent surge in lithium-ion batteries, creating
an unprecedented crisis in fire safety.
So, Chief Flynn, I know the city council has enacted
legislation, but if we in Congress do nothing or do too little,
is it fair to say that the crisis will simply keep getting
worse?
Chief Flynn. Thank you, sir. I remember meeting you out
there at the Grand Concourse after that fire. It was a terrible
tragedy. Luckily, nobody died from injuries at that fire. That
was one device that took out an entire shopping center. It was
a huge fire, a fifth alarm. Just to put it in perspective,
that's the maximum that we have. That's the most resources we
can bring to a scene.
We have regulated it within New York City, and we've seen
many violations of that law that we put in place locally. We
cannot regulate devices that are coming into the city from the
surrounding areas.
Mr. Torres. So ultimately, there is no substitute for
Federal legislation.
Chief Flynn. Yes. So we really need that legislation
enacted to stop those products from coming in, not only to our
city, but to cities around the country.
Mr. Torres. So here in the House, I am advancing
legislation, H.R. 1797, that empowers the Consumer Product
Safety Commission to establish safety standards for the
manufacturing of lithium-ion batteries and the e-mobility
devices that contain them. I want to thank the International
Association of Fire Chiefs, which was the first to endorse the
bill.
Although no legislation is a magic bullet, do you believe,
as I do, that safer manufacturing would prevent and reduce
lithium-ion batteries in New York City and elsewhere in
America? Chief Flynn, you want to----
Chief Flynn. Absolutely. I think, as Dr. Kerber mentioned,
we're really not seeing these fires in the EVs. The reason, I
believe, is because they're manufactured better. We're seeing
low-quality products that are causing these fires in New York
City, products that are being worked on or fixed or made to go
faster in New York City. These are not high-quality products
that are causing these fires.
If we were to enact that standard, I believe we'll see what
we see in the EVs, where we're seeing very few fires in EVs, at
least in New York City I could speak for. If we had that
standard, I think we would see a tremendous change.
Mr. Torres. You spoke about the lack of quality. I sit on
the China Committee, and part of the problem is the lack of
safety regulation in China. Just like the flow of drug
precursors from China is perpetuating opioid deaths in America,
the flow of poorly-manufactured lithium-ion batteries from
China is perpetuating fire deaths in America. I feel strongly
that Congress should act swiftly to lower the de minimis
threshold for imports in order to prevent poorly-manufactured
lithium-ion batteries from saturating the American market.
Does anyone have an opinion on the de minimis threshold?
Chief Flynn. I would say that it's as high as it is, it has
certainly allowed a number of e-bikes and e-scooters to come
into this country underneath that threshold and create fire
safety problems that we're dealing with today.
Mr. Torres. Administrator, about 2 years ago, I passed the
United States Fire Administration Empowerment Act, which set up
a Federal process for investigating the deadliest fires in
America. Can you speak about just the status of the
implementation of the law and the importance of the Federal
role in fire safety, which historically has been seen as a
local concern?
Ms. Moore-Merrell. Absolutely, sir. First of all, thank you
for your interest in fire safety and in that bill, sponsoring
that bill, because we are in the midst of rulemaking at present
defining what a major fire would be as was defined or laid out
in the legislation. So we're hopeful to very soon be able to
exercise that authority and look at major fires and these
recurring, unfortunate fires that are happening with the
lithium-ion.
Mr. Torres. I yield back.
Chairman D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Mr. Torres.
We are going to now start a second round of questioning.
Before that, without objection, I would like to enter into the
record a letter that was received this morning addressed to
myself and Ranking Member Carter from DoorDash, expressing
thanks about the hearing and their commitment, but specifically
about this hearing and calling attention to the fire hazards
posed by the proliferation of substandard imported lithium-ion
batteries powering micromobility devices.
[The information follows:]

Letter From DoorDash

February 15, 2024.

The Honorable Anthony D'Esposito,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology,
Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of Representatives,
H2-176 Ford House Office Building.
The Honorable Troy Carter,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology,
Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of Representatives,
H2-117 Ford House Office Building.
Dear Chairman D'Esposito and Ranking Member Carter: DoorDash would
like to thank the Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology
for holding the hearing, ``Examining Fire Hazards: Lithium-Ion
Batteries and Other Threats to Fire Safety'', and calling attention to
the fire hazards posed by the proliferation of substandard, imported
lithium-ion batteries powering micromobility devices. We would also
like to express our support for Representative Ritchie Torres's H.R.
1797, the ``Setting Consumer Standards for Lithium-Ion Batteries Act'',
of which Chairman D'Esposito and committee Members Rep. Clarke, Rep.
Garbarino, and Rep. Goldman are original cosponsors. It is critical
that the United States establish battery safety standards for all
micromobility devices so that every American can use these products
without putting themselves, their families, or their neighbors at risk.
DoorDash is a technology company that connects consumers with their
favorite local businesses in more than 25 countries across the globe.
Founded in 2013, DoorDash builds products and services to help
businesses innovate, grow, and reach more customers. DoorDash is
building infrastructure for local commerce, enabling merchants to
thrive in the convenience economy, giving consumers access to more of
their communities, and providing work that empowers. With DoorDash,
there is a neighborhood of good in every order.
Electric micromobility is a crucial component of transportation in
the United States, particularly for more urban areas. However, it is
essential that electric micromobility products in the U.S. marketplace
are safe to use and do not create fire hazards due to their reliance on
lithium-ion batteries. This issue is particularly important for food
delivery workers, many of whom own these devices and use them to earn
extra income. Recent fires in New York City and other major cities have
highlighted the dangers posed by these products, and a multipronged
solution is required to not only remove substandard lithium-ion
batteries already on our streets, but also prevent the sale and import
of new lithium-ion batteries that lack adequate safety standards.
DoorDash is working with stakeholders to address e-bike battery
fire hazards in a number of ways. We are financially supporting the
Equitable Commute Project to fund the development of the first trade-in
program dedicated to delivery workers in NYC. This program runs events
on a regular basis to help delivery workers transition from their
existing device to a new UL-certified e-bike, and making sure
uncertified batteries are properly recycled and disposed of. We've also
helped educate Dashers and others in the communities we serve about
safe e-bike practices, including contributing $100,000 to the FDNY
Foundation's e-bike and battery safety education campaign.
In addition, DoorDash has partnered with electric bicycle suppliers
to expand access to affordable, safe e-bikes so that Americans who use
the DoorDash platform to make deliveries and earn extra income have
more transit options. These partnerships allow Dashers to purchase
safe, discounted electric bicycles from reputable manufacturers and
expand access to electric bicycle rentals. While these efforts are a
productive first step, their effectiveness will be limited as long as
the marketplace continues to be flooded with shoddy, foreign-made e-
bikes powered by uncertified lithium-ion batteries.
Local and State solutions, however well-conceived, are also falling
short. Recently, New York City passed a local safety standard requiring
all lithium-ion powered micromobility devices sold in the city to be UL
certified, with violators subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000.
Despite its dedicated efforts, the city has struggled with enforcement
due to the widespread availability of substandard batteries through
popular on-line marketplaces. Unsurprisingly, it is difficult to
effectively reduce the flow of uncertified batteries at the municipal
level when these products can still be readily purchased in neighboring
communities or through the internet. Localized approaches are not
effective for this type of problem, we need a national policy that can
be enforced at our borders.
H.R. 1797 would do just that by requiring the Consumer Product
Safety Commission (CPSC) to promulgate a final consumer product safety
standard for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries used in micromobility
devices within 180 days of enactment. Shutting down the flow of unsafe
batteries will help make families across the country safer, and protect
hardworking communities from the hazards that come from shoddy,
foreign-manufactured lithium-ion batteries. The ``Setting Consumer
Standards for Lithium-Ion Batteries Act'' is necessary to address these
loopholes by ensuring that a national safety standard exists.
DoorDash will continue to work with all stakeholders and to remove
hazardous lithium-ion batteries from our communities, but a safety
floor must be put in place to ensure that unsafe batteries do not enter
the marketplace to begin with.
We thank Chairman D'Esposito for his leadership on this issue and
the committee for holding this important hearing.
Sincerely,
Carrianna Suiter,
Head of Federal Government Relations, DoorDash.
Kuruvilla Kassandra Perez-Desir,
Head of Government Relations NY/NJ & Puerto Rico, DoorDash.

Chairman D'Esposito. Dr. Moore-Merrell, as lithium-ion
battery fires have clearly increased, they have become more
dangerous and, of course, more deadly. Are firefighting
organizations asking for more assistance, through our
Assistance to Firefighters grant and Staffing for Adequate Fire
and Emergency Response programs to prepare for these type of
fires?
Ms. Moore-Merrell. Yes, fire departments across the Nation
are eager for training. So, as I said to you, we're still in a
very much research and understanding stage. Every incident
provides additional information. Our colleagues in research,
even sitting here at the table, Dr. Kerber and his team, have
been researching. They provide training on-line. We have
enhanced courses at the NFA, as has been noted, in training and
tactics and understanding scene safety.
But each time that the manufacturers, particularly with the
new micromobility products and even the EVs, they evolve, they
change. So the training has to keep up. So every time we learn
something, it's like we have to change the training. So all of
these things are causing departments across the Nation to need
constant training in this regard. So, yes, they are asking for
that, and it is primarily understanding and training.
We're still trying to understand the impact on our gear.
We've talked about PFAS. But right now, we're beginning to
understand that firefighters who are fighting these lithium-ion
fires, and you heard about the toxins from the smoke, well,
we're seeing also that once we wash their gear, some of the
toxins from these fires are not coming out of the gear. So
we're still looking for research to be able to understand that
impact. So we anticipate that that's going to be another issue
around the gear and the safety of firefighters themselves.
Chairman D'Esposito. So one of the goals of this committee
since the beginning of the 118th Congress is to make sure that
resources, especially when it came to grant funding, was made
not only available, but that the application process was made
known to even the smaller departments. You know, coming from
the NYPD, the FDNY, we are the big departments that are always
recognized with grant funding. But it has been our goal, and
that is a bipartisan concern that we have, to make sure that
departments, even in the smallest crevices of this country,
know that they have the ability and the resources available. So
I know that I speak for both sides of the aisle that anything
that we can do to relay those messages, to help get that
awareness out, is important to us.
Mr. Kerber, your testimony stated that lithium-ion
batteries present a dynamic challenge to the fire and emergency
services. As use of these devices accelerates through
communities, emergency responses will expose first responders
to explosive thermal events and toxic emissions beyond
traditional protocols.
Following the attacks on September 11, 2001, many first
responders who were present that day were exposed to ash,
debris, and various harmful particles that have resulted in
countless not only sickness, but unfortunate deaths. It is of
the utmost importance that we ensure the safety of first
responders so that they can continue to do their jobs and keep
our communities safe.
What type of research is FSRI conducting on the negative
health effects of lithium-ion battery fires, and what can
Congress do to help?
Mr. Kerber. Thank you very much for that question.
As we speak right now, the FSRI team is conducting a series
of EV fires at our laboratory in Northbrook, Illinois. They
spent the last 3 weeks burning different manufacturers' EVs,
understanding the size of the fire, but, more importantly,
working with NIOSH and other industrial hygiene experts to
understand what are the chemicals that are coming off of these
vehicles, at what concentrations, and what possible health
effects could there be with this new challenge?
So that data has been gathered over the last several weeks.
It will now be in laboratories being analyzed so we can
understand what is in that smoke. Then from there, we'll work
with some toxicology partners to figure out, what could the
possible health effects of this be? Then from there, we start
developing methodologies and practices with the fire service so
they understand how to protect themselves, what equipment they
need, and all of the downstream impacts that we need to
prevent.
Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you. My time has just about
expired.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Moore-Merrell, I am going to come back to you because
it looks like you have got somebody shared with some
information on where we think the larger amount of these
batteries are manufactured, as I asked earlier. Since we now
have an idea that we don't know where they all come from, but
we have a pretty good idea that a lot of them come from China.
The concern with when we import components like this, share
with me the mechanism or process that they are tested before
they are put into equipment: toys, cell phones, bicycles,
motorcycles, cell phones, hoverboards. Are they inspected and,
if so, to what extent?
Ms. Moore-Merrell. So one of the things that you heard Dr.
Kerber and Chief Flynn talk about was the voluntary standards
that they are tested to today. So UL has a standard. There are
standards that the testing, and they are labeled. The
unfortunate part is that often those labels are being
fraudulently applied, and so we have some fake. I know FDNY has
certainly encountered some of that. So there are voluntary
standards. What we need is a mandatory standard.
Mr. Carter. So certainly we know that a nefarious actor is
not going to voluntarily tell that they are doing something
nefarious. We all know that.
Ms. Moore-Merrell. Correct, sir.
Mr. Carter. So what can we do? What are we doing to stop
that or to have a more robust checkpoint?
Ms. Moore-Merrell. At this point, what I'd like to do is
turn to Dr. Kerber to talk about the UL standard and that
testing----
Mr. Carter. Certainly.
Ms. Moore-Merrell [continuing]. And what UL is doing to
engage.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Mr. Kerber. Thank you, Dr. Moore-Merrell.
So for over 130 years, UL has been creating safety
standards and certifying to those safety standards. I think one
of the big pieces that people don't realize about that process
is through our colleagues at UL solutions, if you have a
product that bears the UL mark, that product is inspected in
where it's being created to make sure that it's being made to
pass the safety standard, and there's a follow-up service to
make sure that it continues to meet the standard as it is sold
all over the world. So in order to bear that UL mark, not only
did it pass the safety standard that was created via the
voluntary consensus process, but it continues to be made to
that standard. I think that is not what's happening here.
There are good organizations, good companies that are
following this process for e-bikes and e-scooters today.
There's many certified products that have met that safety
standard as exists because it's voluntary. There's many that
also have not.
Mr. Carter. We only need one.
Mr. Kerber. Correct.
Mr. Carter. We only need one bad one to cause someone to
lose their life. Only one bad one to wreak havoc on our
Nation's security. Only one bad one to wreck the whole system.
So share with me this notion of voluntary. What does that even
mean, and what is that process?
With no disrespect, it seems that we are trusting people
that may not be trustworthy to tell us a product is good and
trust but verify is probably a good notion to employ.
Mr. Kerber. Trust but verify is absolutely appropriate. I
mean, so it takes the entire system to make it work. So you
have to have the retailers that only want to sell certified
products. You have to have consumers that only want to buy
certified products by a Nationally-recognized testing lab, so
they know that what they're buying at the store has, in fact,
gone through this rigorous process and is safe to have in their
home. So it takes many actors in order to make that system
work.
Mr. Carter. So is there a distinction between those that
were voluntarily checked and those that have gone through a
more exhaustive check?
Mr. Kerber. So anyone that bears the UL mark has gone
through an exhaustive certification process. The voluntary
component is also the consensus process by which the standards
are made, where all stakeholders are brought in. Everyone is
able to bring their science, bring their knowledge to the
system to make sure that those standards are covering all
possible and foreseeable safety hazards that might exist. So if
you've gone through that process, then you're producing a safe
product.
Mr. Carter. So by what percentage would you say are
products that are being used today in America that have not
been UL tested but are on the products, on the shelves, in the
homes of American people right now at risk, would you guess,
percentage?
Mr. Kerber. I'd have to look into that. I know that----
Mr. Carter. Does somebody just--I mean, are we talking 10
percent, 20 percent, 30 percent, 1 percent?
Mr. Kerber. Americans have hundreds of products in their
home that bear UL marks.
Mr. Carter. OK. But I need to know, because now you have
distinguished for me that we have some that are really tested
and some that are voluntarily tested. I think the American
people--someone here, if you can't get it today, I would really
like someone to report back to us some notion and some idea of
what percentage of components that we have deemed to be
dangerous may be on the shelves and in the homes of American
people that have not been tested. Can anybody just real
quickly, my time is up, but if you can't get it, will you all
commit to getting it for us?
Ms. Moore-Merrell. We will do so, sir.
Mr. Carter. Now, I would like that not two people ask
again, and somehow you mysteriously find it, like you did when
I asked about China. So thank you.
Ms. Moore-Merrell. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. My time is far expended. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Carter.
I now recognize Mr. Goldman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to pick up a little bit on where I left off, Dr.
Kerber, and ask you for your perspective on the kind-of
secondary downstream concerns that these e-bikes especially
create. We are hopeful, of course, of passing Congressman
Torres' law, which would make the voluntary testing mandatory,
which is a critical, vital first step. I think we are all in
agreement about that.
But, again, I want to go back to this question of what to
do if those are properly tested, but then are purchased and
then either played with or changed or altered after that. What
are your thoughts as to how we can regulate that, how we can
enforce that against that?
Mr. Kerber. Modifying lithium-ion battery products is
incredibly dangerous. We need to be able to make sure that
those are sealed systems and are not able to be tampered with.
But humans are involved, right? So we know and have seen that
they have been tampered with.
There was actually a fire death in Virginia, where someone
had tampered with a device that they had purchased on the
internet and lost their life in that fire.
Enforcement is incredibly difficult. The fire service is
incredibly understaffed when it comes to things like
enforcement. It's usually one of the first things to get cut
within a community. So we need to bolster those resources
because it's not just a lithium-ion battery problem, it's a
fire safety problem, period. Enforcement is one of our biggest
challenges.
Mr. Goldman. Do you think that the mandatory regulations
that would arise out of the passage of this bill could be done
in a way to make it to require certification of lithium-ion
batteries that are more difficult to tamper with than right
now?
Mr. Kerber. Absolutely. I mean, you can write any
requirements into the standard, and it goes through the
consensus process. Everyone agrees with it. Absolutely there's
ways to reduce the chance of that happening.
Mr. Goldman. All right. That's helpful to understand that
on the front end that there is a way of reducing the
possibility of tampering.
Chief Flynn, you had mentioned in our meeting that the fire
department of New York is part of a task force to address this
issue. Can you explain a little bit more what that task force
is and how you are working with other agencies to address this
issue?
Chief Flynn. Absolutely. We are working with many city
agencies. We go out and inspect together because a lot of these
locations are engaged in other dangerous practices that we need
to address.
So we employ the help of our Department of Consumer and
Worker Protection to address certain issues, such as our Local
Law 39, which requires devices sold, rented, leased within the
city to meet that UL certification. So we have that in place
already within the city. It went into effect in September 2022.
So we've been out vigorously enforcing that law.
So we work with all agencies within the city. We go out, as
you mentioned, NYPD is entrusted with securing the roadways
related to these devices. We employ their help as well, so we
do joint inspections with them.
Mr. Goldman. You inspect, when you say joint inspections,
you're inspecting the stores that are selling these batteries?
Chief Flynn. Yes. We are not capable of doing street-level
enforcement, and that law applies to the sale of the devices,
not the possession of the devices. So street enforcement,
mainly geared toward violations of the vehicle and traffic law,
would be conducted by the NYPD.
Mr. Goldman. Right.
Chief Flynn. We do go out with them to these locations,
though, to inspect the devices that are being sold. When they
are found to not meet the requirements of the VTO, the NYPD
then would take action there.
Mr. Goldman. Through this task force and your work with the
other city agencies, have you come up with any other ideas for
how to enforce not only the certification process in Local Law
37 that you referred to, but also, you know, on the back end,
to make sure that they are compliant with the certification
process?
Chief Flynn. We issue many summonses, violations. We seize
devices at the time of the inspection. We reinspect. After
those summonses are adjudicated at court, we go back and make
sure that that does not continue. Any time that a new store
pops up, we make sure we get out there as soon as we become
aware of it, to inspect that location. Again, we cannot inspect
people's personal residences, so we see most of our fires in
those.
Mr. Goldman. Well, my time is up. I would just like to say,
in addition to or in reference to the letter from DoorDash that
you entered into the record, I do think there is a place for
the delivery companies to have a role in making sure that
deliveristas who are working for them and using these e-bikes
are compliant with the regulations and certifications, and that
we ought to, in this committee and perhaps otherwise,
investigate how we can engage with some of these delivery
companies to help ensure that these e-bikes are safe.
I yield back.
Chairman D'Esposito. Sounds like a good idea for another
subcommittee hearing.
Without objection, I would like to enter one more article
into the record. It is from the New York Daily News, dated
December 10, 2023, titled, ``Family mourns Bronx man killed in
latest fire blamed on lithium-ion battery.''
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman D'Esposito. I want to thank the witnesses: Chief
Butler, Mr. Kerber, Chief Flynn, Dr. Moore-Merrill. I want to
thank you for your time, for making the trip here, for your
valuable testimony, and, of course, I want to thank my
colleagues for their questions.
The Members of this subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we would ask that the
witnesses respond to these in writing. Pursuant to committee
rule VII(D), the hearing record will be held open for 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:44 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X  I

----------

Statement of the American Burn Association

The American Burn Association (ABA) thanks the House Homeland
Security Committee Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology
for holding a hearing to address the risks posed by lithium-ion
batteries and other fire hazards. The ABA is grateful for the
opportunity to submit this statement for the record on this important
subject.
The ABA proudly supports H.R. 1797/S. 1008, the Setting Consumer
Standards for Lithium-Ion Batteries Act. We thank Representative
Ritchie Torres (D-NY-15) and Senator Kristen Gillibrand (D-NY) for
sponsoring this important legislation to require the Consumer Product
Safety Commission to create a consumer product safety standard for
rechargeable lithium-ion batteries. We also thank all of the Members of
Congress who have cosponsored this legislation. The ABA believes this
bill is necessary to protect individuals from poor-quality lithium-ion
batteries. These batteries, found in many everyday products, pose a
serious fire safety issue in homes and businesses. These fires begin
quickly and grow rapidly, increasing the risk of serious burn injury
for both civilians and emergency responders. The creation of a Federal
quality standard ensures access to these products while mitigating fire
risks.
The ABA also proudly supports H.R. 4090/S. 870, the Fire Grants and
Safety Act. This bill reauthorizes funding for the U.S. Fire
Administration, the Assistance to Firefighters Grants Program, the Fire
Prevention and Safety Grants Program, and the Staffing for Adequate
Fire and Emergency Response Grant Program. The ABA believes it is vital
for Congress to ensure the U.S. Fire Administration and these grant
programs are fully funded in order to prevent fires and ensure our
first responders have the tools they need to keep our communities safe.
We thank Representative Thomas Kean (R-NJ-7) and Senator Gary Peters
(D-MI) for sponsoring this important legislation and all the Members
who have co-sponsored this legislation.
We call on Congress to pass both the Setting Consumer Standards for
Lithium-Ion Batteries Act and the Fire Grants and Safety Act and for
President Biden to sign these bills without delay. The ABA is happy to
work with Members on both sides of the aisle and the President to get
these bills signed into law.
The ABA and its members dedicate their efforts and resources to
promoting and supporting burn-related research, education, care,
rehabilitation, and prevention. The ABA has more than 2,500 members in
the United States, Canada, Europe, Asia, and Latin America. Members
include physicians, nurses, occupational and physical therapists,
researchers, social workers, firefighters, and hospitals with burn
centers. The ABA's multi-disciplinary membership enhances their ability
to work toward common goals with other organizations on educational
programs. Thank you again for the opportunity to submit these comments
for the record. Please do not hesitate to contact the ABA if there is
anything we can do to help support research funding, policies, or
regulations that prevent burn injuries and positively impact patients
and survivors.

A P P E N D I X  I I

----------

Question From Ranking Member Troy A. Carter for Daniel E. Flynn

Question. Since 2003, cities and States have received dedicated
funding aimed at countering terrorism from the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS). Such funding included the Urban Area Security
Initiative (UASI) and the State Homeland Security Grant Program.
Currently, the proposed appropriated amounts differ in both the House
and the Senate, with the Senate amounts being lower by $78 million in
total/combined. How do these grants enhance security and fire
preparedness within communities? Are there changes to the grants that
Congress should consider in light of current needs and challenges?
Answer. Thank you for your attention to the Urban Area Security
Initiative (UASI) Grant Program. Funds from UASI have been extremely
important to the New York City Fire Depaitment (FDNY) and enable us to
be a regional and national asset.
The FDNY has utilized DHS funds to build capabilities to prepare
for and respond to complex emergencies--from acts of terrorism to
active-shooter incidents to severe weather to COVID-19. It was DHS
funds that helped the Department recover and rebuild after 9/11. They
have also been critical to support the planning, equipment, drills,
technology, and training needs of the FDNY to prepare for emergencies.
Additionally, the FDNY has utilized DHS funds to pilot, test, and
deploy emerging technologies like drones and other robotics platforms,
such as the ``Spot Robot.''
The FDNY has invested DHS funds in several core areas, including
incident management, our Center for Terrorism and Disaster Preparedness
(CTDP), regionally deployable preparedness systems, and the
Counterterrorism Rescue Task Force. We have used them to build state-
of-the-art training facilities and simulators, enhance port security,
and cybersecurity, and to improve interoperable communications. DHS
funds help pay for the FDNY Incident Management Team (IMT) which is a
local, regional, and National resource that has responded to incidents
around the country. Examples of recent deployments include a wildfire
in your home State of Louisiana, a hurricane in Florida, and a wildfire
in Montana.
In recent years, the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
instituted funding requirements (for example: requiring 3 percent
toward cybersecurity). In general, we want to have the flexibility to
allocate DHS funds to build and sustain capabilities that address our
preparedness gaps and needs. Additionally, the Port Security Grant
Program (PSGP) has been funded at $100 million in recent years. This
had been a $400 million grant program, and as an example of an impact
of those cuts, FDNY has reduced our marine maintenance schedule.
We appreciate your attention to the matter, and we hope that
Congress continues to fund this essential grant program.

Question From Ranking Member Troy A. Carter for John S. Butler

Question. Since 2003, cities and States have received dedicated
funding aimed at countering terrorism from the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS). Such funding included the Urban Area Security
Initiative (UASI) and the State Homeland Security Grant Program
(SHSGP). Currently, the proposed appropriated amounts differ in both
the House and the Senate, with the Senate amounts being lower by $78
million in total/combined. How do these grants enhance security and
fire preparedness within communities? Are there changes to the grants
that Congress should consider in light of current needs and challenges?
Answer. It is important to note that the UASI and SHSGP programs
were created after the terrorist attacks of 9/11 to improve the
Nation's capability to respond to acts of terrorism. Since the grants'
creation, UASI and SHSGP have helped States and communities purchase
equipment and training to prevent, prepare, and respond to acts of
terrorism. These capabilities include the creation and maintenance of a
system of intelligence fusion centers; State urban search-and-rescue
teams; and improved mass casualty response and hazardous materials
response at the local level. Most importantly, Federal funds have
served as an incentive to bring Federal, State, Tribal/territorial,
local, and non-governmental agencies together to plan for acts of
terrorism. These Federal funds have broken down stovepipes and improved
the coordination and response to acts of terrorism, mass casualty
incidents, and even all-hazards incidents like the COVID-19 pandemic.
The IAFC thanks the House for its robust funding for programs like
UASI, SHSGP, and even the Assistance to Firefighters Grant (AFG)
program and the Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response
(SAFER) grant programs. The Senate proposes cuts to these programs,
which would result in a degradation of these capabilities over time.
For example, State urban search-and-rescue teams are seeing reduced
funding as Federal funding for SHSGP is cut and more of the funding is
allocated by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security for specific
purposes.

Question From Honorable Donald Payne, Jr. for John S. Butler

Question. H.R. 3254, the First Responder Access to Innovative
Technologies Act, would expedite the process for getting this next-
generation equipment into the hands of first responders and
firefighters, ensuring they have the equipment they need to do their
jobs safely and effectively. How would H.R. 3254 improve the baseline
response during emergencies?
Answer. A number of innovative technologies have been developed to
help first responders, including UAS and technology to track
firefighters and monitor their health. As this new technology is
developed, it may not be included on the Authorized Equipment List nor
be covered under existing voluntary consensus standards. H.R. 3254 sets
up a uniform process for reviewing requests to purchase equipment or
systems that do not meet or exceed voluntary consensus standards. The
process would have to consider factors such as the use of the equipment
by Federal agencies; the absence of voluntary consensus standards; the
existence of international standards for such equipment; the capability
gap addressed by the requested equipment; how this requested equipment
better serves the needs of the applicant than other consensus-standard
compliant technology; and other factors.
The IAFC endorsed H.R. 3254 because it sets up a more stringent
process for reviewing applications to buy equipment using UASI and
SHSGP funds, while still allowing access to innovative technologies to
prepare for acts of terrorism.
Thank you again for your focus on addressing the Nation's fire
problem. I look forward to continuing to work with you to protect
America's citizens.

[all]
