- DESIGN VS. DEFAULT: ANALYZING SHIFTS IN CYBERSECURITY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DESIGN VS. DEFAULT: ANALYZING SHIFTS IN
CYBERSECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 5, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-84

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
60-205 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Eric Swalwell, California
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           J. Luis Correa, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
August Pfluger, Texas                Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Nick LaLota, New York                Robert Garcia, California
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              LaMonica McIver, New Jersey
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION

Andrew R. Garbarino, New York, Chairman
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California, Ranking
Mike Ezell, Mississippi                  Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez,  New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     LaMonica McIver, New Jersey
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Cara Mumford, Subcommittee Staff Director
Moira Bergin, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Eric Swalwell, a Representative in Congress From
the State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witnesses

Ms. Heather Adkins, Vice President, Security Engineering, Google:
Oral Statement.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
Mr. Jim Richberg, Head of Cyber Policy and Global Field CISO,
Fortinet, Inc.:
Oral Statement.................................................    35
Prepared Statement.............................................    37
Mr. Shane Paulsen Fry, Chief Technology Officer, RunSafe
Security, Inc.:
Oral Statement.................................................    42
Prepared Statement.............................................    44
Mr. Srinivas Mukkamala, Board of Regents, New Mexico Tech; El
Paso Electric:
Oral Statement.................................................    46
Prepared Statement.............................................    48

Appendix

Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Heather Adkins...    67
Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Jim Richberg.....    67
Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Shane Paulsen Fry    68
Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Srinivas
Mukkamala......................................................    68

DESIGN VS. DEFAULT: ANALYZING SHIFTS IN CYBERSECURITY

----------

Thursday, December 5, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Andrew R.
Garbarino (Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Garbarino, Ezell, Lee, Swalwell,
Menendez, and McIver.
Mr. Garbarino. The Committee on Homeland Security
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare the
committee in recess at any point.
The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony from a
panel of industry leaders who will provide their perspectives
on CISA's Secure by Design initiative, including Secure by
Design pledge, which captures the initiative's principles.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Good morning.
As cyber threats grow more advanced by the day, enhancing
our cybersecurity posture has become one of the defining
challenges of our time. This is due in part to how we have
traditionally treated cybersecurity--as an add-on rather than
essential.
We have relied on patches and software updates to fix
vulnerabilities once they are discovered. Now that malicious
actors can exploit weaknesses faster that we can address them,
our reactive approach will not suffice.
To address this issue, CISA launched the Secure by Design
initiative in April 2023, an effort that encourages companies
to prioritize cybersecurity at the outset of product
development.
As part of this initiative, CISA created a pledge that
captures the 7 key pillars of what it means to be secure by
design. These encompass actions from improving software
security to increasing transparency about incidents.
Since the pledge was released in May, over 250 companies
have signed on, underscoring wide-spread industry support and
commitment to raising the bar for basic cybersecurity
practices.
Today's hearing provides a valuable opportunity to dive
deeper into the Secure by Design framework. In particular, we
will consider how Secure by Design has benefited individual
companies while enhancing cybersecurity across sectors and our
Nation.
From my perspective, Secure by Design is a proactive
commitment to making cybersecurity part of a company's core
mission. It represents a shift toward viewing security and
innovation as complementary, not competing, priorities.
As consumers, we must not only want but also expect that
products we purchase are secure out of the box. To that end, we
must remember that this initiative has worked because it has
been voluntary. To continue to incentivize security as a
standard practice rather than a costly add-on, it must continue
to have industry buy-in.
Companies have implemented Secure by Design principles at a
speed and scale that suits their business model. Likewise, CISA
has fulfilled its role as a trusted partner by offering
implementation guidance and facilitating critical conversations
with pledge signatories.
I look forward to discussing the pledge's successes,
challenges, and potential for the future. We risk losing the
collaboration of companies that are forced to adopt
requirements that they cannot meet, especially since many are
already burdened with duplicative cyber regulations.
I want to thank our witnesses for their time and expertise.
Your insights are critical as we work to strike a partnership
between Government, industry, insurers, and other stakeholders
in the cybersecurity ecosystem.
I hope this discussion about the Secure by Design
initiative will provide a clear picture of what is working,
where gaps remain, and how we can continue building the
partnerships and policies necessary to enhance our Nation's
cybersecurity posture.
Thank you, and I look forward to our conversation.
[The statement of Chairman Garbarino follows:]
Statement of Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino
December 5, 2024
Good morning.
As cyber threats grow more advanced by the day, enhancing our
cybersecurity posture has become one of the defining challenges of our
time. This is due in part to how we have traditionally treated
cybersecurity: as an add-on, rather than essential.
We have relied upon patches and software updates to fix
vulnerabilities once they are discovered. Now that malicious actors can
exploit weaknesses faster than we can address them, our reactive
approach will not suffice.
To address this issue, CISA launched the ``Secure by Design''
initiative in April 2023--an effort that encourages companies to
prioritize cybersecurity at the outset of product development.
As part of this initiative, CISA created a pledge that captures the
7 key pillars of what it means to be ``Secure by Design.'' These
encompass actions for improving software security, to increasing
transparency about incidents.
Since the pledge was released in May, over 250 companies have
signed on, underscoring wide-spread industry support and commitment to
raising the bar for basic cybersecurity practices.
Today's hearing provides a valuable opportunity to dive deeper into
the Secure by Design framework. In particular, we'll consider how
Secure by Design has benefited individual companies while enhancing
cybersecurity across sectors and our Nation.
From my perspective, Secure by Design is a proactive commitment to
making cybersecurity part of a company's core mission. It represents a
shift toward viewing security and innovation as complementary, not
competing, priorities. As consumers, we must not only want, but also
expect, that products we purchase are secure out of the box.
To that end, we must remember that this initiative has worked
because it has been voluntary. To continue to incentivize security as a
standard practice rather than a costly add-on, it must continue to have
industry buy-in.
Companies have implemented Secure by Design principles at a speed
and scale that suits their business model. Likewise, CISA has fulfilled
its role as a trusted partner by offering implementation guidance and
facilitating critical conversations with pledge signatories. I look
forward to discussing the pledge's successes, challenges, and potential
for the future.
We risk losing this collaboration if companies are forced to adopt
requirements which they cannot meet--especially since many are already
burdened with duplicative cyber regulations.
I want to thank our witnesses for their time and expertise. Your
insights are critical as we work to strengthen partnerships between
Government, industry, insurers, and other stakeholders in the
cybersecurity ecosystem.
I hope this discussion about the Secure by Design initiative will
provide a clearer picture of what's working, where gaps remain, and how
we can continue building the partnerships and policies necessary to
enhance our Nation's cybersecurity posture.
Thank you, and I look forward to our conversation.

Mr. Garbarino. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from California, Mr. Swalwell, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Swalwell. Good morning.
I would like to thank Chairman Garbarino for holding
today's hearing on Secure by Design and secure by default.
In recent decades, we have witnessed remarkable
technological progress that has changed every aspect of our
lives. With rapid advances in AI, we can expect that
transformation to continue in the years ahead.
Much of this innovation has taken place, of course, in
America but also in my Congressional district. I am looking
forward to hearing from Mr. Srinivas Mukkamala in particular,
my invited guest, because of his connection to my district.
The competition between technology companies globally has
also led to the development of new products and services that
have benefited people around the world.
A challenge with this digital revolution is that the
innovation that has transformed how we communicate, store our
data, and access vital services has not always been matched
with the level of security necessary to protect us from foreign
adversaries and criminal gangs. Every day, we read about cyber
incidents that demonstrate the security built into our digital
ecosystem and that it is insufficient to protect our privacy or
critical infrastructure.
To combat this problem, we must rely on the same innovative
spirit that has fueled our recent technological progress to
also transform our security. This idea underpinned President
Biden's National Cybersecurity Strategy when it was committed
to building toward a future digital ecosystem that is more
inherently defensible and resilient.
Under Director Easterly's leadership, CISA has led the way
with its Secure by Design initiative, partnering with allied
countries and private-sector partners to develop principles on
how we can better embed security into technology.
Critical is an understanding that security must primarily
be the responsibility of those with the most resources and
expertise. For too long, the response to many cyber incidents
is a reminder to turn on multifactor authentication or training
on how to spot a phishing attack.
Don't get me wrong; there is a role for cybersecurity
training and best practices for end-users. But humans are
fallible, and asking consumers to defend themselves against
well-resourced criminal gangs and nation-state actors is a
doomed strategy. Instead, we must reduce the burden on end-
users by embedding security into technology and turning on
security features by default.
I would also like to just acknowledge Ms. Adkins, who is
representing Google. I have noticed in my own Gmail some of the
recent upgrades that make it much harder for an outside actor
to access Gmail, and I think all users are appreciative of
that.
This fundamental shift in how we think about security will
not be easy, and it will take time, resources, and cooperation
between Government and the private sector. The efforts we have
seen under the Biden administration have made significant
progress, but we must continue this initiative in the coming
years.
Today's hearing is an opportunity to hear directly from
private-sector experts on the promise of Secure by Design, the
challenges we will face in shifting to this new paradigm, and
how the Federal Government can support and incentivize improved
security.
It is critical that terms like ``secure by design'' and
``secure by default'' are not just buzzwords and marketing
schemes but result in meaningful change. I hope our witnesses
will help this subcommittee better understand how we can
support private-sector innovations in security and move toward
a more secure digital ecosystem.
Before I close, this is likely our last subcommittee
hearing before a new administration takes place. CISA's Secure
by Design initiative is just one example of the many vital
projects that CISA carries out. Efforts in the next
administration to weaken or abolish CISA could have devastating
impacts on our national security, and I hope that we can
continue to work, as we have this Congress under the Chairman's
leadership, in a bipartisan way to support this vital agency.
With that, I look forward to the witnesses and their
testimony. I yield back. Thank you.
[The statement of Ranking Member Swalwell follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Eric Swalwell
December 5, 2024
In recent decades, we have witnessed remarkable technological
progress that has changed every aspect of our lives, and with rapid
advances in AI, we can expect this transformation to continue in the
coming years.
Much of this innovation has taken place here in America, including
in my district in the Bay Area, and the competition between technology
companies globally to develop new products and services has benefited
people around the world.
A challenge with this digital revolution is that the innovation
that has transformed how we communicate, store our data, and access
vital services has not always been matched with a level of security
necessary to protect us from foreign adversaries and criminal gangs.
Every day we read about cyber incidents that demonstrate the
security built into our digital ecosystem is insufficient to protect
our privacy or critical infrastructure.
To combat this problem, we must rely on the same innovative spirit
that has fueled our recent technological progress to also transform how
we secure our networks.
This idea underpinned President Biden's National Cybersecurity
Strategy when it committed to ``building toward a future digital
ecosystem that is more inherently defensible and resilient.''
And under Director Easterly's leadership, CISA has led the way with
its Secure by Design Initiative, partnering with allied countries and
private-sector partners to develop principles on how we can better
embed security into technology going forward.
Critical to this effort is an understanding that security must
primarily be the responsibility of those with the most expertise and
resources.
For too long, the response to many cyber incidents is a reminder to
turn on multifactor authentication or training on how to spot a
phishing attack.
Don't get me wrong--there's a role for cybersecurity training and
best practices for end-users.
But, humans are fallible, and asking consumers to defend themselves
against well-resourced criminal gangs and nation-state actors is a
doomed strategy.
Instead, we must reduce the burden on end-users by embedding
security into technology and turning on security features by default.
This fundamental shift in how we think about security will not be
easy, and it will take time, resources, and cooperation between
Government and the private sector.
The efforts we have seen under the Biden administration have made
significant progress, but we must continue this initiative in the
coming years.
Today's hearing will be an opportunity to hear directly from
private-sector experts on the promise of Secure by Design, the
challenges we will face in shifting to this new paradigm, and how the
Federal Government can better support and incentivize improved
security.
It is critical that terms like secure by design and secure by
default not become buzzwords in marketing schemes but instead result in
meaningfully improved security outcomes.
I hope our witnesses will help this subcommittee better understand
how we can support private sector innovations in security and move
toward a more secure digital ecosystem.
Before I close, this is likely our last subcommittee hearing before
a new administration takes office.
CISA's Secure by Design Initiative is just one example of the many
vital projects CISA carries out.
Efforts in the next administration to weaken or abolish CISA could
have devastating impacts on our national security, and I hope we can
work in a bipartisan way to support this vital agency.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Ranking Member Swalwell.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
December 5, 2024
When President Biden and Vice President Harris were sworn in 4
years ago, they committed to making cybersecurity a national security
priority, and they have.
From the May 2021 Executive Order on Improving the Nation's
Cybersecurity, to the March 2023 National Cybersecurity Strategy, to
the July 2023 National Cyber Workforce and Education Strategy, the
Biden-Harris administration has put in place ambitious policies to
secure our digital ecosystem.
A common thread in these efforts has been identifying systemic
approaches to improving security.
Notably, the National Cyber Strategy articulated a pivotal shift in
responsibility for security--away from consumers and onto software
developers and technology manufacturers who are better positioned to
systemic action reduce cyber risk.
Too frequently, the technology we rely on every day is vulnerable
to attack because manufacturers prioritized being first to market over
being the most secure in the market.
As CISA Director Jen Easterly observed: ``We don't have a
cybersecurity problem. We have a software quality problem.''
With that in mind, I commend CISA for launching the Secure by
Design Initiative and encouraging software manufacturers to take the
steps necessary to ensure their products are secure when their
customers use them.
I am pleased that over 200 companies have signed CISA's Secure by
Design Pledge, including some of our witnesses today.
I will be interested in understanding how witnesses have improved
their development practices since signing the Pledge, and how CISA can
incentivize and facilitate greater adoption of Secure by Design
practices in the future.
At the same time, I recognize that the Secure by Design Initiative
is a voluntary program with no enforcement mechanism.
We would be remiss if we did not explore the limitations of relying
on voluntary programs to improve the security of technology that
underpins our communications infrastructure, our health care
infrastructure, Federal networks, and other critical infrastructure
sectors.
Before I close, I will note that that this is the last
cybersecurity hearing we will hold during the Biden-Harris
administration.
Project 2025, which was written by people close to the President-
elect, included a series of troubling, ill-informed proposals for
CISA's future that would diminish its ability to effectively defend
Federal networks and carry out its broad infrastructure security
mission.
I hope my colleagues on this panel will educate the incoming
administration about CISA's important missions and push back against
efforts to undermine the agency in the weeks and months ahead.

Mr. Garbarino. I am pleased to have a distinguished panel
of witnesses before us today on this very important topic.
I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise their right
hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Garbarino. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative.
Thank you, and please be seated.
I would like to now formally introduce our witnesses.
Heather Adkins is a 22-year Google veteran and a founding
member of the Google Security Team. As VP of security
engineering and head of Google's Office of Cybersecurity
Resilience, she has built a global team responsible for
maintaining the safety and security of Google's networks,
systems, and applications. She is co-author of the book
``Building Secure & Reliable Systems'' and has advised numerous
organizations on how to adopt modern, defendable architectures.
Shane Fry is the CTO at RunSafe Security, Inc. He has over
a decade of experience in cybersecurity, both offensive and
defensive. Shane began his career performing vulnerability
assessments on a variety of software platforms. His research
has spanned all the layers of the hardware and software stack,
including physical circuit security, secure boot, software
updates, memory corruption, and web application
vulnerabilities. Shane has worked for the U.S. Government, a
large prime contractor, and numerous cybersecurity start-ups.
Mr. Jim Richberg is Fortinet's head of cyber policy and
global field CISO. This role enables him to leverage his nearly
40 years' experience driving innovation in cybersecurity and
threat intelligence. Prior to joining Fortinet, Jim served as
the U.S. National Intelligence Manager for Cyber, the senior
Federal executive focused on cyber intelligence within the U.S.
intelligence community. He led the creation and implementation
of the cyber strategy for the 17 departments and agencies of
the IC, set integrated priorities on the cyber threat, and
served as the senior advisor to the director of national
intelligence on cyber issues.
Dr. Srinivas Mukkamala--is that right? Wonderful--serves on
the Board of Regents for New Mexico Tech; independent board
member of El Paso Electric; State of New Mexico's Governor's
advisor on AI and cybersecurity; advisor to Cowbell Cyber and
advisor to SecurityScorecard, among many other advisory roles.
How are you here today? That's a lot of work.
He served as chief product officer for Ivanti, where he was
responsible for product management and engineering. Dr.
Mukkamala founded RiskSense, a recognized leader in risk-based
vulnerability management. Ivanti acquired RiskSense in 2021.
I thank all the witnesses for being here today.
I now recognize Ms. Adkins for 5 minutes to summarize her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HEATHER ADKINS, VICE PRESIDENT, SECURITY
ENGINEERING, GOOGLE

Ms. Adkins. Thank you.
Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and other
Members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
speak here today. I am Heather Adkins, and I'm vice president
of security engineering at Google.
Billions of people today rely on technology in their daily
lives--to run their businesses, further their education, for
entertainment, shopping, and many other things. In this
interconnected world, it's critical that we ensure technology
systems are resilient to keep people safe. As we know from the
news, that is not always the case.
Throughout my career in cybersecurity, I've had a good
vantage point from which to study how security breaches occur
and the succession of events that cause them. What I've learned
is that whether or not a system is resilient is a question of
whether it's designed properly. Cybersecurity is an inherent
property of the system, in the same way that safety is an
inherent property of an automobile.
For this reason, for over 20 years, Google has pioneered a
Secure by Design approach, long before we called it that,
embedding security into every phase of the software development
life cycle, not just the beginning or the end. This year, we
published a detailed white paper on our approach, titled ``An
Overview of Google's Commitment to Secure by Design.'' My
testimony today will share some insights from that paper.
First, we know that many attacks start with social
engineering, where an attacker tricks a user into taking
harmful action. In 2023 alone, Americans lost $12.5 billion to
phishing and scams.
To combat these kinds of threats, Google has invested in
bringing multifactor authentication to all of our users. This
journey dates back to 2010, when we launched Google
Authenticator and two-step verification for Google Workspace.
Since then, we have expanded this to all of our services and
worked with the FIDO Alliance, an industry coalition, to
develop standardized hardware tokens to stop password phishing.
This coalition has also developed industry standards such
as passkeys, a passwordless sign-in experience which has been
used to authenticate users more than 1 billion times. The
industry goal is to eliminate passwords altogether--a design
flaw on the internet that has persisted for decades.
Second, attackers exploit entire classes of vulnerabilities
that stem from how software is written. We've been working
proactively to reduce the incidence of these as well.
Our approach starts with safe coding frameworks and secure
development environments, meaning we give our developers the
tools to write safe code by default rather than relying on them
to understand everything about cybersecurity.
By doing this, we've been able to prevent many of MITRE's
25 most dangerous software weaknesses from entering our code
base, such as cross-site scripting, the No. 1 weakness; SQL
injection, the No. 3; and others. By reducing the number of
vulnerabilities we create in the development process, our users
are safer by default. We believe this is the most scalable
approach to building resilient software.
Third, we know that when a vulnerability does surface in
our products, it's important to issue fixes quickly and to be
transparent. We believe that vendors should seek to reduce the
burden on end-users by making it as easy as possible to apply
software updates. Google Chrome and Google ChromeOS, for
example, automatically update on behalf of the user so they are
protected as soon as possible. We know the speed of deployment
of patches is crucial to reducing the attacker's chances of
their success.
In the interest of transparency, we also issue CVEs and
security bulletins for products that may require users to take
action, including Android and Google Cloud. This transparency
also gives external parties insights into the type of
vulnerabilities we observe and address.
In addition to our internal proactive measures, we also
collaborate with the industry and engage with the external
research community. For example, via our Vulnerability
Disclosure Policy and our Vulnerability Rewards Programs, we
have connected with security researchers all over the world
that have helped us secure the products. Since we launched
these programs in 2010, we've distributed 18,500 awards
totaling nearly US$59 million.
Finally, when users and businesses use our products, it's
important to notify them about possible intrusions into their
accounts and the best practices to stay safe. We do this via
warnings in their Google account, just like a car dashboard
might alert a driver to an issue with the engine. This allows
users to check on the settings of their accounts using a
checkup tool and also look at personalized recommendations.
Enterprise users using Workspace and Cloud also have access
to logging information to triage the impact on their business.
These dashboard alerts are available in our products by default
for no additional cost.
This is just a brief overview of what we've done over the
last 20 years, the dedication we have to incorporating Secure
by Design at Google. We know our work is not done. Securing the
digital ecosystem really is a continuous effort. It's a team
sport. We need industry partners, policy makers, and security
experts at the table.
So I thank you for holding this important hearing, and I
look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Adkins follows:]
Prepared Statement of Heather Adkins
December 5, 2024
Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. My
name is Heather Adkins, and I serve as vice president for security
engineering at Google.
Billions of people today rely on technology in their daily lives--
to run their businesses, to further their education, for entertainment
and shopping, and much more. In this interconnected world, it's
critical that we ensure technology systems are resilient to keep people
safe. As we know from the news, that isn't always the case.
Throughout my career in cybersecurity, I have had a good vantage
point from which to study how security breaches occur, and the
succession of events that cause them. What I have learned is that
whether a system is resilient or not is a question of whether it was
designed properly--cybersecurity is an inherent property of a system,
the same way safety is an inherent property of an automobile.
For this reason, for over 20 years, Google has pioneered a Secure
by Design approach, embedding security into every phase of the software
development life cycle--not just at the beginning or the end. This
year, we published a detailed white paper (also attached) on our
approach, titled ``An Overview of Google's Commitment to Secure by
Design,'' and my testimony today will share some highlights from our
work.
First, we know that many attacks start with social engineering--
where an attacker tricks a user into taking a harmful action. Americans
lost $12.5 billion to phishing and scams in 2023 alone. To combat these
kinds of threats Google has invested in bringing multi-factor
authentication to all our users. Our journey dates back to 2010, when
we launched Google Authenticator and 2-Step Verification for Google
Workspace. Since then, we have expanded this to all our services, and
worked with the FIDO Alliance--an industry coalition--to develop
standardized hardware tokens that stop password phishing. This
coalition has also developed an industry standard called passkeys--a
passwordless sign-in experience, which has been used to authenticate
users more than 1 billion times. The industry goal is to eliminate the
password--a key design flaw on the internet that has persisted for
decades.
Second, attackers exploit entire classes of vulnerabilities that
stem from how software is written. We have been working to proactively
reduce the incidence of these. Our approach starts with our safe coding
frameworks and secure development environment. This means we give our
developers the tools to write safe code by default, rather than relying
on them to understand and remember everything about security.
We've been able to prevent many of MITRE's 25 Most Dangerous
Software Weaknesses from entering our code base, such as cross-site
scripting (the No. 1 weakness), SQL injection (the No. 3 weakness) and
others. By reducing the number of vulnerabilities we create in our
software development process, our users are safer by default. We
believe this is the most scalable approach to building resilient
software.
Third, we know that when a vulnerability does surface in our
products it's important to issue fixes quickly and to be transparent.
We also believe that vendors should seek to reduce the burden on end
users by making it as easy as possible to apply software updates.
Google Chrome and ChromeOS, for example, automatically update on the
user's behalf so they are protected as soon as possible. We know the
speed of deployment is crucial to reducing an attacker's chances of
exploiting those flaws. In the interest of transparency, we issue
Common Vulnerability and Exposure (CVEs) and security bulletins for
products that may require consumers and business to take action,
including Android, Google Cloud, and many others. This transparency
gives external parties insights into the types of vulnerabilities we
observe and address.
In addition to our internal proactive measures, Google collaborates
across industry and extensively engages with the external research
community, experts, and the public. For example, our Vulnerability
Disclosure Policy and Vulnerability Rewards Programs have connected us
to security researchers all over the world that have helped us to
secure our products. Since we launched the Vulnerability Rewards
Programs in 2010, we have distributed 18,500 rewards totaling nearly
$59 million.
Finally, when users and businesses use our products, it's important
that we notify them about possible intrusions into their accounts, and
best practices on how to stay safe. We inform users via warnings about
the security of their Google accounts, just as a car dashboard might
alert the driver to an issue with the engine. This allows the user to
check the settings of their account using our Security Checkup tool,
which offers Security Alerts and personalized recommendations.
Enterprise users using our Workspace and Cloud products also have
access to useful logging information to triage the impact to their
businesses. These ``dashboard alerts'' are available in our products by
default, for no additional cost.
This is a brief overview of 20 years of dedication to incorporating
Secure by Design at Google, but our work is not done. Securing our
digital ecosystem is a continuous effort, and a team sport where we
need industry partners, policy makers, and security experts at the
table.
Thank you, again, for holding this important hearing. I look
forward to answering your questions.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Ms. Adkins.
We've been joined by Congressman Menendez.
Happy to see you here, my friend.
I now recognize Mr. Richberg for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JIM RICHBERG, HEAD OF CYBER POLICY AND GLOBAL
FIELD CISO, FORTINET, INC.

Mr. Richberg. Thank you.
Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee, I appreciate this
opportunity to testify before you today.
My name is Jim Richberg. I serve as head of cyber policy,
global field CISO at Fortinet.
Prior to my time at Fortinet, I served in the Federal
Government, overseeing implementation of Government-wide
cybersecurity initiatives for Presidents Bush and Obama and
serving as the national intelligence manager for cyber under 2
directors of national intelligence.
Fortinet is a U.S. company that is one of the largest
cybersecurity companies in the world. While we manufacture over
half of the firewalls sold worldwide, our portfolio actually
extends across nearly 60 different integrated security and
networking solutions.
We also run an award-winning cybersecurity training
institute with educational partners across the United States.
We appreciate this subcommittee's focus on cyber work force
efforts, including the PIVOTT Act.
We have a broad domestic footprint of over 4,000 employees
in the United States and people or infrastructure in virtually
every State. We recently hosted committee staff for a work
force development discussion at our headquarters in Sunnyvale,
California.
Ranking Member Swalwell, we appreciate you taking time to
visit our facility in Union City. We have facilities across the
country, including Florida, Texas, Georgia, and Illinois.
Now, I represent Fortinet in the council that serves as the
IT sector's voice and partner for collaboration with CISA, and
the council asked me to help lead its collaboration with CISA
on Secure by Design.
Industry was already working on Secure by Design, but as a
concept it gained prominence as a part of the 2023 National
Cybersecurity Strategy and in subsequent CISA-led white papers.
These described the potential of Secure by Design but did not
constitute an actionable road map for IT manufacturers or their
customers to follow.
So CISA began to work with our IT council to craft this
voluntary pledge that software producers could use as a
starting point. The team that worked on the pledge focused on
selecting items that would be achievable by small business but
also provide scope for improvement by larger and more capable
companies.
Our philosophy in crafting the pledge was to agree on what
to accomplish and to leave it to pledge signatories to
determine how to tackle each of these goals. We were also
mindful that pledge goals should yield tangible improvements to
user security and produce measures of progress that could be
shared publicly.
The pledge was released in May 2024, with 68 companies,
including Fortinet, signing it initially. Currently, as the
Chairman has noted, over 250 companies, ranging from small
software developers to the largest IT firms in the world, have
signed it.
Pledge signers agree to work on 7 specified goals and to
report their progress within 1 year. Fortinet has been making
significant progress on each of the pledge goals. I'd be happy
to go into specifics in response to your questions.
I volunteered to lead industry's collaboration with CISA
because of my personal belief in the value of this approach and
because Fortinet has an on-going commitment to the core
concepts of Secure by Design.
Radical transparency is one of those concepts. It's the
idea that IT companies should disclose their product
vulnerabilities, whether these are found internally or
externally, and Fortinet proudly adheres to that tenet.
For too long, companies have cited each other's
vulnerabilities in misleading marketing rather than
acknowledging that everyone should find and mitigate
vulnerabilities. We hope this pledge helps mature the sector's
approach to this important issue, which is one that affects
both cyber resilience and economic competitiveness.
While Secure by Design has been shown by Fortinet and other
early adopters to be achievable, this approach will only
succeed if it is valued by the marketplace. Unfortunately, this
is not like the movie ``Field of Dreams'' where, if you build
it, they, the customers, will automatically come. The crucial
step will be in creating viable ``secure by demand.''
In my work with executives at major companies, I've found
that few of them have heard of Secure by Design but that
virtually all of them are interested in considering it as at
least a possible factor in procurement. At this point,
customers can likely find a supplier in most major software
categories who has signed the pledge.
In my experience, letting market forces drive change is a
powerful and practical approach to improving security and
resilience. While Secure by Design is not a panacea, it can be
a powerful lever for private-sector-led progress in
cybersecurity. This concept is a work in progress, and like the
process of creating the current pledge, its success will
require continued public-private partnership.
I thank you for the opportunity to be part of this
important hearing and look forward to today's discussion and
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Richberg follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jim Richberg
December 5, 2024
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, Chairman Garbarino,
Ranking Member Swalwell, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee,
I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today on ``Secure by
Design'', which is an important but little understood tool for
improving cybersecurity. My name is Jim Richberg and I serve as head of
cyber policy and global field chief information security officer at
Fortinet.
Fortinet \1\ is a U.S. company that is one of the largest
cybersecurity companies in the world. While we manufacture over half of
the firewalls sold world-wide, our portfolio extends across nearly 60
different integrated cybersecurity and networking solutions and
services, reflecting our commitment to innovation as information
technology (IT) and cyber threats continue to evolve. In addition to
our products and services, Fortinet operates a robust cybersecurity
training institute \2\ focused on helping to address the significant
global cyber workforce and skill gaps and enabling a more digitally
secure society.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.fortinet.com/corporate/about-us/about-us.
\2\ https://training.fortinet.com.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fortinet is part of numerous collaborative activities between
industry and the U.S. Government, ranging from participation in the IT
sector's coordinating council to collaboration on technology
development through NIST's National Cybersecurity Excellence
Partnership \3\ and coordinated cyber threat analysis and response via
the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative \4\ (JCDC) run by the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA). Reflecting the
fact that cyber crime does not stop at country borders, Fortinet also
participates in global initiatives such as the World Economic Forum
Centre for Cybersecurity \5\ and the Cyber Threat Alliance.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ NCEP: A Mechanism for Partnering with NCCoE/NCCoE.
\4\ Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative/CISA.
\5\ https://centres.weforum.org/centre-for-cybersecurity.
\6\ Home--Cyber Threat Alliance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I represent Fortinet in multiple public-private sector fora and
work with governments and large enterprises across the United States
and globally to address complex cyber problems ranging from Artificial
Intelligence to Zero Trust. My knowledge of cybersecurity, the cyber
threat landscape, and the need for building cyber resilience within
organizations and nationally is based upon my 33 years of service in
the U.S. Government as well as my work at Fortinet. I oversaw the
implementation of the whole-of-Government Comprehensive National
Cybersecurity Initiative \7\ for Presidents Bush and Obama. I also
served as the National Intelligence Manager for Cyber under 2 directors
of national intelligence and was responsible for creating a unifying
cyber strategy for the U.S. intelligence community and for setting its
cyber threat priorities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ NSPD 54: Cybersecurity Policy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Information Technology is part of U.S. critical infrastructure, and
I am honored to represent Fortinet in the Sector Coordinating Council
\8\ that serves as the sector's voice and partner for collaboration
with CISA, which is the Sector Risk Management Agency for IT. As a
Council member, I was one of the leaders in its extensive collaboration
with CISA on Secure by Design and I am well-positioned to talk about
this initiative both broadly and in depth.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ IT Sector Coordinating Council--Home.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
what is secure by design and where did it come from?
Secure by Design was part of the 2023 U.S. National Cybersecurity
Strategy,\9\ which recognized the need for a fundamental shift in how
the United States should allocate roles, responsibilities, and
resources in cyber space. The Strategy noted that ``We must rebalance
the responsibility to defend cyber space by shifting the burden for
cybersecurity away from individuals, small businesses, local
governments, and infrastructure operators, and onto the organizations
that are most capable and best positioned to reduce risks for all of
us.''\10\ This meant shifting the focus of responsibility toward the
producers of the IT products and services which are vital to
individuals, organizations, and our critical infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ National Cybersecurity Strategy/ONCD/The White House.
\10\ National Cybersecurity Strategy/ONCD/The White House.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Following the release of the U.S. National Strategy, Secure by
Design was described in greater depth in a White Paper \11\ authored by
CISA, other U.S. Government agencies, and international partners in
2023. Its guidance for IT manufacturers focused on 3 core principles:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Secure By Design.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. ``The burden of security should not fall solely on the customer.
Software manufacturers should take ownership of the security
outcomes of their customer's purchase and evolve their products
accordingly.
2. ``Embrace radical transparency and accountability. Software
manufacturers should pride themselves in delivering safe and
secure products, as well as differentiating themselves from the
rest of the manufacturer community based on their ability to do
so. This may include sharing information they learn from their
customer deployments, such as the uptake of strong
authentication mechanisms by default. It also includes a strong
commitment to ensure vulnerability advisories and associated
common vulnerability and exposure (CVE) records are complete
and accurate. However, beware of the temptation to count CVEs
as a negative metric, since such numbers are also a sign of a
healthy code analysis and testing community.
3. ``Build organizational structure and leadership to achieve these
goals.''\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Shifting the Balance of Cybersecurity Risk: Principles and
Approaches for Security-by-Design and -Default.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The White Paper also introduced the concept of ``Secure by
Default'', with vendors shipping products in configurations that would
be effective against the most likely or prevalent threats rather than
relying on users to become near-experts before they could become
secure, or to follow ``hardening guides'' that require the customer to
take specific configuration steps to operate securely. Many have cited
the multi-faceted public and private-sector effort that led to dramatic
improvements in motor vehicle safety \13\ as proof that collective
cybersecurity can be enhanced through Secure by Design manufacturer-
driven action. ``Secure by Default'' is similar, potentially
encompassing the equivalent of seat belt chimes--``noisy'' and repeated
reminders that would notify a user when they operate a product in a
less-than-secure mode.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ https://www.nhtsa.gov/how-vehicle-safety-has-improved-over-
decades.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Government-drafted White Paper described the potential of
Secure by Design, but it did not constitute an adequate road map for
either producers of software or more critically, for customers to use.
Making this concept usable required sustained engagement and public-/
private-sector partnership.
crafting a voluntary secure by design pledge
To that end, in late 2023 CISA began work with the IT Sector
Coordinating Council on Secure by Design with the intent of making the
concept actionable in the form of a voluntary pledge \14\ that
producers of software could adopt and that current or potential
customers could use as a guide. I co-led this process of collaboration
from the industry side.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Secure by Design Pledge/CISA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISA had the pen but was open to industry's input on both specific
content and the structure of the Pledge. While recognizing that signing
the Pledge was going to represent a purely voluntary commitment, CISA
was adamant that it be viewed as an ``all or nothing'' undertaking by
signatories rather than something where they would ``cherry pick''
goals to work on. CISA and the industry team that worked on the Pledge
focused on selecting and framing actions that could be achievable even
for small businesses, but also provide room for improvement by larger
and more cyber-capable companies.
Our philosophy in crafting the Pledge was to agree on goals to be
pursued without prescribing any specific means for reaching them. In
other words, industry and CISA worked to reach agreement on outcomes
(what to accomplish) and left it to signatories to determine how to
tackle accomplishing these goals. This is perhaps most relevant to the
Pledge goal focused on eliminating entire classes of vulnerabilities,
where both the specific outcomes and the means for implementation are
likely to vary significantly by signatory and the type of vulnerability
they have chosen to address.
We were mindful during Pledge development that its goals should
generate measurable outcomes and measures of progress that could be
shared with the public and with customers. We realized that, if the
Pledge was to become widely adopted, its goals had to be both
attainable and impactful. We also recognized that the Pledge approach
was likely to be iterative, and the initial Pledge was envisioned as a
``proof of concept'' that could generate lessons learned to inform any
further collaboration on a revised Pledge.
details of the secure by design pledge
By signing the Pledge, companies undertake to show measurable
progress against the following goals within 1 year:\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Secure by Design Pledge/CISA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Multi-factor authentication (MFA).--Demonstrate actions taken to
measurably increase the use of multi-factor authentication
across the manufacturer's products.
2. Default passwords.--Demonstrate measurable progress toward
reducing default passwords across the manufacturers' products.
3. Reducing entire classes of vulnerability.--Demonstrate actions
taken toward enabling a significant measurable reduction in the
prevalence of one or more vulnerability classes across the
manufacturer's products.
4. Security patches.--Demonstrate actions taken to measurably
increase the installation of security patches by customers.
5. Vulnerability disclosure policy.--Publish a vulnerability
disclosure policy (VDP).
6. CVEs.--Demonstrate transparency in vulnerability reporting.
7. Evidence of intrusions.--Demonstrate a measurable increase in
the ability for customers to gather evidence of cybersecurity
intrusions affecting the manufacturer's products.
The Pledge was designed to define a floor or minimum level of
commitment in each of the areas addressed by the Goals and not to
establish a performance ceiling. For example, cyber attackers often
take advantage of poor identity and access management controls, so the
Pledge calls on signatories to increase the use of Multi-Factor
Authentication (MFA) by customers. There are multiple ways to
accomplish this goal, some of which provide security against more
sophisticated attacks, but even basic MFA improves security compared to
employing a user id and password alone.
The Pledge was publicly released in May 2024, with 68 companies--
including Fortinet--signing it at the RSA cybersecurity conference. As
of 1 December 2024, over 250 companies,\16\ ranging from small software
developers to some of the largest IT firms in the world, have signed
this voluntary agreement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Secure by Design Pledge Signers/CISA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
fortinet's perspective on the importance of the pledge
I volunteered to lead industry's collaboration with CISA both
because of my personal belief in the potential value of this approach
and because of Fortinet's industry leadership in many of the concepts
at the core of Secure by Design. At Fortinet, we have a long-standing
dedication to proactively incorporating and adhering to security best
practices aligned with Government partners like CISA across our product
development life cycle. As a company we believe that seeing Secure by
Design precepts implemented more broadly would be beneficial to our
collective security and that it is achievable by industry.
Secure coding practices and tools continue to improve with time,
and Fortinet has combined these improving industry-wide capabilities
along with internally-driven innovation. Our Secure Product Development
Lifecycle Policy, which is based on secure-by-design and secure-by-
default principles, helps ensure that security is built into each
product from its inception and covers every stage of the product life
cycle from initial design through to the end of product use.
embracing radical transparency
Computer code is written by humans and given the size and
complexity of modern software programs, mistakes in creating or
maintaining software or in user configuration of a product are
virtually inevitable. The growth in computing power, new modes of
connectivity, and ever-expanding malicious actor tactics, techniques,
and procedures also drive the exploitability of vulnerabilities. In
general, software vulnerabilities can be found by 1 of 3 sources:
1. The manufacturer of a product, who is arguably the most familiar
with its functions and inner workings.
2. Customers who may encounter problems or anomalies during use,
and third-party security researchers who explicitly look for
potential problems. If these problems are reported to or shared
with the manufacturer, they may be fixed or ``patched''.
3. Malicious actors who, when they find a vulnerability, exploit it
rather than report it for mitigation.
Fortinet is proud that nearly 80 percent of the vulnerabilities
discovered in its products in 2023 were identified by the company
internally (No. 1 above) rather than found by outsiders (No. 2 and No.
3).
Radical Transparency is one of the core tenets of Secure by Design.
If something matches the characteristics of a CVE, Fortinet is
committed to reporting it as such rather than fixing the problem in the
guise of a ``performance enhancement''. To improve national cyber
resilience and consumer awareness, Fortinet believes that IT companies
should collectively practice such ``radical transparency'' with respect
to their disclosures of vulnerabilities, whether they are found
internally or externally.
Correctly and comprehensively cataloging problems, patches, and
upgrades is important. Large organizations often devote resources to
verifying that a patch works as intended and to validating that it does
not break something else in an organization's IT environment before
they will install the update. While well-resourced organizations may
have the staff and budget to perform this validation and verification
process, their resources are finite. Organizations will often make the
decision whether to perform validation and verification based on
whether a software update is to a function that is relevant to them. If
a security vulnerability is mischaracterized as a ``bug fix'',
``performance enhancement'' or functional upgrade, a company may not
apply a patch without realizing that its security is affected by the
underlying vulnerability that the patch addresses.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ How Proactive Responsible Radical Transparency Benefits
Customers/Fortinet.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a rule, smaller organizations and individual users typically
don't have a formal process or policy with regards to patching. They
often fail to patch due to resource limitations or because they are not
even aware of an update's existence. For these users, a vendor policy
of automatically updating software will result in more widespread
patching and increased security for these enterprises and users.
fortinet's performance on the pledge
Fortinet has been making significant progress implementing the
specific goals outlined in the CISA Secure by Design Pledge since
signing it in May 2024. Our efforts \18\ include:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ https://www.fortinet.com/blog/industry-trends/fortinet-
progress-on-its-secure-by-design-pledge-commitments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Eliminating default passwords and prompting users to create
strong passwords during the product installation process.

Implementing automatic/by default update capabilities for
products typically used by small and medium-sized
organizations--automatically remediating security issues
(applying security patches) while allowing users to opt out if
desired.

Demonstrating transparency through reporting all Common
Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVEs) along with the
accompanying Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE). This is
important since CISA has observed that many organizations will
report a vulnerability without noting the class (CWE) of
activity it belongs to. This omission makes it difficult to use
the National Vulnerability Database of CVE's for either
strategic analysis (e.g., to determine which are the most
prevalent classes of vulnerability) or tactically (enabling an
organization to search by the classes of weakness relevant to
itself).

Publishing a machine-readable security policy and portal for
our customers or third-party researchers to use in reporting
any vulnerabilities they find in Fortinet products.

Working to eradicate whole classes of vulnerability.
Fortinet is working on numerous initiatives aligned to the other
Pledge objects as well, such as providing greater support to help
customers using end-of-life products transition to newer supported
versions.
what's next? looking beyond the secure by design pledge
Secure by Design and Secure by Default have been shown by Fortinet
and other early adopters to be viable for IT manufacturers to implement
and to generate measurable improvements in their customers' security.
However, this approach will only succeed if it is recognized and
desired by the marketplace--and unfortunately this is not like the
movie ``Field of Dreams'' where if you build it, they (customers) will
automatically come. The crucial step will be in creating viable
``Secure by Demand''.
I speak frequently with cybersecurity and IT executives at major
companies and have found that few of them are aware of Secure by
Design--but that virtually all of them were interested in considering
it as a possible factor in procurement decisions. A logo or symbol
indicating that a manufacturer has signed the Pledge and an
accompanying consumer awareness campaign could help increase overall
user awareness of Secure by Design. There is a potential role for both
Government and the private sector in accomplishing this.
At this point, over 250 companies representing a significant
portion of the software market have signed the Pledge, and customers
likely can find a supplier in most major categories of software who has
signed the Pledge and made a commitment to showing what they have done
to implement it. Over a dozen allied governments joined the United
States in co-authoring the Secure by Design White Paper,\19\ making
participation in fielding products demonstrating the Secure by Design
approach more attractive to companies that sell IT in multiple national
markets.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Secure-by-Design/CISA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Broadening the scope and application of this concept beyond IT
could also help build demand, and work is under way to apply the
concept to Operational Technology (OT) as well. But while the
Operational Technology environment has a significant overlap with IT in
terms of security problems and solutions, significant differences make
a wholesale ``lift and shift'' of the IT-focused model impractical for
OT. The ecosystem of producers and customers is different, and the
product life cycle is dramatically longer, with OT systems often kept
in service for 30 years or more rather than replaced every few years as
in IT. Mission priorities also differ, with OT operators emphasizing
safety and reliability over security.
conclusion
As one who has worked on cybersecurity in both the public and
private sectors, I believe that letting market forces drive broad
change is a powerful and practical approach to improving our
cybersecurity and digital resilience. Secure by Design is not a panacea
but it can be a powerful lever for private sector-led enhancement of
our cybersecurity. This concept is a work in progress, and like the
process of creating the current Secure by Design Pledge, its ultimate
success will require continued public-private partnership. We in
industry stand ready to assist the committee, and I thank you for the
opportunity to be part of this important hearing. I look forward to
today's discussion and I welcome your questions.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Richberg.
I now recognize Mr. Fry for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SHANE PAULSEN FRY, CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER,
RUNSAFE SECURITY, INC.

Mr. Fry. Thank you, Chairman Green, Subcommittee Chairman
Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and esteemed Members of the
committee. I appreciate the opportunity to address you today on
CISA's Secure by Design initiative.
My name is Shane Fry, and I'm the chief technology officer
of RunSafe Security, having joined the company in 2018 after
spending time in the U.S. Government and in commercial
organizations performing advanced cyber research. I spent the
majority of my career focused on devices commonly found in
critical infrastructure.
Implementing the practices of Secure by Design has helped
RunSafe Security improve the security and reliability our
software and, thus, the security and reliability of our
customers' systems, which include critical infrastructure and
military weapons systems. It took us approximately 6 months to
write our relatively small code base into Rust, including time
to verify completeness and perform extensive testing.
Since signing the Secure by Design pledge, we've integrated
SBOM generation into our builds and plan to host these SBOMs
publicly alongside each of our releases. We strongly believe
that companies pledging to do Secure by Design should do so as
publicly and transparently as possible, and our pledge has
accelerated our plans to be more public about the security
posture of our software.
Secure by Design is a robust program that stands to shape
development practices for decades to come. It has helped
reinforce important cybersecurity concepts like software supply
chain security and memory safety. It serves its role well as a
North Star for software and device developers, and its
importance can been seen by the large number of companies that
have signed the Secure by Design pledge.
The mechanics for organizations to achieve true, complete
Secure by Design, however, can take years or even decades for
existing software and systems, risking the program's relevance
if bridges to Secure by Design aren't encouraged.
As it pertains to critical infrastructure protection, the
vision of Secure by Design meets the reality of legacy
hardware, trillions of lines of code, and complex vendor supply
chains. Unfortunately, our adversaries won't stop their
campaigns of weaponizing our critical infrastructure to achieve
their geopolitical objectives while we get our cyber house in
order.
In a hearing before the Select Committee on the Chinese
Communist Party in January, witnesses laid out with stark
clarity that China is pre-placing cyber weapons inside our
critical infrastructure in order to disrupt basic citizen
services such as water, transportation, communication, and
energy.
FBI Director Wray also indicated that if every cyber asset
at the FBI was directed to counter China, ignoring all other
threats, China's hacking forces would still outnumber the FBI
assets 50 to 1.
Companies we're working with have told us it will take 8
years or more to fully implement aspects of Secure by Design.
So, with 50 times our assets and 8-plus years to continue
placing cyber weapons, our critical infrastructure might not be
ours by the time we are Secure by Design.
One of the key but otherwise esoteric issues covered by
Secure by Design is memory safety. In recent years, NSA, ONCD,
Congress, and CISA have all increased visibility on the risks
caused by memory safety issues.
Memory safety attacks take legitimate software and stitch
pieces of them together in unauthorized ways to hijack the
system. Memory safety vulnerabilities account for about 70
percent of vulnerabilities in critical infrastructure and often
have the highest severity rating.
Secure by Design guides device manufacturers to rewrite all
their software into a memory-safe language like Rust.
According to a former Gartner analyst, the cost of
rewriting that software can be approximated, though, between
$40- and $70 trillion. For many reasons, that transition to
Rust is mechanically impossible within the next 5 years,
leaving our infrastructure exposed to attack.
Studies undertaken by firms at the leading edge of
automating code rewrites to Rust indicate that tools are only
able to safely handle about 5 percent of the effort. DARPA's
TRACTOR effort will hopefully improve that, but we're a few
years out from real results there.
Finally, there are extensive challenges utilizing memory-
safe languages in industries with safety certification
requirements.
Despite the challenges we've discussed, the committee has
many compelling paths forward, and CISA's investment in Secure
by Design will be essential at every turn. So please allow me
to present some suggestions on how industry and Government can
work together to meaningfully improve the security of critical
infrastructure.
First, CISA should revise Secure by Design to encourage
device manufacturers to immediately implement existing
commercial solutions that prevent exploitation and memory
safety vulnerabilities.
Second, the U.S. Government should lead by example. All
Government-developed or -required software should require
compliance with Secure by Design.
Third, Congress should find ways to encourage critical
infrastructure asset owners to update software in a timely
manner so that Secure by Design updates are actually deployed
to fielded devices.
Fourth, CISA should include critical infrastructure
manufacturers in its Secure by Design pledge program. CISA's
pledge explicitly excludes physical products, which ends up
excluding most industrial control systems products. The results
are clear: None of the major industrial control systems device
manufacturers have signed the pledge.
Finally, Congress should incentivize development of safety-
certified tooling for memory-safe languages.
In closing, Secure by Design has had a tremendous impact on
industry, but it has a long way to go before we can
collectively declare victory.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify to this esteemed
subcommittee today. I look forward to answering your questions,
and I appreciate your focus on this very important program.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fry follows:]
Prepared Statement of Shane Paulsen Fry
December 5, 2024
Thank you Chairman Green, Subcommittee Chairman Garbarino, Ranking
Member Swalwell, and esteemed Members of the committee. I appreciate
the opportunity to address the subcommittee today on CISA's Secure by
Design initiative.
My name is Shane Fry and I am the chief technology officer of
RunSafe Security, having joined the company in 2018 after spending time
in the U.S. Government and then commercial organizations performing
advanced cyber research, both offensive and defensive in nature. I've
spent the majority of my career focused in embedded device security,
particularly in devices commonly found in critical infrastructure.
Implementing the practices of Secure by Design has helped RunSafe
improve the security and reliability of our software, and thus the
security and reliability of our customers' systems, which include
critical infrastructure and military weapon systems. While we do have a
secure software development process, we felt obligated as a security
company to port our software to a memory-safe language so we would not
be the source of an attack on customer systems and networks. It took us
approximately 6 months to port our code to Rust, including time to
verify correctness of the port and perform extensive testing. Since
signing the Secure by Design pledge, we've integrated SBOM generation
into our build processes and have plans to host those SBOMs publicly
alongside each of our releases. We strongly believe that companies
pledging to do Secure by Design should do so as publicly and
transparently as possible, and our pledge has accelerated plans to be
more public about the security posture of our software.
secure by design as a north star
Secure by Design is a robust program, whose development with
aggressive industry engagement increases the chance it shapes product
and development practices for decades to come. Instead of companies
playing defense on cyber, focusing on chasing every bug, Secure by
Design lays out an affirmative series of practices that can decrease
the overall risk of devices. It has helped reinforce important
cybersecurity concepts like software supply chain security and memory
safety, which we'll come back to shortly. It serves its role well as a
North Star for software and device developers and its importance can be
seen by the large number of companies that have signed the Secure by
Design pledge.
The only challenge with a ``North Star'' is that you never quite
reach it. The mechanics for organizations to achieve true, complete
Secure by Design can take years or even decades for existing software
and systems, risking the program's relevance if ``Bridges to Secure by
Design'' aren't encouraged. The tight, well-researched recommendations
decompose into thousands of complex technical decisions that take years
to implement.
critical infrastructure protection
As it pertains to Critical Infrastructure Protection, the elegant
vision of Secure by Design meets the reality of legacy hardware, legacy
processors, limited system memory, trillions of lines of code, and
complex vendor supply chains. Unfortunately, our adversaries won't stop
their campaigns of weaponizing our critical infrastructure to achieve
their geopolitical objectives while we get our ``cyber house'' in
order. In a hearing before the Select Committee on the Chinese
Community Party in January, FBI Director Wray, then-General Nakasone,
Director Easterly, and Dr. Coker laid out with stark clarity that China
is pre-placing cyber weapons inside our critical infrastructure, in
order to disrupt basic citizen services, such as water, transportation,
communications, and energy, attempting to divert the political will of
the United States from defending Taiwan when China decides to use
military action to coerce Taiwan into CCP's system, perhaps between
2027 and 2030. How important will our commitment to Taiwan be if we
can't provide clean water to our populace? Director Wray also indicated
that if every cyber asset at the FBI was directed to counter China,
ignoring all other threats, China's hacking forces would still
outnumber the FBI assets 50:1. Companies we're working with in industry
have told us it will take 8-15 years, or more, to fully implement
aspects of Secure by Design. With 50 times our defensive assets and 8-
15 years to continue placing cyber weapons, our critical infrastructure
might not be ``our'' critical infrastructure by the time we are Secure
by Design.
memory safety
One of the key, but otherwise-esoteric, issues brought to the
forefront of cyber hygiene conversations by Secure by Design is
``Memory Safety.'' In recent years, the National Security Agency, the
Office of the National Cyber Director, Congress, and CISA have all
increased visibility on the endemic risk caused by Memory Safety issues
across the economy. In short, Memory Safety issues are when an attacker
is able to misuse legitimate software in memory for unintended
purposes, arising primarily from systems written in C and C++. By way
of an analogy, a memory safety ``attack'' would be similar to taking
the letters, words, and spaces from Little Red Riding Hood and creating
a ransom note using those same letters in a different order. Memory
Safety attacks take legitimate software and stitch the pieces of the
software together in unauthorized ways to hijack the system. As
highlighted by the NSA, ONCD, CISA, Microsoft, and many others, memory
safety vulnerabilities account for about 70 percent of the
vulnerabilities in C and C++ software. Additionally, according to
research by Dr. Laurie Williams at North Carolina State University,
this class of vulnerabilities has a consistently higher vulnerability
rating than every other class of vulnerabilities and takes twice as
long to fix.
Secure by Design guides critical infrastructure device
manufacturers to rewrite all of their C and C++ software into a memory-
safe language like Rust. For a litany of reasons, that transition to
Rust is mechanically impossible within the next 5 years, leaving our
infrastructure exposed to attack. No combination of money, people, or
technology exist to achieve that. According to former Gartner analyst
Brad LaPorte, now at High Tide Advisors, the cost of rewriting the
software can be approximated at between $40 and $70 trillion, based on
a comparison to the Y2K problem. There are not enough developers to
write or maintain that much Rust. Additionally, the salaries for
existing Rust developers tend to be in the top quartile of developer
salaries, causing any rewrites to draw on the most constrained and
expensive resources. Even if one device manufacturer chooses to write
all of their code in Rust, the supporting dependencies in the operating
system might not be present in a memory-safe language. Even recent
studies undertaken by firms at the leading edge of automating code-
rewrites from C to Rust indicate that humans are still needed for 95
percent of the effort, with tools only able to handle 5 percent of the
effort. Finally, there are extensive challenges utilizing memory-safe
languages in certain critical infrastructure industries where software
needs to meet safety certification requirements, for example DO-178 in
aviation and ISO 26262 in automotive.
proposed solutions
Despite the challenges we've discussed, the committee has many
compelling paths forward and CISA's investment in Secure by Design will
be essential at each turn. So please allow me to present some
suggestions on how industry and Government can work together to
meaningfully improve the security of critical infrastructure:
1. CISA should modify Secure by Design to incorporate memory
protections into existing devices today by encouraging device
manufacturers to implement existing commercial solutions that
prevent exploitation of devastating memory safety
vulnerabilities even without rewriting a single line of code.
2. The U.S. Government should lead by example: U.S. Government-
developed software should adopt software memory protections
today and all funded acquisitions of devices or software should
mandate compliance with Secure by Design.
3. Congress should find ways to encourage critical infrastructure
asset owners to update software in a timely manner. Assuming
every device manufacturer adopts Secure by Design and has
secure releases available tomorrow, a huge hole still exists in
critical infrastructure: a software update that is secure by
default but is never deployed to fielded assets does not make
critical infrastructure any more secure than it is today. None
of CISA's current efforts, Secure by Design, Secure by Default,
or Secure by Demand address this problem.
4. CISA should include critical infrastructure manufacturers in its
Secure by Design Pledge program. For some unexplainable reason,
CISA's pledge explicitly excludes physical products, which ends
up excluding most critical infrastructure products. The results
are clear: none of the major critical infrastructure
manufacturers have signed the pledge.
5. Congress should incentivize development of safety certified
tooling for DO-178/DO-330 and ISO 26262 certification and ISA
62443.
closing
Secure by Design has already had a tremendous impact on industry,
but it has a long way to go before we can collectively declare victory.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify to this esteemed subcommittee
today. I look forward to answering your questions and I appreciate your
focus on this very important program.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Fry.
I recognize Dr. Mukkamala for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SRINIVAS MUKKAMALA, BOARD OF REGENTS, NEW MEXICO
TECH; EL PASO ELECTRIC

Mr. Mukkamala. Thank you, Chairman Garbarino, for having me
here, Member Swalwell, and the rest of the committee Members.
So my name is Srinivas Mukkamala. So I have a really unique
representation, being on the Board of Regents of New Mexico
Tech, which was just featured in the RAND report last week on
kinetic warfare and how the United States will be up for a rude
shock. That work is actually being done south, on the Southern
Border of the United States, called Playas, where we look at
every single communication system and look at, if there is
vulnerable software, how can that take down our men and women
on the front lines. This was just published last week.
I also represent a utility, one of the largest utilities in
the country, which also owns the largest nuclear power plant,
and a border, supports 3 bases, and I'm an independent board
member there.
I also represent Cowbell Cyber, which is in the
Congressman's district, which insures small and medium
businesses in an event, if there is an unfortunate thing, how
do you really defend yourself?
So a very interesting perspective from 3 different walks of
life--training the future cyber citizens; really looking at how
do you power AI, generating power, the livelihood; and the
third one is, if you're at an incident, how do you recover from
that?
So I was a fortunate recipient of the Congressional support
for getting my degree in AI and cybersecurity in 2000. A lot of
people talk about cybersecurity today; very few of us actually
were trained in cyber, in AI, 25 years ago. We didn't learn on
the job. We didn't learn it by choice. We actually went to
school for that. That gives us a very good understanding about
the fundamentals of what's working and what's not.
So what I want to focus on is a class in 2001 which was
paramount, software integrity class that was taught in major
universities. Zero-defect software was the theme, and written
by Allan Stavely from New Mexico Tech. We cannot have software
with errors. I'm talking 25 years ago. The case study which we
all studied was the Therac-25. It's a risk condition that
killed people with those issues.
Today, 25 years later, we're talking memory-safe, we're
talking risk conditions, and it is one of the examples CISA
talks about you can't have in your court--25 years later.
In 2005, a program called Build In Security, by DHS, with
Carnegie Mellon, was introduced. Again, a voluntary program.
Every vendor said, we will follow this, we will have built-in
security. Twenty years later, we're still talking Secure by
Design.
I think we have a fundamental challenge, and we are up for
a rude shock. There are two alarming scenarios I want to bring
to the committee's attention.
The first one is a multi-trillion-dollar tech debt program.
It's a real problem. We talk about financial debt; we talk
about printing money. We have a real tech debt problem.
The second one is, we have $1.4 trillion worth of software
installed on systems running critical infrastructure around the
world. This is what's giving the adversaries an asymmetric
advantage. It is not their sophistication. Yes, they're
sophisticated, but it's really the software errors that's
giving them the advantage. Not us being resilient and not being
able to respond on time is allowing the so-called Chinese
actors, North Korean actors, Korean actors--you name the
actor--to own our systems and cause havoc.
One of the questions we should ask for ourselves: When we
have a system of truths like National Software Reference
Library, we have the national vulnerability software library,
NVD, why don't we have a national legacy software library?
Because that brings real transparency. As a consumer, I
know that I'm using a legacy software. Why are we not
developing that nationally and educating the consumers? That
will force the vendors to get away from legacy software. We
expect the consumer to know what they're buying, but
unfortunately we might not.
There are 3 things I want to bring to the committee's
attention.
We need to have transparency, and lack of accountability is
not helping. That needs to be enforced, and that needs to be
really brought to the forefront.
The second one is, we need to define classes of
vulnerabilities. We keep talking about different rankings,
``top 25 most dangerous common weaknesses.'' That ranking
changes every other year. There is a legacy ranking, there's a
current ranking, and when you start looking at the future
rankings for AI, which we all are talking about, it's a very
different ranking. So what am I going to hold you accountable
for? What is your guidance? What do you really want us to do?
The third one I want to really talk about is, software
safety is not a choice. It is not a design thing. I mean,
design is important, but you cannot--I mean, you won't even buy
a stroller without a safety symbol on it. Why am I using
software without a safety symbol on that and letting critical
infrastructure run? We regulate medical devices, we regulate
utilities, we regulate every single thing around us. Why not
software?
I think it's paramount, it's about time to make sure there
is assurance on the software that's being put on consumers,
that runs national security systems and critical
infrastructure, so we all can be assured and be confident that
we are actually running a reliable software and we are not in
danger.
With that, thank you for this opportunity. I'm happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mukkamala follows:]
Prepared Statement of Srinivas Mukkamala
Thursday, December 5, 2024
Software errors can be a significant reason for safety issues, as
malfunctions caused by bugs in code can lead to dangerous situations in
systems that control critical functions like medical devices,
transportation systems, or industrial machinery, potentially causing
harm to users or the environment if not properly addressed.
A good example and a case study in most U.S. universities software
integrity course curriculum is The Therac-25.
The Therac-25 is a computer-controlled radiation therapy machine
produced by Atomic Energy of Canada Limited (AECL) in 1982. It was
involved in at least 6 accidents between 1985 and 1987, in which some
patients were given massive overdoses of radiation. Because of
concurrent programming errors (also known as race conditions), it
sometimes gave its patients radiation doses that were hundreds of times
greater than normal, resulting in death or serious injury. These
accidents highlighted the dangers of software control of safety-
critical systems.
We have 2 alarming scenarios at hand as I testify on Dec 5, 2024:

A report published by Forbes: A Trillion-Dollar Global Tech
Problem, a recent study examined the increase in tech debt from
2012 to 2023 across industries and regions reveals global tech
debt has nearly doubled over this time frame, increasing by
around $6 trillion.

In the United States, 3 sectors are responsible for 64
percent of the estimated $2.2 trillion rise in tech debt:
banking and investment services; communications, media, and
services; and Government.

$1.14 Trillion to Keep the Lights on: Legacy's Drag on
Productivity published by Mechanical Orchard. January 23, 2023.
Legacy systems run code or rely on libraries that might contain
known security vulnerabilities with no way to patch these. Dated,
insecure code increases the attack surface for a business.
In its 2019 study of several critical Federal Government systems,
GAO noted that several of the legacy systems were operating with known
security vulnerabilities and unsupported hardware and software.
What is alarming is the lack of transparency and a catalog of
legacy systems and software serving critical infrastructure. We have
several initiatives to catalog know software (NSRL--The National
Software Reference Library) and known vulnerabilities (NVD--National
Vulnerability Database). An initiative to catalog legacy software and
publish known weakness and vulnerabilities will allow entities to
better understand the risk posed by legacy software.
key point 1: transparency and lack of accountability
Initiatives like ``Secure by Design'' and Build Security In (a 2005
initiative) bring the required awareness that is needed to address the
problem at hand.
``Secure by Design'' is a voluntary pledge focused on enterprise
software products and services. By participating in the pledge,
software manufacturers are pledging to make a good-faith effort to
demonstrate measurable progress toward the following areas.
We can't afford good faith in safety. Recent attacks have
demonstrated the impact on critical infrastructure from Water Utilities
to Food Processing units.
What's needed is radical transparency on the pledge, a catalog of
software by the vendor what is covered and what is not. A clear time
line to demonstrate progress in securing legacy and vulnerable software
that is been neglected for years.
How Food and Drug Administration (FDA) holds drug and product
manufacturers automatically liable for any harm caused by their
product. Congress can also establish a software liability regime for
software manufacturers.
key point 2: defining classes of vulnerability and developing a
taxonomy
One of the goals in the pledge is to reduce entire classes of
vulnerability. Within 1 year of signing the pledge, it will demonstrate
a significant reduction in the prevalence of 1 or more vulnerability
classes across the manufacturer's products.
Without a proper definition and a prescriptive list of Common
Weaknesses and Vulnerabilities that needs to be reduced or eliminated
there is room for interpretation and not yield desired results.
Based on our research and analysis of 25 Most Dangerous Software
Weaknesses list (CWE
TM
Top 25) is the positioning of memory
buffer operations. While MITRE ranks this at No. 20, it consistently
appears as the top target for both threat groups and ransomware
operators.
We also observed significant evolution in the threat landscape,
particularly with the emergence of AI/ML systems.
Organizations must adapt their security priorities to address these
changes, with special attention to emerging AI/ML-specific
vulnerabilities that may not yet be reflected in standardized rankings.
key point 3: a safety seal for software
Software runs multiple critical infrastructure sectors. What is
rapidly changing is the digital transformation and autonomous nature of
how these systems operate today. There are several sectors that follow
rigorous quality tests and checks before they are deployed in
production. Congress can establish a safety framework for software
industry as well.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Dr. Mukkamala.
Members will be recognized in order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning
may be called after all Members have been recognized.
I now recognize Mr. Ezell from Mississippi for his 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Everybody's been impacted in one way or another by these
cyber attacks on CrowdStrike, Microsoft, and several others. So
I'm pleased that we're continuing to have a discussion on this
very important matter.
The Secure by Design pledge is a good step toward
incentivizing businesses to create more secure products.
I want to be clear that, while I support efforts such as
these, I'm always concerned by efforts to codify or mandate
these requirements for businesses. Mandates are often
duplicative, costly, and burdensome in time and resources.
We have seen over 250 companies, including our industry
representative witnesses here today, already sign this pledge
to improve and strengthen their cybersecurity.
I want to kind-of just go down the line with all of you
today. I'd like to thank each and every one of you for your
commitment, for being here today. I'm sure you could be plenty
of other places, so thank you very much.
I'd like to discuss a little bit more which of the 7
pillars has been the hardest to adopt and why.
I'll start with you, Ms. Adkins, and just kind-of go down
the line.
Ms. Adkins. Well, I would say, there is complexity in all
7, but I would probably rank classes of vulnerabilities as one
of the most difficult.
The reason being is that, to really fix this problem in its
kind of purest form, you have to change the way developers
work. In the work force--you know, at a company, you have some
control over that. But we rely on third-party software, we rely
on open-source software, where we don't have any control over
how that software is developed as well. So the kind-of full
list of materials that go into the software is hard.
So we have had to spend a lot of time really innovating in
that space to make sure that the way we write code is safe.
Now, with generative AI, we've got this great new tool,
actually, that we think, you know, after, you know, 3 to 5
years of research we're going to have an even better tool.
Mr. Ezell. OK.
Ms. Adkins. Yes.
Mr. Ezell. Would anybody else like to comment about that?
Mr. Richberg. So I would indisputably say No. 3, on
tackling entire classes of vulnerabilities. But I bring guilty
knowledge as someone who literally helped craft the things.
Some of them are very binary, one and done. Do you have a
policy on vulnerability disclosure that lets people test you?
You write it; you don't.
This one was intended as the stretch goal for companies
like Fortinet and Google, where tackling by the things we've
talked about--memory-safe programming languages, addressing SQL
injection--that one was intended as something where there are a
large number of classes of vulnerability. You can succeed in
tackling them serially, but even for big companies, it's going
to take us a long time to knock off all of those.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you.
Anybody else?
Mr. Fry. So I would agree; I think tackling all classes of
memory vulnerabilities is probably the hardest. The number of
developers out there that can write code in those memory-safe
languages is very limited. They are the most expensive
engineers you can pay today, and that's really challenging.
Now, there are some classes that are easier to solve than
others, and, you know, there's definitely great frameworks for
that.
The other thing that I see in talking to a lot of
industrial control systems manufacturers is not the generation
of software build materials but their willingness to share
them. So they treat them almost more than the intellectual
property of their source code. That, I think, is a huge
challenge for some of these companies to overcome, is accepting
that part. But they're going to be way behind on the memory
safety conversion as well and getting that whole class of
vulnerabilities covered.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you.
Doctor.
Mr. Mukkamala. So I'd like to add an important aspect. I
agree with Ms. Adkins on that is the hardest problem, for 3
reasons.
There's a human involved. Most of our developers today are
not trained in software security. That is a real problem. They
lack training. The other thing that's also causing a real issue
is, majority of the software is actually built offshore.
I can give an example for India. Indian universities do not
train their students, not have a curriculum on software
security. I was trained in India. Still today, I was looking at
a curriculum from the top Indian Institute of Technology, IIT,
which majority of the CEOs in this country are from those
schools, their undergraduate. They're not trained in software
security. You have a critical gap.
That's No. 1.
No. 2, we have legacy software. We might not even have the
source code for us to go back and look at what are the
weaknesses and what are the vulnerabilities. You're looking at
compiled code. You have limited visibility into that. Even if
you find a vulnerability, people are very concerned, because
it's not well-documented, you're going to break something, so
you'd rather leave it the way it is.
The third most important thing, which we are not talking
about--Ms. Adkins talked about AI will really help us going
forward. At the same time, you'll also have a lot of machine-
generated libraries, machine-generated code. What we haven't
seen is, is it good, is it bad, or will it create a new class
of weaknesses and vulnerabilities that we'll all have to learn
from and live with?
So those are my 3 key points.
Mr. Ezell. Uh-huh.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Menendez, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Menendez. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, thank you
for convening today's hearing.
Cybersecurity is no longer just a technical issue; it's a
matter of public safety and trust.
Across New Jersey, institutions have suffered devastating
ransomware attacks that threaten essential services and public
confidence. Just last week, in my district, Hoboken City Hall
suffered a significant ransomware attack, paralyzing vital
municipal services and underscoring how vulnerable public
infrastructure can be.
This incident also echoes previous attacks on educational
institutions, such as Stevens Institute of Technology in 2019
and, more recently, New Jersey City University, highlighting a
worrying trend. Ransomware operators are increasingly focused
on exploiting the limited cybersecurity resources of local
governments and schools.
These incidents serve as more than just isolated
disruptions; they represent a growing threat to public safety
and economic stability. This reality demands a proactive,
coordinated response from industry and Government alike, rooted
in principles like those found in CISA's Secure by Design
initiative, which aims to shift cybersecurity responsibility
from consumers to technology producers.
Today, I look forward to our focus being on understanding
how we can move beyond reactive security measures; instead,
more toward a proactive framework that builds resilience into
our systems from the ground up.
Mr. Mukkamala, you and I agree that vulnerabilities in
software can have far-reaching consequences, especially when it
comes to critical infrastructure. In your testimony, you
discuss the importance of making Secure by Design by a
fundamental part of software development to prevent critical
vulnerabilities.
If the next administration fails to build upon this
initiative, what are the immediate and long-term consequences
we could face, particularly regarding cyber attacks on critical
infrastructure?
Mr. Mukkamala. So, Member, the most important thing for the
next administration is to really hold software vendors
accountable.
Right now, we are expecting the consumer to be resilient.
Majority of the consumers--you touched on educational
institutions--K to 20, they don't have the resources. You're
talking about utilities. We're talking about digital
transformation, automation. There is no security guy sitting in
a utility. At the best, you get 2 or 3 people. But you're
talking about livelihoods of hundreds and thousands of people.
You've seen American Water just got impacted by ransomware.
When you start looking at, how many security folks do I
have that are trained in cybersecurity, who understand
software--not systems; software--it won't even be a handful of
people. We have a real problem.
That's why it's very important for the new administration
to, No. 1, not encourage vulnerable software in the Federal
Government. It starts there. The second is, also hold software
vendors accountable if there is an error. There should be some
sort of a liability because of fewer errors.
Mr. Menendez. Yeah. I appreciate that.
Recent cyber incidents like the ransomware attack on
Hoboken City Hall that I had mentioned earlier underscore the
vulnerabilities municipalities face. This attack, which
occurred last week, forced city hall to close and suspend on-
line services. IT teams isolated the infected computer to
prevent further damage, and essential services like the
municipal court had to be relocated temporarily. Investigations
are still under way to determine the extent of the cyber
attack.
My question to you is, how do you see the principles of
Secure by Design reducing the burden on under-resourced
entities like local governments?
Mr. Mukkamala. So, first, there's already software running
that's vulnerable. I don't think we will fix an attack right
away. That's a very important thing.
For the future part, we need to make sure the software
that's been downloaded is secure while we look back and look at
what systems are vulnerable so we can avoid these attacks.
From the grant we have today for the State, local, and
education on--there's actually a grant from CISA to support
these local communities. The future administration should
continue to support that. We cannot take away funding from the
little money they have to secure the under-resourced
organizations. We can continue to support that.
At the same time, we need to do continuous diagnostics. I
know CDM is not a famous thing in the Federal Government, but
if you don't diagnose, if you don't detect faster, you can't
remediate. The most important thing is, we need to continue to
detect, continue to prioritize, and continue to remediate.
That's what we should be focusing on to avoid future attacks.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate that.
I'll yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Adkins, you mentioned in your answering questions to
Mr. Ezell that one of the things we have to do is change the
way the developers work, you know. You're deputy chair of the
Cyber Safety Review Board, so you have a unique understanding
of the importance of public and partnerships and working with
the private sector.
You briefly touched on it, again, in your answer to Mr.
Ezell about the 7 pillars. There's issues, you think, with all
of them, or there could be issues with all of them. Could you
go into more detail?
Ms. Adkins. I would say, I wouldn't characterize them as
issues; I'd characterize them as complexities.
So, for example, when we went to implement multifactor
authentication for our infrastructure and our users, many of
the usable solutions didn't exist. Actually, users reject
unusable solutions. So you have to go back to the drawing board
and reinvent the way things work. That's a complexity for
multifactor authentication.
When we're looking at some of the others that are in there,
I think about if you, for example, want to start a
vulnerability disclosure program but you haven't improved your
software quality, what you're going to immediately get is
thousands and thousands of reports that you already knew and is
actually not that valuable to you.
So there's a journey on each one of these steps that
everyone has to walk through.
Mr. Garbarino. OK.
You know, you brought up multifactor authentication, and,
you know, we know it's not all created equal, and there's
threat actors that actually have been able to find a way around
some of the multifactor authentications.
What could be--either Ms. Adkins or Mr. Richberg, what
could be done with the 7 pillars or what could be done with
that when we're talking about Secure by Design?
Mr. Richberg. So we set the 7 pillars--the 7 portions up to
be a floor and not a ceiling, and multifactor authentication
was one of those.
To your point, we recognized and there was discussion,
should we specify phishing-resistant multifactor
authentication, something like your phone that's
cryptographically bound to you, not a text or an email that can
be intercepted? But we said, recognize, we're doing this not
only for the big companies but for the small start-ups. That's
a high bar for them to clear. Anything is better than a user ID
or password, so let's let them start with something.
Let's also recognize that this pledge is likely to be
serial. We'll learn from this, and then we might have--because
this is a voluntary pledge--a 2.0. We certainly talked about
there's nuance in multifactor authentication.
Mr. Garbarino. But if we're going to have a floor,
shouldn't--and when we're talking about Secure by Design,
shouldn't the floor be secure?
I mean, if it's not--I mean, how do we--and I get the
complexities with the start-ups, but we still want them selling
a secure product if they're working on this, correct?
Mr. Richberg. But for the things that the pledge is
measuring, yes, we agreed these would all represent progress.
Any form of multifactor authentication is better than single-
factor authentication.
Mr. Garbarino. I agree with you.
Mr. Richberg. Now, there can be more nuanced ones. We
recognize, because those are commercially available, most
companies would jump to that.
But we didn't want to produce a pledge that prospective
signatories would look at it and say, some of these were too
hard. Because this pledge was envisioned as all-or-nothing.
It's not mandatory that you make progress on them, but we and
CISA didn't want companies to cherry-pick, ``I'm going to sign
the pledge because one of these things I can do.''
Mr. Garbarino. Ms. Adkins, you had a----
Ms. Adkins. Yes, I wanted to jump in here too.
You know, the FIDO Alliance, which is the industry
coalition looking at FIDO protocols--so things like security
keys, passkeys--understand this is a transition time line. But
we are now at a place where passkeys are actually the most
usable solution, and they are far more secure than things like
SMS-based MFA. It's time to push everyone there, deprecate
SMS--at least here in the United States.
Mr. Garbarino. That was my next follow-up. I was going to
ask you about passkeys, and you jumped to it before I even
could.
Mr. Fry or Dr. Mukkamala, is anything you want to add to
this discussion? I don't want to--I see you've been nodding, so
I'm not sure if there was something you wanted to add.
Mr. Mukkamala. No, I'm----[off-mike], Mr. Chair.
Mr. Garbarino. OK.
Mr. Fry, you're good? OK.
OK. So now I wanted to--Mr. Richberg, I--CISA released the
Secure by Design guidance for the IT community. Your expertise
is in OT.
Does the IT guidance work for OT? If it doesn't, why, and
what might be some foundational elements of OT guidance that
should be included?
Mr. Richberg. The short answer, because I know I'm short on
time, is it doesn't----
Mr. Garbarino. No, no, you can keep going. I'm the Chair.
Mr. Richberg [continuing]. OK--it doesn't work for OT. They
share some complexities in terms of the way you think about
security, but it is a much different time line, it's a
different crowd. They tried grafting the pledge to the OT
environment. It doesn't work.
You've got the companies, the handful of companies, that
make the core chips for ICS and SCADA. You've got the larger
number of companies that actually make the operational
technology for specific industries. What you use for making
cars is different than power plants. Then you've got the
companies that buy it and customize it. They don't run it off
the shelf. It's a different ecosystem.
We turn over IT in 3- and 4-year cycles. OT lasts for 30
years. So how do we implement Secure by Design in something
they may not want to buy for 15 years? It's a different
ecosystem.
The first version of the pledge looked like lift-and-shift,
did not work; it's back to the drawing board. Full disclosure:
We had to do that 5 or 6 times on the IT pledge with CISA.
Mr. Garbarino. It sounds like OT might--you can't even do
Secure by Design on some of these because of--well, let's go to
Mr. Swalwell first, and then we're going to do a second round
of questions.
I yield back, and I now recognize the Ranking Member for 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you.
This is a distinct, informed panel that we have, and I'd
like to start by just asking for your take and wisdom on the
most recent FBI warning regarding the use of Android or iPhone
and essentially recommending that Americans, in their text
messaging, move to more encrypted applications.
I would just start with you, Ms. Adkins. I mean, it's quite
alarming from a just, you know, data privacy, potential
critical infrastructure for those who work in that space who
use Apple or Android. Like, what can you say to that warning,
and what should Americans know?
Ms. Adkins. That warning doesn't surprise me at all. It
echoes advice that the security industry has have been giving
for a very long time. We understand that strong encryption is
absolutely necessary for protecting information, whether it's
in enterprise systems flowing over the internet, cell networks,
et cetera.
What we did in Android--I can't speak to Apple's ecosystem,
but what we did in the Android a little while back is to start
to move away from SMS for texting into the RCS protocol. This
works a little higher up the stack, and we can provide transit
encryption that would protect you from the particular threat
you're referencing.
Mr. Swalwell. Now, is it correct, though, that--I believe
this is so with iPhone--where, if you do not back your
iMessages up on the cloud, that it's more protected than if you
do, because if your Apple ID is hacked, then you can go
directly into the messages, whereas----
Ms. Adkins. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell [continuing]. You would only need the--you
would have to actually get the device----
Ms. Adkins. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell [continuing]. To get the----
Ms. Adkins. So what you're talking about is one layer up in
the protocol sandwich.
Mr. Swalwell. Sure.
Ms. Adkins. But RCS provides--is a replacement,
essentially, for SMS.
Then on top of that, in Android we provide a comparable
feature in Messages. So, if you're on an Android phone and
you're messaging someone on an Android phone, at the most top
layer that is encrypted end-to-end.
Mr. Swalwell. How about an iPhone and an Android phone?
Ms. Adkins. So the interoperability at that layer is
something that we would really like the industry to do. It
doesn't exist today.
Mr. Swalwell. Yes.
Ms. Adkins. But the industry group that works on RCS--this
is the GSMA group--took up in September that they're going to
look at end-to-end encryption which would be interoperable
between all the systems.
But we're huge advocates of strong encryption to protect
Americans in this situation.
Mr. Swalwell. Great.
Would anyone else like to speak to this most recent
warning?
Mr. Richberg. I think I would talk about it in a little
more abstract fashion, in the sense that I agree with what Ms.
Adkins is saying; industry groups, industry interoperability
will solve it.
Asking individuals to download a third-party app to secure
themselves continues to perpetuate this idea that you are--yes,
you are responsible for your own security, but you shouldn't
have to be the executor of it. That's what the big--that's the
crux of Secure by Design: We should do that, we in industry.
Mr. Swalwell. Right. Thank you.
Mr. Fry.
Mr. Fry. Yes, I think it's a great discussion point. One of
the things, taking it maybe a step further, is not just end-
users but, as you talk about, people that are deploying
software and systems that maybe aren't you and I but, you know,
IT, ISPs, and, you know, telco providers, they need that Secure
by Design as well. They're not going to be experts in a
Fortinet switch or an Android device. They're an expert in----
Mr. Swalwell. Right.
Mr. Fry [continuing]. Sending phone messages and calls
across the country.
So, you know, Secure by Design really has a great
opportunity to impact that, and, by extension, you and I are
protected from that as well.
But we've got to really look at what's out there today as
well as what we're going to put out 5 years from now, and make
sure that we're not just looking at the future but what can we
do for devices that are in data centers and----
Mr. Swalwell. Right.
Mr. Fry [continuing]. Server rooms across the country
today.
Mr. Swalwell. If, like, say, a Chinese Government actor or
a criminal-gang actor was able to access, you know, millions of
Americans' content, using AI you could you piece together
information about that individual to access, you know, many of,
you know, their most secure and protected possessions, from
bank records, health records, et cetera. Is that right?
Mr. Fry. Absolutely.
Mr. Swalwell. Dr. Mukkamala.
Mr. Mukkamala. The warning is too little too late.
I'll say this simple example. Folks in the intelligence
community have been using Signal for a long time. There's a
reason for that. This warning should have come almost 5, 10
years ago. We have known for a long time telecom infrastructure
was susceptible to attacks. We have known this right after 9/
11.
When we said, let's go get every communication, put a tap
on so we can see communications back and forth, what does it
really mean? You can go look at communications. We have known
this for 21 years, and we should've paid attention to that.
We should've created secure protocols from a communications
standpoint. What I'm afraid is, when you start looking at
sensitive devices communicating with each other, we still don't
have that. We are focused on consumer-grade. At the same time,
there is so much back-end crossing that goes on in
infrastructure all on clear text.
Mr. Swalwell. Right.
Mr. Mukkamala. I think that's the next real ticking time
bomb, for an adversary to intercept operational communications
that will take down a power plant, that will take down a water
facility, that will take down automobiles, which are running
autonomous today. I think that's where we need to be really
paying attention to, on securing communication channels.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
We'll now start our second round of questions. I know Ms.
Lee is on her way.
Mr. Menendez, do you have--no? OK.
I recognize myself for my second round of questions.
Let's go back to the OT conversation we were having. Mr.
Richberg, you were about to say something. I know Mr. Fry
wanted to jump in. So let's get back at it.
Mr. Richberg. So I think it is going to be a soluble
problem for OT, but I think, frankly, they rushed it. They
needed to try to get something done and they thought they could
port it. The initial version is, frankly, I don't think going
to be viable and it will be back to the drawing board.
It's very much--we're at the point I think of
whiteboarding. What exactly is it going to look like? Because
you have different players in the ecosystem. You have different
priorities.
For IT, quite often you can say security can be as
important as anything else. We know for OT it's going to be
safety, reliability, then maybe efficiency or performance, and
then security is going to be No. 4.
So it is going to be something where the concept applies,
but I think because the values, the players, and the time
lines, and, frankly, constraints are different, we're going to
have to come at it differently.
But it's going to be critically important, because I know
this subcommittee's jurisdiction includes critical
infrastructure. You've got these small players in the
infrastructure, rural electric co-ops, small water utilities,
who the same guy who cuts the grass and paints the building
keeps the IT dusted. If it doesn't do its own security, there
is no security. That's the reality where any level of Secure by
Design for OT will be meaningful.
Mr. Garbarino. Mr. Fry.
Mr. Fry. Yes. So the additional clarification that I would
bring is that the companies that we talk to in industrial
control systems, some of the top manufacturers, they're
actively trying to figure out how they can be Secure by Design.
So while it may not have been originally designed for OT
networks and OT systems and devices, there's a lot of
communication happening in those companies to figure out how
can we achieve this.
Now, interestingly, a lot of that was just discussion. How
can we put an industry panel together? How can we comply?
Since the EU Cyber Resiliency Act has come into effect
there's been actual motion of assigning engineers to doing work
to become compliant with the Cyber Resiliency Act.
So that gives me a lot of promise that the United States
will benefit from that and where I think device manufacturers
for OT systems will actually strive to become Secure by Design,
because there's so much overlap in the Cyber Resiliency Act and
Secure by Design.
Mr. Garbarino. Doc.
Mr. Mukkamala. I would like to start with an example. Does
a radiologist work for a general physician? One is vertical-
focused. The other one is horizontal-focused. IT is very
horizontal. You've got to maintain your systems.
When it comes to OT, we club it as one thing. It's very
vertical-focused and it's a black box. It's very domain-
specific. The digital transformation is bringing IT and OT
together, and you really see loggerheads. One is: Go patch your
system. The other is: With what?
I don't have a firmware patching. I don't have a patching
render to patch my firmware. I don't even know what the
underlying system is, because I just took a fork from a Linux,
stripped it down, and that's my OS drive. I don't know what
libraries are in there, because that's not documented.
There's a lot of unknowns when it comes to vertical-focused
OT. Again, it comes back to the work force. Are we training
cybersecurity folks in water systems?
You're learning on the job. You didn't go through a formal
education. Would you ever let a radiology technician come look
at a patient without going through a formal certification?
So we have a fundamental gap on how we look at the
convergence and what's going on today. Unfortunately, the
industry is moving so fast and we will have no choice but IT
and OT to work together, and that will also get converged on
more generalized. As vendors learn what it is, you'll actually
see some vertical training and vertical focus as well.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you.
Ms. Adkins, is there anything you wanted to add?
Ms. Adkins. Yes. I think the one thing we haven't talked
about here that really strikes me about OT is we haven't talked
about the recoverability story.
The war in Ukraine is an incredible case study for us, as
an industry, to see how cyber attacks against their
infrastructure are being recovered from and actually how you
can negate the effect of a cyber attack if you can recover
within minutes or hours.
So while we think about the journey on Secure by Design for
OT, we also need to think about the bridge. What are we going
to do in the mean time? If that's a 5- to 10-year journey,
what's the story for the electric company and the water and
whatnot?
I think it has to be some kind of very tough conversation
of here's your performance indicator, make sure you can recover
the system with the next period of time.
Mr. Garbarino. Mr. Richberg.
Mr. Richberg. Then I think, because I work a lot with these
utilities, the challenge is they're regulated utilities, they
can identify a need, but they then have to go to a State
utilities commission to get the approval to raise the rates in
the future to pay for it, so that they're always lagging with
resources what they need to fix.
Mr. Garbarino. I feel like the utility commissions don't
always understand what the necessities are.
I am out of my second round of questions. I'll just wait
for the Ranking Member, see if he wants to go again.
Yes, yield to Mr. Menendez. We'll go to Laurel first then.
I recognize the gentlewoman from Florida, Ms. Lee, for 5
minutes of questions.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome. Thank you all for being here.
Dr. Mukkamala, I'd like to start with a question for you.
In your written testimony, you mention the Forbes article, ``A
Trillion-Dollar Global Tech Problem,'' which talks about the
benefits of using automation and streamlining operations, but
emphasizes the importance of starting with a thorough audit of
existing tools and systems.
Would you tell us a little bit more about why that is the
important starting place and how we might use artificial
intelligence or other tools to assist us in performing that
kind of audit?
Mr. Mukkamala. So, Chairwoman Lee, it's a great question.
First, the hypothesis is you need to know what you have,
and that's what is missing.
A 2019 audit from the Federal systems clearly identified
multiple systems running legacy software with critical
vulnerabilities, exposing our country to foreign actors. That
is the U.S. Government does routine audits. That's how they
identified that.
When you start looking at small businesses, State
governments, local governments, higher education, they don't
have the resources. They don't even do regular audits unless
required by compliance.
If you don't know what you have, you don't know how you can
secure that. If I can't secure it, I am running a vulnerable
machine.
My simple analogy is: We go do regular checkups at 40. We
start when you're born. We stop at 16. We don't go back to a
pediatrician. We come back again, start at 40.
Fourteen, 16 years to 40 years, you are a walking time
bomb, right? You're hoping you're healthy, you're a superhuman
and nothing is going to happen. But 40, suddenly the clock
starts, we need to go get our annual done.
For systems, unfortunately, we don't have that. We have to
do a continuous thing, not even a periodic. So that's why it's
important to go back and take a look at what do I have today
and what machine I am on, why am I running on these systems,
and then assess how vulnerable you are.
You can't fix everything. Then you have to prioritize what
am I going to fix, and then really start building to what we
consider resilience.
In an absence of resilience, you have to build mechanisms
so you can recover if there is an incident on your
organization.
Ms. Lee. Let me interject there, because I think you're
touching on something that is very important.
So prior to coming to Congress, I was responsible for
running a State agency. One of the greatest challenges that we
had was doing exactly what you describe: Identify what are the
things that we have, what exists, then how do we deal with all
of these legacy systems and their vulnerabilities, and do that
in the construct of procurements and the appropriation process?
Government in particular is so poorly suited to be nimble
and be efficient and forward-thinking when it comes to
integrating new technology and identifying and guarding against
those vulnerabilities.
But one of the things that you just mentioned was also
recovery. If and when there is an incident, how are we going to
get back up to operating?
So I'd love for you to talk about those 2 things in a
little more detail.
One is how we should think about navigating away from these
legacy systems. Are there good approaches or best practices to
trying to identify and then leave them?
Then second, best practices on having that redundancy so
that when there's an incident we can continue to operate.
Mr. Mukkamala. It's a great question. I am fortunate enough
to have a lot of experience working with multiple States and
also advising about 6 Governors to that, on the exact topic.
I'll go back to 2008. The State of New Mexico went through
a barrage of incidents. Governor Richardson was at the helm of
the State. Deloitte was the vendor that was doing annual
assessments, charging an arm and a leg, to tell them what they
should do and giving PDF reports that nobody would even touch.
This is 2008.
Fast forward, 2015. Now we have multiple regulations that
States have to comply--actually more regulations than what the
Feds think: 1075, CJIS, MRZ, you name it, FERPA, multiple
regulations. So they're forced to go do their audits with very
limited resources.
The reason they even scan their systems today is because
there is an impending Federal audit and I'm going to scan the
system. That's not enough.
Today, when you start looking at where the vulnerabilities
are, we're still talking vulnerabilities. Unfortunately,
vulnerability is too late. We need to be talking about: Do we
have coding errors in the software we are developing, co-
developing, and using? That's a weakness.
We need to know what weaknesses are that would lead into
vulnerabilities. Then we have to look at what are the ones
attackers took time to actually develop and exploit. That's
weaponization. Then you have to look at it and say: Which are
the ones that are already weaponized they're using?
So it's really a life cycle in itself. Most States, I mean,
most corporations, are not even equipped.
So that's the space called risk-based vulnerability
management, which coined in cyber war in 2008 a project called
CACTUS, supported by Congress.
Which vulnerabilities will we use to attack our enemy
networks? We turned it around and said: OK, let's go use it for
vulnerability prioritization. We created that space in 2011.
Today, that's not enough and we're looking at exposures,
weaknesses, because not every vulnerability is patchable;
coding errors, somebody has to go modify the code. If I have a
vulnerability, if I can patch it, I can patch it.
The stats as of this Monday, there are more than 268,000
known vulnerabilities reported between NVD and other CNAs.
There are only 68,000 that are patchable. That is a striking
alarm.
So this is becoming a data problem, not a cybersecurity
problem. So with States, you're collecting more data than you
can consume. That's where AI can really help in being able to
consume this data at a faster pace, really prioritize and focus
on the critical systems with a functional context. If I'm
serving Medicaid, I want to go focus on that system first than
trying to focus on a system I'm doing the regular stuff.
To answer your second question, States don't have enough
resources for resiliency. They don't operate on N+1 resiliency.
I don't have a system-to-system.
That's where recovery becomes a real thing. The basics they
focus is back-ups. When in audits, every single time, even the
Federal audits, you see systems not being backed up regularly.
So, at the minimum, to really get ahead of ourself from
ransomware, we should back any and every critical data, and
that should be enforced.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentlelady's time is expired.
I now recognize the gentlelady from New Jersey, Ms. McIver,
for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. McIver. Thank you so much, Chairman. Thank you for
allowing me this time.
I want to thank the Ranking Member and our witnesses for
joining us today. Of course, today we're here to talk about
Secure by Design, an effort aimed to ensuring cybersecurity
infrastructure is included in new technologies from the very
start.
I represent New Jersey's 10th Congressional District, along
with my wonderful colleague here, who represents the Eighth. We
have many overlapping cities who experience some cyber attack
shut-downs.
Most recently, we had a situation in the city of Hoboken,
which I'm sure the Congressman has talked about, and we also
experienced something in the city of Newark of different cyber
attacks that happened with our Newark Housing Authority as well
as our city of Newark City Hall, and we saw some attacks on our
health systems as well.
So we continue to see attacks on our State and local
governments, small agencies as well. Secure by Design can
definitely be able to tackle some of these problems that we see
happening with these entities.
So one of my questions to all of the witnesses to answer
is: What challenges do you foresee in applying Secure by Design
principles to smaller entities such as that I mentioned,
whether it's smaller municipalities, smaller health care
systems and centers, and underserved and underresourced
communities?
Mr. Richberg. So Secure by Design is really set up as
something the vendors should do, which then the small consumers
will be able to benefit from.
I know that the Congresswoman from Florida mentioned
procurement. Procurement is the weakness, especially for local
government. Those people in the highway department may know if
a project is going to be built that's a good bridge. They won't
know anything about sensors.
They need those types of things to be built into the
product, they need it to be Secure By Design, because those
underresourced organizations can't do it.
You mentioned medical. The FDA, under the PATCH Act, is
actually a couple of years ahead of CISA in implementing what
really looks like Secure by Design with the medical industry,
and they're making a lot of strides over the past year.
Ms. McIver. Thank you.
Mr. Fry. I think it's a really interesting discussion
point, because as we look at Secure by Design affecting
vendors, the downstream impact is that these small
municipalities won't have to worry as much if their devices are
secure.
But it does bring an interesting question of: What are
these small municipalities supposed to do today? How can you
know, if we assume that suddenly everything is Secure By Design
tomorrow, those small municipalities still have to apply
updates. They still have to understand what devices and
software they even have in their ecosystems.
So they're still going to have to have some focus to
understand that I have a secure version of this that I need to
update to. That's where advocacy and potentially, you know,
funding at the State and Federal level can help those smaller
municipalities get to secure systems today.
The faster we can get vendors to do Secure by Design and
solve some of these problems today, the faster that funding can
be effective or those efforts in those small municipalities can
help make their systems more secure.
Ms. McIver. Thank you.
Mr. Mukkamala. Understanding what they have is the most
important thing. The burden needs to be moved from the consumer
to the vendor. When we start looking at these 2 fundamental
things, we will solve a lot of problems.
The DHS program that's allowing the small municipalities,
cities, counties, and public education to look for what
vulnerabilities do they have is really helping quite a bit.
There's a lot more scanning activity going on on their systems
today than ever before.
The recent edition of the E-Rate program, for the first
time now public schools can apply for cybersecurity as part of
their technology funding. That is a great move by the Congress
because that's really going to help those K-12 institutions
look for systems that would have impacted kids from learning
on-line, because it's very important for rural America.
I mean, New Jersey is blessed because it's urban America.
When you look at States like New Mexico, Mississippi, Alabama,
these kids can't travel. They have to take on-line classes. If
the systems go down, they are out of learning for weeks. We
can't afford that. We can't leave children behind because of
ransomware.
Ms. McIver. Thank you. Thank you so much.
I'm sorry, Ms. Adkins, my time is up.
Thank you so much for that, Chair.
Ms. Adkins, anything to add?
Ms. Adkins. Yes. Thank you for the question. It's a really
good one. I'm sorry to hear what's happening in New Jersey.
This is, unfortunately, a plague that we are seeing across many
places.
It is possible to build systems that are resistant to
ransomware. There are many on the market today, and there will
be many more coming as we have this conversation and they come
to market.
It's important that through procurement, through consumer
choice, that people have access to be able to make those
choices, to bring in modern operating systems and modern
software. That is ultimately the solution to this problem over
the long term.
Ms. McIver. Thank you, Ms. Adkins.
I yield the rest--well, no time, but I yield. Thank you.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Swalwell for his second round of
questions.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. Thank you, Chair.
I just wanted to go back to Dr. Mukkamala.
Your testimony highlighted how GAO has found legacy systems
with known vulnerabilities are operating across Federal
agencies.
What are the obstacles to upgrading existing legacy
technology? How can we address this challenge of insecure
legacy systems? How should addressing legacy technology be
integrated into Secure by Design?
Mr. Mukkamala. So thank you, Ranking Member Swalwell.
The No. 1 fear is breaking the functionality of these
legacy systems. I mean, that's where it starts.
The second important thing is the unknown. We don't know
what systems we are running. The GAO report talks about it, but
we didn't take it further and say: Let's go study the entire
Federal complex, civilly and intelligence community, and say,
let's catalogue what legacy systems do we have today, what
functionality are we serving, and what is the legacy software,
who are the vendors they are responsible for?
What's happening that is alarming and interesting is these
vendors of legacy software are still charging the Federal
Government for support, for maintenance, yet having only 1 or 2
people run a hundred-million-dollar business, and the Federal
Government is OK with that.
It's the accountability piece, right? If you're selling me
software that's legacy, that's vulnerable, and you have 3
people supporting it, we expect nation-states not to attack us?
So coming back to the question, it's the breaking of it.
It's the black box approach and not knowing what's really
vulnerable across the Federal ecosystem.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. Thank you.
Go ahead, Mr. Richberg.
Mr. Richberg. I actually would take a different tack on
that as a former Federal executive. It's funding. It's
resources.
I mean, I remember spending time down in the Chambers
explaining the OPM breach, that we had seen something like that
coming because we knew we were running a Fortran system that we
could not get funded to recapitalize and upgrade.
So, yes, we may have trouble understanding some of the
intricacies, but the reality is there are a lot of IT
modernization plans that simply don't make the cut to ever be
implemented.
Mr. Swalwell. Great.
Dr. Mukkamala, I get to play like the role of professor
here, so go ahead if you want to respond.
Mr. Mukkamala. Absolutely, funding is the thing. Then here
I'm actually--the Federal Government is already spending money.
Yes, we might not get to a modern system because it takes a lot
more time, implementation, and it's reworking of the entire
process. That's not easy.
That's one of the reasons why people don't get off legacy
systems. It's the cost of moving to a newer system. You see
that quite a bit not only in the Feds, in the State as well.
The challenge is, if you're paying an IT vendor X dollars,
are they really deserving those X dollars? I don't see that
being asked.
Mr. Swalwell. With that, after playing the role of judge or
professor, I'm going to yield back to the Chair.
Thank you. Thank you again to all of our witnesses.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey for 5 minutes
of questions.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Chairman. I yield my 5 minutes to
you for additional questions.
Mr. Garbarino. Oh, thank you, the gentleman. Very kind of
you.
Mr. Menendez. I thought you'd appreciate that.
Mr. Garbarino. Mr. Fry, I wanted to ask you a question.
Your company signed the pledge. What's the benefit of
signing the pledge? I mean, it's not like by signing the pledge
we'll go along with the pillars, you don't get a stamp of
approval saying Secure By Design. So what's the benefit of a
company signing the pledge?
Mr. Fry. So I think there's a couple different things that
are really important.
For us, as a security company, it's important that we lead
by example, just as I've asked the Federal Government to lead
by example for acquisitions.
It felt very wrong for us to not be writing our code as
much as we could in memory-safe languages, to have the Secure
by Design pledge as something that we're doing. It kind-of
feels hypocritical to not be doing security as a security
company.
So that's really been one of the big driving factors for
us, is we've wanted to do this, the pledge. Secure by Design
coming out was a good time line to say: Let's do this publicly.
So that's been really helpful for us.
The benefit to other companies is that, as all the
witnesses today have said, is a more secure ecosystem, and also
the ability for security-conscious consumers to decide who they
want to buy software and devices from.
They might choose to prioritize security. I hope they
would. That's something that we see in the OT space. You're
going to be locked in for 20, 30 years with this software, this
device. You should buy that more secure version of that. So
that's why the pledge is so valuable to us.
Mr. Garbarino. I have 4 minutes left, and I want you all
just to be able to make a closing statement.
So, Mr. Fry, we'll start with you, but if you can just
limit it to about a minute, and then we'll go to everybody
else, because I know, Mr. Richberg, you wanted to make a
comment.
But, Mr. Fry, something you just wanted to make sure is put
on the record today, because this is a very important hearing.
Mr. Fry. Yes. I think it's very obvious that Secure by
Design is making a lot of waves, but we can't lose sight of the
fact that there's software today that is not secure that's
deployed in these small governments and utilities and things
like that that are going to need security.
We have to do something about the software that's deployed
today. We have to make sure that that isn't just the IT
systems, that it's got to be the OT systems as well.
So I'd like to call all the OT device manufacturers: Let's
do the Secure by Design pledge. Let's work with Congress and
find a good way--or CISA--to find a good way to incentivize
these companies to actually secure their systems. Because I
think limiting it to just IT systems is a little bit
shortsighted.
I understand we have to do something that we can do
quickly. It's a good first step. But we've got to continue to
push further and make that impact across the ecosystem.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you.
Ms. Adkins.
Ms. Adkins. It is technically feasible to solve many of our
security problems, but it will require a few things, ingenuity
and innovation being almost the easiest of these, the hardest
being the work that companies will have to do to rip and
replace and what that journey will be like.
We've got trillions of lines of code on the internet. Some
portion of that will have to be checked, rewritten, deprecated.
Then the systems that actually get deployed are important.
So we need to think not only about the technical components
of this, but also the policy components, procurement, the whole
ecosystem that plays into how do we make not just digital
transformation but the digital retransformation that has to
happen.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. Mr. Richberg.
Mr. Richberg. To put what Ms. Adkins said slightly another
way, the hard stuff is the soft stuff. It's not the technical
problem. We have technical fixes for this.
The premise of Secure by Design was that ``Field of
Dreams'' thing, as I said: If you build it, users will flock to
it.
Well, my experience from talking to Fortune 500 executives
is they don't even know about this. But when you tell them it's
here, they say: If I have a choice between product A, B, or C,
and one of those is from a company that signed the pledge and
is willing to let my people see what they've done to implement
it, yes, I'd like to factor that in.
So with a new CISA management, maybe talk about, do we
include this in Cybersecurity Awareness Month?
Industry is not going to stop doing this. They weren't
mandated to do this. You look at the 251 companies that have
signed it. We represent a majority by sales volume, I suspect,
of the IT activity in this country. We're doing it because this
is good cybersecurity hygiene.
So how do we take advantage of the bully pulpit of letting
potential consumers know this is out there, factor this in as
you replace your technology.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Richberg.
Doctor.
Mr. Mukkamala. Secure by Design is a great initiative. We
need to continue to do that and to ask for the new Congresses
to continue to support it. We have to focus on the
fundamentals. What that means is reskilling, upskilling our
existing work force.
Secure by Design talks about companies, focusing on the
technical aspect. But nowhere in this pledge the people who
signed it said: My work force has these gaps today.
We're going to address a fundamental work force problem. I
think that absolutely needs to be brought back into first
principle thinking on upskilling and reskilling a work force.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you all to the witnesses for coming today and your
testimony. I know you've all worked with CISA quite a bit,
especially on this. We have as well.
I'm going to miss Director Easterly when she leaves. I know
the Ranking Member also worked very well with Director
Easterly. I'm looking forward and interested to see who will be
taking over CISA next year.
With that, the Members of the subcommittee may have some
additional questions for you all, and we would ask that the
witnesses respond to those in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be open for 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:29 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Heather Adkins
Question 1. Is the Secure by Design initiative effectively driving
the cybersecurity ecosystem toward more secure products?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. How would your view of the initiative change if the
pledge became mandatory, if at all?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. How do you think Google's decision to pull out of China
following Operation Aurora has affected its ability to uphold Secure by
Design principles?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4a. Which measures from the Secure by Design pledge had
your companies already adopted as common practice?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4b. What activities or costs did, or will, your companies
incur by signing the pledge?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. How does Google apply Secure by Design principles to
its AI development and deployment?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. How have you measured your progress when you published
reports on implementing Secure by Design?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 7. Please describe your experience helping CISA draft the
pledge. How did you get involved, and what was the drafting process
like? Did CISA incorporate your feedback into the pledge's pillars?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 8. Do you find the guidance documents and advisories CISA
has published under the Secure by Design initiative to be valuable? Why
or why not?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 9. As you have implemented Secure by Design principles,
have you noticed a significant demand shift from your customers?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 10. How do you communicate the need for cybersecurity
products to your customers?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 11. How does your company disclose vulnerabilities without
increasing risk to your systems?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Jim Richberg
Question 1. Is the Secure by Design initiative effectively driving
the cybersecurity ecosystem toward more secure products?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. How would your view of the initiative change if the
pledge became mandatory, if at all?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. Reporting indicates that China-backed actors may have
recently exploited vulnerabilities in Fortinet products. As you
continue to implement Secure by Design, do you think its pillars will
be enough to protect against the China threat?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4a. Which measures from the Secure by Design pledge had
your companies already adopted as common practice?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4b. What new activities or costs did, or will, your
companies incur by signing the pledge?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. Recognizing that software and hardware also have unique
challenges, do you think CISA made the right choice by leaving out
physical products? Why or why not?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. Your company issued progress reports for implementing
Secure by Design. How have you measured your progress?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 7. If you helped CISA draft the pledge, what did was the
drafting process like? Did CISA incorporate your feedback into the
pledge's pillars?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 8. Do you find the guidance documents and advisories CISA
has published under the Secure by Design initiative to be valuable? Why
or why not?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 9. As you have implemented Secure by Design principles,
have you noticed a significant demand shift from your customers?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 10. How did you communicate the need for cybersecure
products to your customers?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 11. How can the U.S. Government facilitate and incentivize
information sharing among vendors in a way that doesn't punish
companies for being transparent and optimizes better security for all?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 12. How does your company disclose vulnerabilities without
increasing risk to your systems?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Shane Paulsen Fry
Question 1. Is Secure by Design initiative effectively driving the
cybersecurity ecosystem toward more secure products?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. How would your view of the initiative change if the
pledge became mandatory, if at all?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. Which measures from the Secure by Design pledge had
your companies already adopted as common practice?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3b. What new activities or costs did, or will, your
companies incur by signing the pledge?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. Is every pillar of Secure by Design ``specific and
measurable''?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. Do you find the guidance documents and advisories CISA
has published under the Secure by Design initiative valuable? Why or
why not?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. As you have implemented Secure by Design principles,
have you noticed a significant demand shift from your customers?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 7. As a small company, what are the challenges of making
cybersecurity a selling point for your products?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 8. How does your company disclose vulnerabilities without
increasing risk to your systems?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Srinivas Mukkamala
Question 1. Is the Secure by Design initiative effectively driving
the cybersecurity ecosystem toward more secure products?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. How would your view of the initiative change if the
pledge became mandatory, if at all?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. Which measures from the Secure by Design pledge had
your companies already adopted as common practice?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3b. What activities or costs did, or will, your companies
incur by signing the pledge?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. Do you find the guidance documents and advisories CISA
has published under the Secure by Design initiative to be valuable? Why
or why not?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. As you have implemented Secure by Design principles,
have you noticed a significant demand shift from your customers or
entities you have interacted with?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. How does your company disclose vulnerabilities without
increasing risk to your systems?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

[all]
