- IMPACTS OF EMERGENCY AUTHORITY CYBERSECURITY REGULATIONS ON THE TRANSPORTATION SECTOR

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPACTS  OF  EMERGENCY   AUTHORITY
CYBERSECURITY REGULATIONS ON THE
TRANSPORTATION SECTOR

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME
SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

NOVEMBER 19, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-82
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

60-114 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Eric Swalwell, California
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           J. Luis Correa, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
August Pfluger, Texas                Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Nick LaLota, New York                Robert Garcia, California
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              LaMonica McIver, New Jersey
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida, Chairman
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Shri Thanedar, Michigan, Ranking
Nick LaLota, New York                  Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Garcia, California
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
officio)                           Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Vacancy, Subcommittee Staff Director
Alex Marston, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS

The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Shri Thanedar, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

WITNESSES

Panel I

Mr. Steve Lorincz, Deputy Executive Assistant Administrator,
Security Operations, Transportation Security Administration,
U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     7
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     8
Mr. Chad Gorman, Deputy Executive Assistant Administrator,
Operations Support, Transportation Security Administration,
U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    12
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     8
Ms. Tina Won Sherman, PhD, Director, Homeland Security and
Justice, U.S. Government Accountability Office:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    15

Panel II

Mr. Ian Jefferies, President & Chief Executive Officer,
Association of American Railroads:
Oral Statement.................................................    33
Prepared Statement.............................................    35
Ms. Kimberly Denbow, Vice President, Security Operations,
American Gas Association:
Oral Statement.................................................    37
Prepared Statement.............................................    39

FOR THE RECORD

The Honorable Clay Higgins, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Louisiana:
Article, November 18, 2024, The Record, Recorded Future News...    30

APPENDIX

The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Statement of Airlines For America..............................    49

IMPACTS  OF  EMERGENCY  AUTHORITY
CYBERSECURITY REGULATIONS ON THE
TRANSPORTATION SECTOR

----------

Tuesday, November 19, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Transportation and
Maritime Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Carlos A. Gimenez
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Gimenez, Higgins, Lee, and
Thanedar.
Mr. Gimenez. Good morning. The Committee on Homeland
Security Subcommittee on Transportation and Maritime Security
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair may declare the subcommittee
in recess at any point. Today's hearing will examine the
Transportation Security Administration's use of security
directives and proposed rule making in transportation sector
cybersecurity regulations.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today, the subcommittee is examining how the Transportation
Security Administration utilizes security directives and public
rules to manage cybersecurity risks within the transportation
sector.
In today's interconnected world, cybersecurity is more than
just an IT issue. It is a critical component of our national
security.
Cyber threats have become pervasive, and their potential
impact on critical infrastructure has profound implications for
the safety and stability of our society and the resilience of
our economy.
Nowhere is this more evident than our transportation
systems, which serve as the backbone of the American economy.
These systems connect our communities, support commerce, and
facilitate the movement of goods and services across the
country and around the world.
Our transportation networks, spanning aviation, rail,
public transit, highways, pipelines, and maritime ports, are
increasingly reliant on complex digital systems for operations
and coordination.
This reliance makes them especially vulnerable to cyber
attacks by criminal groups and nation-state actors.
Moreover, as emerging technologies like autonomous
vehicles, connected infrastructure, and artificial intelligence
become more integrated into our transportation system, the
cybersecurity threat landscape grows more complex.
These advances, while offering new efficiencies and
capabilities, also create additional access points that cyber
criminals and nation-state adversaries could exploit.
A cyber attack on any of these systems could disrupt
travel, halt commerce, threaten public safety, and create
cascading effects across our economy and national security
landscape.
Whether through ransomware attacks, data breaches, or other
malicious cyber activities, such threats have the potential to
cause extensive harm, demonstrating the need for targeted
cybersecurity regulations within the transportation sector.
Safeguarding our transportation infrastructure is not only
about securing physical assets, it's also about protecting the
digital networks that power and control them, ensuring
resilience in the face of evolving threats.
The Transportation Security Administration, TSA,
established to protect our Nation's transportation systems, has
an essential and increasingly complex role in defending these
critical networks against cyber threats.
With this mandate to secure the Nation's vast
transportation infrastructure, covering everything from
aviation and rail to maritime and public transit, TSA is tasked
not only with physical security, but also with developing and
enforcing cybersecurity regulations across the industry.
I have concerns about TSA's current approach. In recent
years, TSA has issued numerous security directives aimed at
addressing cyber risks.
However, these directives often seem reactive, hastily
implemented, and lacking the necessary consultation with
stakeholders.
Industry feedback indicates that these directives can be
overt, overly prescriptive rather than performance-based,
limiting operators' abilities to tailor cybersecurity practices
to their specific operational needs.
A security directive that lacks clarity and flexibility may
do more harm than good. Instead of fostering robust security
measures, it can lead to confusion in efficiency and check-box
mentality, where compliance is valued over actual risk
reduction.
Moreover, the lack of collaboration with industry experts,
the people who understand these systems best, raises concerns
about whether these directives are even capable of addressing
the most pressing vulnerabilities.
On November 6, less than 2 weeks ago, TSA issued a Notice
of Proposed Rulemaking that aimed to establish mandatory cyber
risk management and reporting requirements for certain surface
transportation owners and operators.
The sheer complexity of these regulations, spanning over
300 pages, is overwhelming, especially considering smaller
operators who are already operating with limited resources.
These proposed rules raise an important question: Will they
effectively fulfill their intended purpose by reducing
cybersecurity risk within the transportation sector, or will
they simply place an undue burden on operators?
TSA should empower operators with the flexibility to
develop and implement tailored cybersecurity strategies that
best address their unique risks and operational needs.
When I was the mayor of Miami-Dade County, I focused on
reducing overhead and streamlining regulations to enable
business innovation and improve government efficiency.
I believe the same approach is essential as we work to
effectively protect our Nation's transportation systems from
cybersecurity risks. By balancing regulatory standards with
operational adaptability, we can promote robust cybersecurity
practices that both protect critical infrastructure and foster
innovation and efficiency within the industry.
Thank you to our witnesses from both panels for appearing
before the subcommittee. I look forward to your testimony.
[The statement of Chairman Gimenez follows:]

Statement of Chairman Carlos A. Gimenez

Today, this subcommittee is examining how the Transportation
Security Administration utilizes Security Directives and Public Rules
to manage cybersecurity risks within the transportation sector.
In today's interconnected world, cybersecurity is more than just an
IT issue--it's a critical component of our national security.
Cyber threats have become pervasive, and their potential impact on
critical infrastructure has profound implications for the safety and
stability of our society and the resilience of our economy.
Nowhere is this more evident than in our transportation systems,
which serve as the backbone of the American economy. These systems
connect our communities, support commerce, and facilitate the movement
of goods and services across the country and around the world.
Our transportation networks, spanning aviation, rail, public
transit, highways, pipelines, and maritime ports, are increasingly
reliant on complex digital systems for operation and coordination. This
reliance makes them especially vulnerable to cyber attacks by criminal
groups and nation-state actors.
Moreover, as emerging technologies like autonomous vehicles,
connected infrastructure, and artificial intelligence become more
integrated into our transportation systems, the cybersecurity landscape
grows more complex.
These advances, while offering new efficiencies and capabilities,
also create additional access points that cyber criminals and nation-
state adversaries could exploit.
A cyber attack on any of these systems could disrupt travel, halt
commerce, threaten public safety, and create cascading effects across
our economy and national security landscape.
Whether through ransomware attacks, data breaches, or other
malicious cyber activities, such threats have the potential to cause
extensive harm, demonstrating the urgent need for targeted
cybersecurity regulations within the transportation sector.
Safeguarding our transportation infrastructure is not only about
securing physical assets--it is also about protecting the digital
networks that power and control them, ensuring resilience in the face
of evolving threats.
The Transportation Security Administration (TSA), established to
protect our Nation's transportation systems, has an essential and
increasingly complex role in defending these critical networks against
cyber threats.
With its mandate to secure the Nation's vast transportation
infrastructure--covering everything from aviation and rail to maritime
and public transit--TSA is tasked not only with physical security, but
also with developing and enforcing cybersecurity regulations across the
industry.
I have concerns about the TSA's current approach. In recent years,
TSA has issued numerous Security Directives aimed at addressing cyber
risks. However, these directives often seem reactive, hastily
implemented, and lacking the necessary consultation with stakeholders.
Industry feedback indicates that these directives can be overly
prescriptive rather than performance-based, limiting operators' ability
to tailor cybersecurity practices to their specific operational needs.
A Security Directive that lacks clarity and flexibility may do more
harm than good. Instead of fostering robust security measures, it can
lead to confusion, inefficiency, and a checkbox mentality, where
compliance is valued over actual risk reduction.
Moreover, the lack of collaboration with industry experts--the
people who understand these systems best--raises concerns about whether
these directives are even capable of addressing the most pressing
vulnerabilities.
On November 6, less than 2 weeks ago, TSA issued a Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking that aims to establish mandatory cyber risk
management and reporting requirements for certain surface
transportation owners and operators.
The sheer complexity of these regulations--spanning over 300
pages--is overwhelming, especially considering smaller operators who
are already operating with limited resources.
These proposed rules raise an important question: will they
effectively fulfill their intended purpose by reducing cybersecurity
risks within the transportation sector, or will they simply place an
undue burden on operators?
TSA should empower operators with the flexibility to develop and
implement tailored cybersecurity strategies that best address their
unique risks and operational needs.
When I was mayor of Miami-Dade County, I focused on reducing
overhead and streamlining regulations to enable business innovation and
improve government efficiency. I believe this same approach is
essential as we work to effectively protect our Nation's transportation
systems from cybersecurity risks.
By balancing regulatory standards with operational adaptability, we
can promote robust cybersecurity practices that both protect critical
infrastructure and foster innovation and efficiency within the
industry.
Thank you to our witnesses from both panels for appearing before
the subcommittee.
I look forward to your testimony.

Mr. Gimenez. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Thanedar, for his opening
statements.
Mr. Thanedar. Good morning, everyone. Thank you, Chairman
Gimenez, for holding today's hearing, and thank you to our
witnesses for joining us.
The May 2021 ransomware attack against Colonial Pipeline
served as a major turning point in TSA's approach to securing
transportation systems from cyber attacks.
Prior to the attack, TSA's efforts to ensure the
cybersecurity of transportation systems relied largely upon
voluntary cooperation and adoption of recommended guidelines
and best practices.
The attack had far-reaching impacts as Colonial Pipeline
shut down the transportation of fuel throughout the pipeline,
which services much of Southeastern United States. The public
flocked to gas stations, leading to long lines and fuel
shortages.
In the aftermath of the attack, TSA assumed a more
regulatory posture toward transportation cybersecurity, acting
quickly to issue the first ever cybersecurity directives for
pipeline systems and facilities.
TSA followed that initial security directive with similar
mandates for owners and operators of freight rail, passenger
rail, public transit systems, as well as changes to security
programs for airports and air carriers.
TSA required owners and operators to adopt essential
cybersecurity measures, such as designating a cybersecurity
coordinator and reporting cyber incidents.
TSA engaged extensively with industry stakeholders and
quickly learned that its mandate were viewed as too
prescriptive and inflexible.
To provide regulated parties with enough flexibility to
innovate and respond to evolving threats, TSA developed a novel
approach in subsequent directives, focusing on desired
performance and security outcomes rather than specific
measures.
Over the past couple years, TSA has continued to refine its
approach through extensive engagement with stakeholders.
Earlier this month, TSA issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
to clarify cybersecurity requirements for owners and operators
of pipeline rails and over-the-road bus systems.
TSA's proposal, which is currently open for comments, would
require system owners and operators to establish and execute a
comprehensive cyber risk management program, representing a
significant step forward in the evolution of TSA's
cybersecurity efforts.
The maturation of those efforts is also reflected in recent
adjustments to TSA's investment in cybersecurity.
In fiscal year 2021, prior to the Colonial Pipeline attack,
Congress funded TSA cybersecurity activities at $86 million
with 86 dedicated positions.
Now, in fiscal year 2024, that investment has increased to
$137 million and 167 positions.
For fiscal year 2025, the Biden-Harris administration has
requested an additional increase of $8 million and 41
positions.
I hope Congress will continue to support TSA's efforts to
enhance the cybersecurity of the transportation sector.
To those who may question the need for regulations or TSA's
use of emergency security directives, I would note that if TSA
continued to rely on voluntary compliance with recommended
guidelines and another attack like the attack on Colonial
Pipeline were to occur, the public would rail against both TSA
and Congress for allowing a disproven approach to continue.
Our adversaries are continuing to adapt and pursue
offensive cyber capabilities. Now is the time for TSA and its
partners to ensure our security defenses are fully fortified.
I thank the Chairman and our witnesses again, and I yield
back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thanedar follows:]

Statement of Ranking Member Shri Thanedar

November 19, 2024

The May 2021 ransomware attack against Colonial Pipeline served as
a major turning point in TSA's approach to securing transportation
systems from cyber attacks.
Prior to the attack, TSA's efforts to ensure the cybersecurity of
transportation systems relied largely upon voluntary cooperation and
adoption of recommended guidelines and best practices.
The attack had far-reaching impacts, as Colonial Pipeline shut down
the transportation of fuel through the pipeline, which services much of
the Southeastern United States.
The public flocked to gas stations, leading to long lines and fuel
shortages.
In the aftermath of the attack, TSA assumed a more regulatory
posture toward transportation cybersecurity, acting quickly to issue
the first-ever cybersecurity directives for pipeline systems and
facilities.
TSA followed that initial security directive with similar mandates
for owners and operators of freight rail, passenger rail, and public
transit systems, as well as changes to security programs for airports
and air carriers.
TSA required owners and operators to adopt essential cybersecurity
measures, such as designating a cybersecurity coordinator and reporting
cyber incidents.
TSA engaged extensively with industry stakeholders and quickly
learned that its mandates were viewed as too prescriptive and
inflexible.
To provide regulated parties with enough flexibility to innovate
and respond to evolving threats, TSA developed a novel approach in
subsequent directives, focusing on desired performance and security
outcomes rather than specific measures.
Over the past couple years, TSA has continued to refine its
approach through extensive engagement with stakeholders.
Earlier this month, TSA issued a notice of proposed rulemaking to
codify cybersecurity requirements for owners and operators of pipeline,
rail, and over-the-road bus systems.
TSA's proposal, which is currently open for comment, would require
system owners and operators to establish and execute a comprehensive
cyber risk management program, representing a significant step forward
in the evolution of TSA's cybersecurity efforts.
The maturation of those efforts is also reflected in recent
adjustments to TSA's investment in cybersecurity.
In fiscal year 2021, prior to the Colonial Pipeline attack,
Congress funded TSA's cybersecurity activities at $86 million, with 86
dedicated positions.
Now, in fiscal year 2024, that investment has increased to $137
million and 167 positions.
For fiscal year 2025, the Biden-Harris administration has requested
an additional increase of $8 million and 41 positions.
I hope Congress will continue to support TSA's efforts to enhance
the cybersecurity of the transportation sector.
To those who may question the need for regulations or TSA's use of
emergency security directives, I would note that, if TSA continued to
rely on voluntary compliance with recommended guidelines and another
attack like the attack on Colonial Pipeline were to occur, the public
would rail against both TSA and Congress for allowing a disproven
approach to continue.
Our adversaries are continuing to adapt and pursue offensive cyber
capabilities; now is the time for TSA and its partners to ensure our
security defenses are fully fortified.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Ranking Member Thanedar.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]

Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson

November 19, 2024

In November 2001, following the September 11 terrorist attacks,
Congress passed the Aviation and Transportation Security Act to create
the Transportation Security Administration and task the agency with
securing all modes of transportation.
Congress provided the TSA administrator broad authority to issue
and enforce security measures, including the authority to ``issue,
rescind, and revise such regulations as are necessary to carry out the
functions of the administration.''
Congress also recognized that threats to transportation would
likely evolve faster than regulatory processes could respond, so
Congress provided the TSA administrator with unique authority to bypass
the normal rule-making processes and issue regulations or security
directives immediately when necessary.
In fact, statute requires that ``if the administrator determines
that a regulation or security directive must be issued immediately in
order to protect transportation security, the administrator shall issue
the regulation or security directive without providing notice or an
opportunity for comment and without prior approval of the Secretary.''
This emergency authority has been essential to TSA's ability to
deter, disrupt, and defend against attacks to transportation over the
past 23 years.
For example, in August 2006, following the disruption of an al-
Qaeda plot to attack transatlantic flights using liquid explosives, TSA
used its authority to immediately ban passengers from carrying liquids
on flights.
The ban took effect overnight, and TSA issued updated directives in
the following days to refine the measures, including to allow limited
quantities of liquids.
TSA has similarly issued security directives to respond to
intelligence regarding bombs hidden in underwear and personal
electronic devices, threats posed by certain powders, plots to hide
explosive devices in cargo packages, and public health threats during
the COVID-19 pandemic.
When it comes to the cybersecurity of transportation systems, TSA's
emergency authorities are arguably even more necessary.
Cyber threats have evolved extremely quickly over the past several
years, and the May 2021 ransomware attack against Colonial Pipeline
made clear that the voluntary compliance model TSA had previously
applied to cybersecurity was insufficient.
In the aftermath of the attack, based on intelligence indicating
continued, evolving cyber threats to various modes of transportation,
TSA was able to issue security directives that helped protect
transportation systems prior to the issuance of a proposed rule making.
TSA's initial cybersecurity requirements were overly stringent and
prescriptive--but TSA has worked to refine its approach based on
stakeholder feedback.
The same emergency authorities that allowed TSA to take quick
action also enabled the agency to fix its mistakes expeditiously.
If TSA had not had the ability to issue security directives
immediately, the agency likely would have pursued an overly stringent
and prescriptive rule making, leading to an even longer period of
disruption, all while transportation systems would have been left
vulnerable to attack in the interim.
TSA's cybersecurity efforts have matured significantly over a short
time period, resulting in the agency's recent proposed rule making
which is focused on security outcomes rather than prescriptive
measures.
Though there is still room for further improvement to be achieved
through the notice and comment process, the proposed rule making
represents a novel, collaborative approach to regulations that should
be applauded and encouraged.
Congress should continue to support robust funding for TSA's
cybersecurity efforts and promote collaboration between TSA and
industry partners--not call into question the critical authorities TSA
has leveraged to protect transportation systems.

Mr. Gimenez. Again, I am pleased to have a distinguished
panel of witnesses before us today on this critical topic. I
ask that our witnesses please rise and raise their right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Gimenez. Let the record reflect that the witnesses have
answered in the affirmative. Thank you and please be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses. Mr.
Steve Lorincz serves as the deputy executive assistant
administrator for security operations at the Transportation
Security Administration.
Mr. Chad Gorman serves as the deputy executive assistant
administrator for operations support at the Transportation
Security Administration.
Ms. Tina Won Sherman serves as director for the Homeland
Security and Justice Team at the Government Accountability
Office.
I thank each of our distinguished witnesses for being here
today.
I now recognize Mr. Lorincz for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statements.

STATEMENT OF STEVE LORINCZ, DEPUTY EXECUTIVE ASSIST-
ANT ADMINISTRATOR,  SECURITY OPERATIONS,  TRANSPOR-
TATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION,  U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Lorincz. Good morning, and thank you so much for having
me and inviting me for this hearing. My name is Steve Lorincz.
As you mentioned, I'm the deputy executive assistant
administrator for security operations. I have the privilege to
work with and oversee 57,000 employees within security
operations.
Under our portfolio, we have domestic aviation operations
which oversees 433 airports across the country. We also have
international operations which oversees--we have assets
throughout the world.
We oversee surface operations, we oversee compliance
operations, and we have--we have an administrative function,
which oversees their administrative functions within security
operations.
We also have 2 senior liaison positions--1 is with CISA,
and the other is with the State Department.
So it's a pleasure, once again, to be here. I look forward
to the questions, and thank you.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Lorincz and Mr. Gorman
follows:]

Joint Prepared Statement of Chad Gorman and Steve Lorincz

November 19, 2024

Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and
distinguished Members of the committee. My name is Chad Gorman, and I
serve as the deputy executive assistant administrator for operations
support within the Transportation Security Administration (TSA). I am
joined today by deputy executive assistant administrator for security
operations, Steve Lorincz. We appreciate the opportunity to appear
before you today to discuss TSA's role in cybersecurity for our
Nation's transportation infrastructure.
TSA was established by the Aviation and Transportation Security Act
(ATSA), which was signed into law on November 19, 2001. With the
enactment of ATSA, TSA assumed the mission to oversee security in all
modes of transportation, be that aviation or the Nation's surface
transportation systems--mass transit and passenger rail, freight rail,
highway and motor carrier, pipeline, as well as supporting maritime
security with our U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) partners. In the years since
9/11, TSA has not only had to address the ever-present physical threats
to aviation and surface transportation modes, but also dynamic and
emerging cybersecurity threats to our Nation's aviation, rail, highway
and motor carrier, hazardous liquid, and natural gas pipeline
infrastructure. This is not a mission we can accomplish alone. TSA's
mission success is highly dependent on close collaboration and strong
relationships with our transportation industry stakeholders and our
Federal, State, and local partners, including the Department of
Transportation (DOT) as the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) co-
Sector Risk Management Agency for the Transportation System Sector.

transportation cybersecurity threats

The August cyber attack at the Seattle-Tacoma International Airport
serves as another reminder of the significant disruptions and broader
impacts cybersecurity incidents can cause to transportation. Cyber
attacks are an evolving and persistent threat. Cyber threat actors,
including nation-states, have demonstrated their intent and ability to
conduct malicious cyber activity targeting critical infrastructure by
exploiting vulnerabilities present in both Operational Technology (OT)
(the hardware and software that controls physical devices, processes,
and infrastructure) and Information Technology (IT) systems. Unlike
traditional kinetic threats we confront, cyber threats are not bound by
global borders. They can cross vast distances between our adversaries
and U.S.-based critical transportation infrastructure in seconds,
drastically impacting our ability to respond successfully with our more
traditional and time-bound approaches. Nation-state actors like Russia,
China, Iran, and North Korea recognize cyber capabilities bypass
geographical limitations and, accordingly, they have developed and
demonstrated capabilities that pose significant cyber threats to the
United States. The director of national intelligence has stated that
our adversaries and strategic competitors possess, and in the case of
the People's Republic of China (PRC), have prepositioned cyber attack
capabilities that could be used against U.S. critical infrastructure,
including transportation, especially during times of increased
conflict.
This year, the intelligence community assessed that the PRC almost
certainly could launch cyber attacks that could disrupt critical
infrastructure within the United States, specifically highlighting oil
and gas pipelines and rail systems. In May 2023, the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) issued a joint Cybersecurity
Advisory which highlighted for the first time a cyber threat cluster
associated with the PRC identified as Volt Typhoon. There have been
subsequent documents released on Volt Typhoon by CISA and other U.S.
Government agencies. Volt Typhoon has been active since at least mid-
2021 and targets U.S. critical infrastructure entities, including those
in the transportation sector. Volt Typhoon's choice of targets and
pattern of behavior is not consistent with traditional cyber espionage
or intelligence-gathering operations, and the U.S. Government assesses
with high confidence that Volt Typhoon actors are pre-positioning
themselves on IT networks for disruptive or destructive cyber activity
against U.S. critical infrastructure in the event of a major crisis or
conflict with the United States. Observed behavior suggests Volt
Typhoon intends to maintain access without being detected for as long
as possible by relying almost exclusively on stealthy ``living-off-the-
land'' techniques in which the cyber threat actor uses legitimate,
built-in network administration tools to sustain, advance, and conceal
an attack.
In April 2023, after receiving a briefing on the relevant
intelligence, the Transportation Security Oversight Board (TSOB)
recommended to TSA that a cybersecurity emergency exists that warranted
the TSA administrator's determination to expedite the implementation of
critical cyber mitigation measures in aviation, which he had done
through the exercise of his emergency regulatory authority by issuing
Joint Emergency Amendment (EA) 23-01. Joint EA-2301 on March 7, 2023.
The Joint EA amended the security programs for covered aviation
entities to require performance-based cybersecurity measures intended
to prevent the disruption and degradation of their critical systems.
Additionally, in April of this year, President Biden extended the
national emergency on malicious cyber-enabled activities, citing the
continued significant and malicious activities that are posing an
unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign
policy, and economy of the United States.
TSA is dedicated to protecting our Nation's transportation networks
against evolving cyber threats and continues to work collaboratively
with public and private stakeholders to expand the implementation of
intelligence-driven, risk-based policies and programs and continue
active information sharing within the Federal Government and with
industry to reinforce the security posture of these networks.

addressing cybersecurity threats through unique tsa authorities

In response to these evolving threats, the TSA administrator has
utilized his emergency authorities found in both statute and
regulation. In statute, Congress provided the TSA administrator
authority to issue regulations and security directives (SDs)
immediately to protect transportation security. 49 U.S.C.  114(l)(2)).
In doing so, the administrator may waive certain procedural
requirements for traditional notice and comment rule making to carry
out TSA's transportation security mission. SDs issued under this
authority are subject to review by the Transportation Security
Oversight Board (TSOB). The TSOB was established by the Aviation and
Transportation Security Act of 2001 (ATSA) and consists of 7
statutorily-prescribed voting members, including DHS, DOT, Department
of Justice, Department of Defense, Treasury Department, Office of the
Director of National Intelligence, and National Security Council. The
Board is chaired by the DHS deputy secretary. The TSOB is charged with
reviewing and ratifying, or disapproving, any regulation or SD issued
by the TSA administrator under section 114(l)(2) within 30 days after
the date of issuance. If a regulation or directive is not ratified by
the TSOB, it may remain in effect for no more than 90 days. To date,
the TSOB has reviewed and ratified all of TSA's surface cybersecurity
SDs. The TSOB also has discretionary authority to review and make
recommendations to the administrator regarding transportation security
plans. (49 U.S.C.  115)(c)(5),(6)). Under this authority, the TSOB
provided its recommendation to TSA regarding a cybersecurity emergency
warranting emergency action in the aviation sector.
By regulation, the TSA administrator has the authority to issue
emergency amendments to the security programs of regulated aviation
operators. (49 CFR  1542.105, 1544.105, and 1546.105). The
administrator may use this authority upon finding that there is an
emergency requiring immediate action with respect to safety and
security in air transportation or in air commerce. The administrator
has additional regulatory authority to issue SDs to regulated aviation
operators where it is determined that additional security measures are
necessary to respond to a threat assessment or specific threat. (49 CFR
 1542.303 and 1544.305.)
The TSA administrator's ability to leverage these authorities and
respond immediately during emergency situations has significantly
mitigated threats posed by a rapidly-evolving, and increasingly
volatile, cyber environment. The TSA administrator's emergency
authorities are essential and vital to the Nation's transportation
security.

examples of tsa's cybersecurity program

Immediately following a 2021 ransomware incident impacting a major
U.S. pipeline company, there was a clear understanding across the
administration, Congress, industry, and the public for the need to
prevent future pipeline cybersecurity incidents. The administration
turned to TSA and the TSA administrator leveraged his authority under
49 U.S.C.  114 to respond to emerging cyber threats by directing
owners and operators of certain pipeline and natural gas facilities to
implement a set of select cybersecurity protections to mitigate the
threat. The TSA administrator issued 2 SDs in 2021 to immediately
address these threats. Among the many requirements, the SDs required
pipeline companies to report cybersecurity incidents to CISA within 24
hours after they identify a cybersecurity incident; to designate a
cybersecurity coordinator and alternate that is available to TSA around
the clock; and to implement specific mitigation measures to protect
against ransomware incidents.
Credible cyber threat information also supported the TSA
administrator's use of his emergency authority to implement additional
security measures to U.S. surface (pipelines and railroads) and
aviation (airports and air carriers) transportation networks. In regard
to the surface transportation security domain, the cybersecurity SDs
require higher-risk pipelines, freight railroads, passenger rail, and
rail transit operators to take several critical actions (rail transit
operators only require the first 3):
1. Develop and submit to TSA a Cybersecurity Implementation Plan
(CIP) to achieve performance-based security outcomes;
2. Develop and maintain an up-to-date Cybersecurity Incident
Response Plan (CIRP) to reduce the risk of operational
disruption following cybersecurity incidents;
3. Develop and submit to TSA a Cybersecurity Assessment Plan (CAP)
to ascertain the effectiveness of cybersecurity measures and to
identify and resolve device, network, and/or system
vulnerabilities; and
4. Develop and submit to TSA an annual report that provides the
results of the Cybersecurity Assessment Plan from the previous
year.
Within aviation, the TSA administrator used his regulatory
authority to amend established security programs of the Nation's
largest air carriers and airports to include cybersecurity. Like the
surface SDs, these amendments started with requirements to designate a
Cybersecurity Coordinator, report cybersecurity incidents to CISA, and
to develop a CIRP. They now also include requirements to develop a CIP
and CAP and to allow TSA to inspect these documents.
In promulgating these SDs and security program amendments, TSA
engaged with stakeholders to enhance understanding of the threat
landscape and gather industry feedback. This included stakeholder
discussions at the CEO-level with DHS and TSA leadership, Classified
threat briefings for industry, multiple policy reviews by industry and
Government stakeholders, and consistent engagement sessions with
transportation associations and regulated entities for awareness on the
proposed strategies. Through these regular engagements with industry
partners, we quickly learned that our initial approach to cybersecurity
in surface modes was too prescriptive. This approach limited innovation
and hindered industry's ability to quickly respond to evolving and
emerging dynamic cyber threat landscapes. Based on that feedback, TSA
quickly transitioned our regulatory framework in 2022 to an outcome-
focused, performance-based model that remains our model to the present
day in both surface and aviation modes. This rapid shift to
performance-based SDs versus prescriptive SDs demonstrates the
flexibility of TSA's emergency authorities and highlights the power of
collaboration with our industry partners to collectively address
security issues with measures tailored to specific transportation
environments.
Since August 2023, TSA also led several in-person and virtual
meetings to discuss the pipeline SDs with pipeline owners and operators
from various associations and companies. Additionally, TSA hosts a bi-
weekly call with the owners and operators subject to the rail SDs to
share information and answer questions on the SDs and inspection
requirements. Similar calls have begun within the last few months for
airports and air carriers. In these engagements, TSA also discusses its
cybersecurity policy and strategy, identifies opportunities for
improvement, and provides contextual information via the sharing of
intelligence and incident information.
Finally, TSA also engages regularly with TSA's Surface
Transportation Security Advisory Committee (STSAC) and the Aviation
Security Advisory Committee (ASAC) to share and discuss security
requirements, issues, and challenges. These statutorily-created
committees include representation from the interagency and industry.
Whenever able, we will continue to engage with industry partners prior
to issuing new security requirements.
Concurrently with these efforts, TSA published a Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking (NPRM) that would codify the provisions of the SDs for
certain surface modes of transportation into a Cybersecurity Risk
Management Program. This proposed rule opened for public comment on
November 8, 2024. It continues TSA's commitment to performance-based
requirements, builds on TSA's previously-issued cybersecurity
requirements from the SDs and seeks to establish a sustainable and
comprehensive cyber risk management program for owners and operators
that have higher cybersecurity risk profiles. Our routine engagements
with stakeholders, as well as coordination with inter-agency partners
such as DOT, USCG, and CISA, have been critical in this process--as
with the SDs, their feedback has informed decisions on the proposed
rule making.
Within the aviation sector, TSA continues to partner with aviation
entities on elevating their cybersecurity stance. TSA has partnered and
communicated, at the appropriate level based on the maturity of the
covered parties, cybersecurity program changes to their cybersecurity
programs. As of October 1, 2024, TSA has reviewed and approved over 70
percent of the cybersecurity implementation plans and conducted several
inspections of covered parties.
Within the surface modes, all pipeline CIPs have been approved, and
nearly all rail plans have been approved. In preparation for the SD CIP
inspections, owners and operators were contacted by their Regional
Security Director or inspection point of contact well in advance of the
inspection to provide details and to coordinate any documentation in
advance to ensure all parties were properly prepared. As of May 2024,
TSA completed all initial pipeline inspections. By the end of fiscal
year 2024, 96 percent of rail inspections have been conducted.
With the approved CIPs in surface, most owners and operators have
developed and submitted their CAPs to test the effectiveness of the
measures outlined within their CIPs. As of October 23, 2024, TSA has
approved 99 percent of pipeline and 45 percent of rail CAPs.

information sharing and engagement

Our work does not simply end after issuing these cybersecurity
requirements. On the contrary, TSA continues its robust stakeholder
engagement to mitigate cyber threats. We work closely with covered
owners and operators to successfully implement these requirements,
educate our vast network of transportation owners and operators, and
continue to seek input from both the STSAC and the ASAC on how to best
integrate cybersecurity into the fabric of our transportation security
mission. TSA conducts extensive outreach with thousands of individual
transportation owners and operators to implement these requirements and
ensure consistent application across the transportation sector. We
continually seek opportunities to expand information exchanges and to
provide evaluation tools and training programs to evaluate systems,
identify vulnerabilities, and incorporate security measures and best
practices that mitigate cyber threats.
On behalf of DHS, TSA and USCG are each a Co-Sector Risk Management
Agency for the TSS along with the DOT. In this role, TSA serves with
the USCG as the executive agents for developing, deploying, and
promoting TSS-focused cybersecurity initiatives, programs, assessment
tools, strategies, and threat and intelligence information-sharing
products. TSA is in close alignment with CISA and coordinates on both a
tactical and strategic level to raise the cybersecurity baseline across
the transportation systems sector.
Under the proposed CISA Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical
Infrastructure Act (CIRCIA) rule published on April 4, 2024, all
entities within the TSS--that are currently required to report to TSA--
will also be required to report to CISA. The proposed rule is in line
with TSA's SDs and security programs that require certain
transportation entities to report cybersecurity incidents, as defined
by TSA, to CISA within 24 hours of identification. Regulated entities
complying with TSA's requirements will not need to make a duplicate
report to CISA; all TSA reporting requirements will occur via a report
from TSA into CISA's own systems. Although CIRCIA requirements do not
limit TSA's authority to impose cybersecurity reporting requirements,
define reportable incidents more broadly than CISA, or impose a time
frame for reporting that is shorter than the time frame required by
CIRCIA, TSA has ensured that cybersecurity reporting is integrated with
the system under development by CISA.
Information and intelligence sharing is a key enabler of TSA's
mission to protect the Nation's transportation systems to ensure the
freedom of movement for people and commerce. TSA facilitates both
Classified and un-Classified briefings for trade associations, industry
executive leadership, and key industry security personnel
representatives to ensure full understanding of the evolving threat
picture. As previously stated, TSA's commitment to information sharing
with industry is strongly supported by 2 full-time threat intelligence
sharing cells--the Aviation Domain Intelligence Integration & Analysis
Cell (ADIAC) and the Surface Intelligence Sharing Cell (SISC). Through
these entities, TSA shares thousands of threat items, including cyber
threat intelligence with cleared stakeholders. These 2 intelligence-
sharing cells are excellent examples of Government and industry
partnership, and their establishment resulted directly from stakeholder
collaboration. Close collaboration with our public and private partners
will continue to inform TSA's next steps in the cybersecurity arena.
Finally, we would like to thank Congress and this subcommittee for
your support of TSA's transportation security mission and securing the
funding for critical cyber resources in fiscal year 2024. The fiscal
year 2025 President's budget request, if enacted, will fund specially-
trained personnel to accelerate cybersecurity inspection and compliance
efforts across the entire TSS. TSA will use the funding to emphasize
aviation and surface sector resiliency, use of cyber tools, a trained
cyber response staff, a cyber analytical staff, and a regulatory
support staff. We recognize the continued need to recruit, train, and
retain cybersecurity professionals within TSA. Through recruitment and
retention incentives, to include supporting cybersecurity development
training opportunities and cybersecurity certifications for personnel,
we continue to build our cybersecurity workforce, positioning TSA to
effectively tackle the evolving cybersecurity threat as supported by
recent budget requests.
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to share
the steps and measures TSA has taken in concert with our stakeholders
to strengthen transportation critical infrastructure to address the
serious and persistent cybersecurity threat. TSA is committed to
ensuring appropriate security measures are in place to increase the
cybersecurity defenses of our Nation's most critical transportation
systems. I look forward to answering any questions you may have.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Lorincz.
I now recognize Mr. Gorman for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statements.

STATEMENT OF CHAD GORMAN,  DEPUTY EXECUTIVE ASSIST-
ANT ADMINISTRATOR,  OPERATIONS SUPPORT,  TRANSPOR-
TATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Gorman. Good morning. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member
Thanedar, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you today.
My name is Chad Gorman, and I am the deputy executive
assistant administrator for operations support at TSA. In this
role, I am responsible for TSA's intelligence operations,
regulatory policy, and stakeholder engagement as well as other
programs.
I am joined today by deputy executive assistant
administrator for security operations, Steve Lorincz. We
appreciate the opportunity to discuss TSA's role in
cybersecurity for our Nation's transportation infrastructure.
As the Members of this committee know well, cyber attacks
are an evolving and persistent threat. Cyber actors,
specifically, nation-states like Russia, China, Iran, North
Korea--have demonstrated their intent and ability to conduct
malicious cyber activity, targeting critical infrastructure by
exploiting inherent vulnerabilities of both operational
technology and IT systems.
These nation-state threat actors have developed and
demonstrated capabilities that pose significant cyber threats
to the United States, our critical infrastructure, and the
transportation sector.
As the director of national intelligence has stated, our
adversaries and strategic competitors have the intent and
ability to preposition cyber attack exploits that can be used
against U.S. critical infrastructure, including transportation.
In fact, we have observed highly sophisticated activity
attributed to the People's Republic of China, assessed as
prepositioning for disruptive attacks against U.S. critical
infrastructure, including transportation sector, in the event
of a major crisis or conflict with the United States.
In response to these urgent threats, the TSA administrator
has utilized his emergency authorities found in both statute
and regulations, issued security directives, and emergency
security program amendments immediately to protect
transportation security.
The administrator may use these authorities upon finding
that immediate action is necessary to protect transportation
security.
The TSA administrator's ability to leverage these unique
authorities, and respond immediately during emergency
situations had a significantly mitigative threats posed by a
rapidly-evolving cyber environment.
These emergency authorities are a vital component of the
Nation's--of securing the Nation's transportation system and
allow the TSA administrator to act to prevent harm to
transportation in the advance of catastrophic consequences.
Following the 2021 cyber incident at a major U.S. pipeline,
the TSA administrator leveraged his unique authorities to
require transportation and infrastructure stakeholders, both
surface and aviation, to implement a variety of cybersecurity
protections.
These measures include mandatory reporting of cybersecurity
instances, designating a cybersecurity coordinator, requiring
high-risk pipeline, freight, railroad, passenger rail, and rail
transit operators to develop cybersecurity implementation
response and assessment plans and reporting to TSA on their
efforts on a recurring basis.
The administrator consulted industry partners regarding
these measures and provided multiple threat briefings to CEOs
and other industry representatives.
These measures were developed with extensive collaboration
with industry stakeholders which allowed TSA to better
understand the threat landscape, and gather industry feedback.
It was through this feedback loop that TSA learned that our
initial approach to cybersecurity in surface modes was too
prescriptive.
Based on that feedback, TSA quickly transitioned our
regulatory framework in 2022 to an outcome-focused,
performance-based model empowering our industry partners and
allowing us collectively to address cybersecurity issues with
measures tailored specifically to transportation environments.
Parallel with these emergency measures, TSA continued to
pursue more permanent changes through notice-and-comment rule-
making process culminating in the issuance of a Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking earlier this month.
This proposed rule is intended to codify the provisions of
the recent security directives into a cybersecurity, risk
management program.
The proposed rule continues TSA's commitment to
performance-based requirements, and builds on TSA's previously-
issued cybersecurity requirements aimed at establishing
sustainable and comprehensive cyber risk management programs
for owners and operators with high-risk profiles.
TSA welcomes and encourages industry comment on this
proposed rule. Continuing collaboration with industry partners
as well as with interagency partners such as the Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency, the Department of
Transportation, and the United States Coast Guard is critical
to securing the Nation's transportation sector from
cybersecurity threats.
Industry engagement to date has led directly to better
cybersecurity outcomes. TSA is committed to continuing this
engagement as these threats evolve.
I want to thank the committee for its interest in
cybersecurity of the transportation sector and for its
continuing support of TSA and its unique authorities.
I would like to also publicly thank the dedicated employees
of TSA for the work they do every day to secure the Nation's
transportation systems.
Thank you, Chairman Gimenez and Ranking Member Thanedar,
for the opportunity to testify today. We look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Gorman.
I now recognize Ms. Sherman for 5 minutes to summarize her
opening statements.

STATEMENT OF TINA WON SHERMAN, PH D, DIRECTOR, HOME-
LAND SECURITY AND JUSTICE,  U.S. GOVERNMENT AND AC-
COUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Sherman. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to speak
with you this morning.
The threat landscape today is not quite what we had
envisioned following the tragic events that occurred on
September 11.
Current threat assessments cite the increasing prevalence
and sophistication of cyber attacks on U.S. critical
infrastructure, including on the transportation system sector.
Considered one of the lifeline sectors, transportation
systems include aviation and surface modes and moves billions
of passengers along with millions of tons of goods every year.
How this sector and others are fundamentally critical to
our Nation's economic stability and our everyday lives was
brought into clear relief after the ransomware attack on
Colonial Pipeline in 2021.
More recently, Volt Typhoon's ability to compromise
internet-connected devices in the transportation system sector,
as well as other critical infrastructure sectors, have raised
significant concerns about the extent of the impact a cyber
attack would have on the United States if carried out as part
of a major conflict by a foreign adversary.
The agency I represent, GAO, included the cybersecurity of
critical infrastructure as part of its high-risk list over 20
years ago, and since that time, we have made numerous
recommendations on cybersecurity in the transportation system
sector.
For example, in 2019, 2 years before Colonial Pipeline, we
reported on weaknesses in TSA's management of its pipeline
security efforts. Since that time, TSA has implemented all but
one of our recommendations.
The remaining recommendation is for TSA to update its 2010
Pipeline Security and Incident Recovery Protocol Plan, to
ensure the plan reflects laws, policies, and changes in
pipeline security threats, such as cybersecurity.
TSA officials told us they anticipate completion of the
updated protocol plan by July of next year.
TSA has used its various statutorily-granted authorities to
help secure all modes of the transportation system. This
includes issuing security directives and emergency amendments
in response to threats, events, or significant vulnerabilities,
as well as recently initiating a rule making to develop
cybersecurity regulations for freight and passenger rail,
pipelines, and more limitedly, over-the-road buses.
Over the past 5 years, GAO has reviewed TSA security
directives and emergency amendments in both aviation and
surface transportation systems, and has made recommendations to
clarify the process for renewing such directives and
amendments, and for obtaining and documenting stakeholder
input.
We also recently reported that TSA was unable to
demonstrate that its security directives and emergency
amendments align with leading practices for ransomware.
As it moves through its rule-making process for surface
transportation, TSA should consider leading practices GAO has
identified to improve the effectiveness of the process,
including incorporating project management practices, such as
timely communication with external stakeholders about the rule
making's process and progress as well as other details.
TSA should also be prepared to address some of the factors
that can delay rule making, such as the complexity of the
issues covered, shifts in administration and agency priorities,
and the availability of resources to carry out a rule making.
In closing, TSA must be positioned to effectively mitigate
cybersecurity threats to ensure the safe movement of people and
goods across our Nation's transportation system.
GAO will continue to assist Congress in the oversight of
TSA's efforts.
I'd like to thank my GAO colleagues for their tremendous
support in my preparation and to the subcommittee for holding
this hearing.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sherman follows:]

Prepared Statement of Tina Won Sherman

Tuesday, November 19, 2024

gao highlights

Highlights of GAO-25-107947, a testimony before the Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security, Committee on Homeland Security,
House of Representatives.

Why GAO Did This Study
Surface transportation comprises multiple modes--freight rail,
passenger rail, and pipelines--and moves billions of passengers and
millions of tons of goods each year. Domestic and foreign adversaries
likely will continue to threaten the integrity of our Nation's critical
infrastructure, including the transportation systems sector. They
perceive targeting these sectors would have cascading negative impacts
on U.S. industries and citizens, according to a DHS threat assessment.
This statement discusses GAO's portfolio of work on TSA's efforts
to enhance cybersecurity and its progress addressing prior GAO
recommendations.
This statement is based on prior GAO reports issued from December
2018 through July 2024, along with selected updates on TSA's efforts to
enhance cybersecurity and its progress addressing previous GAO
recommendations. For these reports and selected updates, GAO reviewed
TSA documentation, analyzed data, and interviewed agency officials.

What GAO Recommends
GAO made 6 recommendations to DHS or TSA to address cybersecurity
issues related to the transportation systems sector in the reports
covered by this statement. DHS or TSA concurred with all of them. As of
November 2024, DHS or TSA implemented 1 recommendation, partially
addressed 1 recommendation, and has not implemented 4 recommendations.
GAO will continue to monitor the agency's progress.

surface transportation.--tsa is taking steps to enhance cybersecurity,
but additional actions are needed

What GAO Found
The Transportation Security Administration (TSA)--a component
within the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)--is responsible for
security in the Nation's transportation systems. To fulfill that
responsibility, TSA has statutory authority to issue security
directives imposing requirements on industry without providing notice
or the opportunity for public comment.
In July 2021, GAO reported that in May 2021, TSA began issuing
security directives pursuant to this authority in response to a
ransomware attack on a U.S. pipeline company. TSA has issued, revised,
and extended 5 security directives requiring various actions to
mitigate cyber threats in the freight rail, passenger rail, and
pipeline modes. According to TSA, it has done so with industry feedback
and Federal oversight approval.
In November 2024, TSA issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that,
according to TSA, builds on the agency's performance-based
cybersecurity requirements issued via security directives since 2021.
TSA stated that this rule proposes to mandate cyber risk management and
reporting requirements for certain surface transportation owners and
operators.
In prior work, GAO identified various challenges to cybersecurity
in the transportation systems sector. For example, in January 2024, GAO
reported that ransomware was having increasingly devastating impacts in
the sector and found that TSA's security directives did not align with
ransomware leading practices. GAO recommended that DHS determine the
extent to which the transportation systems sector is adopting leading
cybersecurity practices that help reduce the sector's risk of
ransomware. As of November 2024, this recommendation was not yet
implemented.
In addition, in December 2022, GAO found that TSA had taken steps
to enhance the cybersecurity of internet-connected devices in the
transportation systems sector. However, TSA had not developed metrics
to measure the effectiveness of their efforts or conducted sector-wide
cybersecurity risk assessments specific to these devices. GAO
recommended that TSA develop a sector-specific plan that includes these
metrics and include internet-connected devices in such sector-wide
assessments. As of November 2024, these recommendations were not yet
implemented.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of the
subcommittee: I am pleased to be here today to discuss our work on the
Transportation Security Administration's (TSA) efforts to address
cybersecurity issues. TSA--a component within the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS)--has a stated mission to protect the Nation's
transportation systems to ensure freedom of movement for people and
commerce.
Within the transportation systems sector, surface transportation
comprises multiple modes of transportation--freight rail, passenger
rail, and pipelines--and moves billions of passengers and millions of
tons of goods each year. DHS's 2024 Homeland Threat Assessment noted
that domestic and foreign adversaries likely will continue to threaten
the integrity of our Nation's critical infrastructure--including the
transportation systems sector--over the next year, in part because they
perceive targeting these sectors would have cascading impacts on U.S.
industries and citizens.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Department of Homeland Security, Office of Intelligence and
Analysis, Homeland Threat Assessment 2024, 23-333-IA (Sept. 14, 2023),
accessed Nov. 13, 2024, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/2023-
09/23_0913_ia_23-333-ia_u_homeland-threat-assessment-2024_508C-
_V6_13Sep23.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My statement today discusses GAO's portfolio of work on TSA's
efforts to enhance cybersecurity and its progress addressing our
recommendations. This statement is based on prior GAO reports issued
from December 2018 through July 2024, along with selected updates on
TSA's efforts to enhance cybersecurity and its progress addressing the
recommendations from those prior reports.\2\ To conduct work on our
prior reports and selected updates, we reviewed TSA documentation,
analyzed data, and interviewed agency officials.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Those prior GAO reports are cited in this statement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
More detailed information on the objectives, scope, and
methodologies of our prior work can be found in each of the reports
cited in this statement. We conducted the work on which this statement
is based in accordance with generally accepted Government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit
to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.

background

Cyber Threats to the Transportation Systems Sector
Cyber threats to critical infrastructure sectors that rely on
electronic systems and data to support their missions continue to
increase and represent a significant national security challenge. A
variety of threat actors can carry out cyber attacks on critical
infrastructure, including transportation systems. Examples of these
threat actors include nations, criminal groups, terrorists, and
insiders. The 2024 Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. intelligence
community stated that China, Iran, North Korea, and Russia posed the
greatest cybersecurity threats to U.S. critical infrastructure.\3\ The
assessment stated that these countries possessed the ability to launch
cyber attacks that could have disruptive effects on U.S. critical
infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Annual Threat
Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community (Feb. 5, 2024), accessed
on Nov. 13, 2024, https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/
ATA-2024-Unclassified-Report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Illustrating this threat, in February 2024, the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), Federal Bureau of Investigation,
National Security Agency, TSA, and other Federal and international
partners issued a joint advisory stating that Chinese-sponsored cyber
actors from a group known as Volt Typhoon were seeking to pre-position
themselves on IT networks to carry out cyber attacks in the event of a
major crisis or conflict with the United States.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ CISA, Cybersecurity Advisory: PRC [People's Republic of China]
State-Sponsored Actors Compromise and Maintain Persistent Access to
U.S. Critical Infrastructure, AA24-038A (February 2024), accessed Nov.
13, 2024, https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/2024-03/aa24-
038a_csa_prc_state_sponsored_actors_compromise_us_critical_infrastructur
e_3.pdf. CISA and its U.S. and international partners previously issued
an alert in May 2023 after detecting Volt Typhoon hacking into critical
infrastructure in Guam, which is home to 3 U.S. military bases.
Microsoft, which first detected the hacking, noted that the operation's
likely aim was to disrupt critical communications between the United
States and Asia region during a future crisis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Specifically, Federal officials found that Volt Typhoon had
compromised IT systems in the transportation systems sector and other
critical infrastructure sectors, including communications, energy, and
water and wastewater systems. The alert stated that Federal officials
had a high degree of confidence that the attackers would be able to
move from IT networks to operational technology assets and disrupt
critical functions.

Federal Cybersecurity Challenges
In June 2024, we reiterated the importance of addressing 4 major
cybersecurity challenges, one of which is protecting the cybersecurity
of critical infrastructure.\5\ With regard to protecting the
cybersecurity of critical infrastructure, we reported that more work
remains. Specifically, we made 126 recommendations in public reports
since 2010 in this area. While Federal agencies have implemented 62 of
these recommendations, they have not fully implemented 64 of them as of
May 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ GAO, High-Risk Series: Urgent Action Needed to Address Critical
Cybersecurity Challenges Facing the Nation, GAO-24-107231 (Washington,
DC: June 13, 2024). We reported that the Federal Government needed to
address 4 major cybersecurity challenges: (1) establishing a
comprehensive cybersecurity strategy and performing effective
oversight, (2) securing Federal systems and information, (3) protecting
the cybersecurity of critical infrastructure, and (4) protecting
privacy and sensitive data. Within these 4 challenges are 10 actions
critical to successfully dealing with the serious cybersecurity threats
facing the Nation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, we reported in January 2024 that the Federal agencies
responsible for 4 critical infrastructure sectors that reported almost
half of all ransomware attacks--critical manufacturing, energy, health
care and public health, and transportation systems--had not determined
the extent of their adoption of leading practices to address
ransomware.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Agencies Need to
Enhance Oversight of Ransomware Practices and Assess Federal Support,
GAO-24-106221 (Washington, DC: Jan. 30, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sector Risk Management Agencies and TSA's Transportation Systems Sector
Responsibilities
Sector Risk Management Agencies (SRMAs) are Federal departments or
agencies, designated by law or Presidential directive, with specific
responsibilities for their designated critical infrastructure
sectors.\7\ SRMAs coordinate with CISA to provide specialized expertise
to critical infrastructure owners and operators as well as to support
programs and activities for their relevant sector. In carrying out
these activities, SRMAs are to coordinate with DHS, other Federal
agencies, as appropriate, and State, local, Tribal, and territorial
partners. They also are to collaborate with critical infrastructure
owners and operators within their sectors. National Security
Memorandum-22, issued in April 2024, further defined SRMA roles and
responsibilities, such as leading sector risk management activities,
which, according to the Memorandum, should include recommending sector-
specific measures to protect critical infrastructure.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ 6 U.S.C.  650(23). Although sector-specific plans identify
specific departments, agencies, or components within departments or
agencies as having lead or co-lead responsibilities for carrying out
critical infrastructure protection activities, other offices within the
SRMA departments and agencies also support sector critical
infrastructure protection efforts.
\8\ White House, National Security Memorandum on Critical
Infrastructure Security and Resilience, National Security Memorandum-22
(Washington, DC: April 30, 2024), accessed Nov. 13, 2024, https://
www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2024/04/30/
national-security-memorandum-on-critical-infrastructure-security-and-
resilience/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSA is 1 of DHS's 2 designated agencies that fulfills DHS's SRMA
responsibilities for the transportation systems sector.\9\ The
Department of Transportation is designated as a co-lead for the
transportation systems sector. In TSA's role working with the
transportation systems sector, it has lead responsibility for
coordinating critical infrastructure protection efforts within various
surface modes of transportation, including pipelines, freight rail, and
mass transit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ The U.S. Coast Guard is also designated to fulfill DHS's SRMA
responsibilities for the transportation systems sector, primarily for
maritime security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
tsa's cybersecurity directives require actions to mitigate cyber
threats across the surface transportation sector
TSA is responsible for security in the Nation's transportation
systems. To fulfill that responsibility, TSA has statutory authority to
issue security directives imposing requirements on industry without
providing notice or the opportunity for public comment where the
administrator determines that a directive must be issued immediately to
protect transportation security.\10\ In July 2021, we reported that in
May 2021, TSA began issuing security directives pursuant to this
authority in response to the Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ 49 U.S.C.  114(I)(2)(A).
\11\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: TSA Is Taking Steps
to Address Some Pipeline Security Program Weaknesses, GAO-21-105263
(Washington, DC: July 27, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As shown in the table below, since 2021, TSA has issued 5 security
directives requiring various actions to mitigate cyber threats in the
freight rail, passenger rail, and pipeline modes. TSA has revised and
extended each of these directives several times. According to TSA
documentation, the agency has done so with industry stakeholder input
and feedback. An interagency oversight body has also reviewed and
approved these directives after issuance.\12\ Of the 5 directives, 3
directives have requirements, such as cybersecurity incident reporting,
to enhance cybersecurity in each transportation mode. The remaining 2
directives impose additional requirements for cybersecurity mitigation
actions and testing across the modes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ The Transportation Security Oversight Board, within DHS, is
statutorily required to review and ratify or disapprove any security
directives issued by TSA within 30 days. 49 U.S.C.  114(l)(2)(B),
115(c)(1). The board is composed of 7 members from the Departments of
Defense, Justice, Homeland Security, Transportation, and the Treasury,
the National Security Council, and the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence.

TABLE 1: TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION'S (TSA) SECURITY DIRECTIVES ON SURFACE TRANSPORTATION
CYBERSECURITY FROM MAY 2021 THROUGH OCTOBER 2024
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Title                            Description                 Effective date      Expiration date
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Security Directive Pipeline-2021- Requires critical pipeline owners     May 28, 2021.......  May 28, 2022.
01 Enhancing Pipeline             and operators to designate a
Cybersecurity (SD-01).            cybersecurity coordinator, report
cybersecurity incidents, and
conduct a vulnerability assessment.
Current version is SD-01D.......  Revisions have included an updated    May 29, 2024.......  May 29, 2025.
definition of a cybersecurity
incident, an increased time to
report incidents from 12 to 24
hours, and a requirement for
operators to test and evaluate
cybersecurity implementation plans.

Security Directive Pipeline-2021- Requires critical pipeline owners     July 26, 2021......  July 26, 2022.
02 Pipeline Cybersecurity         and operators to implement
Mitigation Actions, Contingency   mitigation actions to protect
Planning, and Testing (SD-02).    against ransomware attacks and
other known threats, develop and
implement a cybersecurity
contingency and recovery plan, and
conduct a cybersecurity
architecture design review.
Current version is SD-02E.......  Revisions have included changes to    July 27, 2024......  July 27, 2025.
requirements to provide flexibility
in meeting intended security
outcomes.

Security Directive 1580-21-01     Requires freight railroads owners     Dec. 31, 2021......  Dec. 31, 2022.
Enhancing Rail Cybersecurity      and operators to designate a
(SD-03).                          cybersecurity coordinator, report
cybersecurity incidents, and
conduct a vulnerability assessment.
Current version is SD-03C.......  Revisions have included               Oct. 24, 2024......  Oct. 24, 2025.
clarification of the entities to
which it applies and additional
cybersecurity incident response
plan exercise requirements.

Security Directive 1582-21-01     Requires public transportation and    Dec. 31, 2021......  Dec. 31, 2022.
Enhancing Public Transportation   passenger railroad owners and
and Passenger Railroad            operators to designate a
Cybersecurity (SD-04).            cybersecurity coordinator, report
cybersecurity incidents, and
conduct a vulnerability assessment.
Current version is SD-04C.......  Revisions have included               Oct. 24, 2024......  Oct. 24, 2025.
clarification of the entities to
which it applies and additional
cybersecurity incident response
plan exercise requirements.

Security Directive 1582 Rail      Requires certain railroad owners and  Oct. 24, 2022......  Oct. 24, 2023.
Cybersecurity Mitigation          operators to establish a TSA-
Actions and Testing (SD-05).      approved plan to implement
cybersecurity measures and a
program to annually assess the
effectiveness of these measures.
Current version is SD-05C.......  Revisions include adding new          July 1, 2024.......  May 2, 2025.
requirements for assessing,
updating, and reporting assessments
of cybersecurity measures.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: GAO analysis of TSA documentation./GAO-25-107947.

In November 2024, TSA issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking titled
Enhancing Surface Cyber Risk Management in the Federal Register.\13\
According to TSA, this proposed rule builds on the agency's
performance-based cybersecurity requirements issued via security
directives since 2021.\14\ TSA stated that this rule proposes to
mandate cyber risk management and reporting requirements for certain
surface transportation owners and operators. TSA is proposing to impose
cyber risk management requirements on certain pipeline and rail owner
and operators. TSA is also proposing a requirement on pipeline
facilities and systems to have a physical security coordinator and
report significant physical security concerns.\15\ TSA is further
proposing to impose a limited requirement on certain over-the-road bus
owner and operators to report cybersecurity incidents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Enhancing Surface Cyber Risk Management, 89 Fed. Reg. 88,488
(proposed Nov. 11, 2024) (to be codified at 49 C.F.R. Parts 1500, 1503,
1520, 1570, 1580, 1582, 1584, and 1586), accessed Nov. 13, 2024,
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2024/11/07/2024-24704/
enhancing-surface-cyber-risk-management.
\14\ TSA, TSA Announces Proposed Rule that Would Require the
Establishment of Pipeline and Railroad Cyber Risk Management Programs,
Press Release (Washington, DC: Nov. 6, 2024), accessed Nov. 13, 2024,
https://www.tsa.gov/news/press/releases/2024/11/06/tsa-announces-
proposed-rule-would-require-establishment-pipeline-and.
\15\ According to TSA's proposed rule, a Physical Security
Coordinator is a designated point of contact at the corporate level to
function as the administrator for sharing security-related activities
and information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSA is requesting comments on, among other things, the impacts of
regulations and requirements as well as existing training and
certification programs. Specifically, TSA is requesting comments on the
impact of regulations and requirements being imposed by other Federal,
State, and local entities, including DHS components, and potential
options for regulatory harmonization. In addition, TSA is requesting
comments on existing training and certification programs that could
provide options to meet proposed qualification requirements for
cybersecurity coordinators.\16\ TSA plans to review and provide them as
examples, as appropriate, to owners and operators that would be subject
to these requirements. The public comment period is 90 days, or until
February 5, 2025.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Cybersecurity Coordinators are designated points of contact
for TSA to convey time-sensitive information about threats or security
procedures to an owner or operator.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSA's proposed rule is a recent example of a Federal effort to put
forth requirements to mitigate and report cyber attacks. This includes
DHS's efforts to harmonize cyber incident reporting requirements by
certain entities through the rule-making process.\17\ Given the array
of existing requirements for cybersecurity, we testified in June 2024
on the importance of regulatory harmonization--the development and
adoption of more consistent standards and regulations for
cybersecurity.\18\ Without harmonization, adverse impacts can occur.
For example, we reported in 2020 that 4 Federal agencies had
established cybersecurity requirements for States to follow in securing
data.\19\ However, these requirements had conflicting parameters such
as the number of unsuccessful log-on attempts prior to locking out
users. TSA's rulemaking effort presents an opportunity for the agency
to avoid similar pitfalls by considering and, where appropriate,
aligning with existing Federal cybersecurity requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ DHS's CISA submitted a proposed rule related to cyber incident
reporting requirements to the Federal Register in March 2024, and it
was published in April 2024. DHS plans to issue the final rule by
October 2025. For more information, see Cyber Incident Reporting for
Critical Infrastructure Act (CIRCIA) Reporting Requirements, 89 Fed.
Reg. 23,644 (proposed Apr. 4, 2024) and GAO, Critical Infrastructure
Protection: DHS Has Efforts Underway to Implement Federal Incident
Reporting Requirements, GAO-24-106917 (Washington, DC: July 30, 2024).
\18\ GAO, Cybersecurity: Efforts Initiated to Harmonize
Regulations, but Significant Work Remains, GAO-24-107602 (Washington,
DC: June 5, 2024).
\19\ GAO, Cybersecurity: Selected Federal Agencies Need to
Coordinate on Requirements and Assessments of States, GAO-20-123
(Washington, DC: May 27, 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
tsa took steps to improve cybersecurity, but additional action is
needed
Since 2018, we have made 6 recommendations to DHS or TSA to address
cybersecurity issues related to the transportation systems sector. DHS
or TSA concurred with all the recommendations. As of November 2024, DHS
or TSA implemented 1 recommendation, partially addressed 1
recommendation, and has not implemented 4 recommendations.
Specifically, as shown in table 2, TSA developed a workforce plan to
better account for cybersecurity workforce needs, but additional action
is needed to improve ransomware resilience in the transportation
systems sector and to update aged pipeline recovery protocols.

TABLE 2: GAO RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY OR TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
FORIMPROVEMENTS TO TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS SECTOR CYBERSECURITY, AS OF NOVEMBER 2024
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
GAO Report Area and Year                   Recommendation summary                       Status
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ransomware risk reduction 2024 \1\....  Determine the extent to which the           Open.
transportation systems sector is adopting
leading cybersecurity practices that help
reduce the sector's risk of ransomware.
Develop and implement routine evaluation    Open.
procedures that measure the effectiveness
of Federal support in helping reduce the
risk of ransomware to the transportation
systems sector.
Securing internet-connected devices     For the transportation systems sector,      Open.
2022 \2\.                               develop a sector-specific plan that
includes metrics for measuring the
effectiveness of their efforts to enhance
the cybersecurity of their sector's
internet of things and operational
technology environments.
For the transportation systems sector, to   Open.
include internet of things and
operational technology devices as part of
the risk assessments of their sector's
cyber environment.
Pipeline security recovery protocols    Update the 2010 Pipeline Security and       Partially addressed.
2019 \3\.                               Incident Recovery Protocol Plan to ensure
the plan reflects relevant changes in
pipeline security threats, technology,
Federal law and policy, and any other
factors relevant to the security of the
Nation's pipeline systems.
Pipeline cybersecurity workforce 2018   Develop a strategic workforce plan,         Closed as implemented.
\4\.                                    including the number of personnel
necessary to meet goals set for the
Pipeline Security Branch, as well as the
knowledge, skills, and abilities,
including cybersecurity, required.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: GAO/GAO-25-107947.
\1\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Agencies Need to Enhance Oversight of Ransomware Practices and
Assess Federal Support, GAO-24-106221 (Washington, DC: Jan. 30, 2024).
\2\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure: Actions Needed to Better Secure Internet-Connected Devices, GAO-23-105327
(Washington, DC: Dec. 1, 2022).
\3\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Key Pipeline Security Documents Need to Reflect Current Operating
Environment, GAO-19-426 (Washington, DC: June 5, 2019).
\4\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Actions Needed to Address Significant Weaknesses in TSA's Pipeline
Security Program Management, GAO-19-48 (Washington, DC: Dec. 18, 2018).

Below are examples of our past findings and related recommendations
to improve transportation systems sector cybersecurity.
Pipeline cybersecurity workforce.--In December 2018, we found that
TSA had not established a workforce plan for its Pipeline Security
Branch that identified staffing needs or cybersecurity skills required
to best implement pipeline security reviews.\20\ We recommended that
TSA develop a strategic workforce plan that outlines the knowledge,
skills, and abilities, including those related to cybersecurity, needed
to effectively conduct the reviews. Subsequently, we designated the
recommendation as a priority for DHS implementation.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Actions Needed to
Address Significant Weaknesses in TSA's Pipeline Security Program
Management, GAO-19-48 (Washington, DC: Dec. 18, 2018).
\21\ GAO, Priority Open Recommendations: Department of Homeland
Security, GAO-20-355PR (Washington, DC: Apr. 23, 2020). Priority
recommendations are those that GAO believes warrant priority attention
from heads of key departments or agencies. They are highlighted because
their implementation could save large amounts of money; improve
Congressional and/or Executive branch decision making on major issues;
eliminate mismanagement, fraud, and abuse; or ensure that programs
comply with laws and funds are legally spent, among other benefits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSA completed a Workforce Assessment Report in May 2021 that
identified, among other things, several staffing inadequacies,
particularly related to the pipeline cybersecurity mission.
Specifically, the Assessment Report highlighted that the organization
lacked qualified personnel with relevant skills, appropriate
certifications, or expertise in cybersecurity and that over one-third
of the agency's position descriptions were improperly classified for
the duties required. The Workforce Assessment Report included a
recommended workforce plan that defined short-term and long-term
initiatives for addressing staffing inadequacies. For example, the
workforce plan listed initiatives for developing and codifying specific
staff duties required for physical or cybersecurity. These actions
helped ensure that TSA was able to meet its mission of reducing
pipeline systems' vulnerabilities to cybersecurity risks, especially in
a dynamic and evolving threat environment.
Pipeline security recovery protocols. In June 2019, we found that
TSA's Pipeline Security and Incident Recovery Protocol Plan, issued in
March 2010, defined the roles and responsibilities of Federal agencies
and the private sector, among others, related to pipeline security
incidents.\22\ For example, in response to a pipeline incident, TSA
coordinates information sharing between Federal and pipeline
stakeholders, and Department of Transportation's Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration coordinates Federal activities with an
affected pipeline operator to restore service. However, TSA had not
revised the plan to reflect changes in several areas, including
cybersecurity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Key Pipeline Security
Documents Need to Reflect Current Operating Environment, GAO-19-426
(Washington, DC: June 5, 2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We recommended that TSA update the 2010 Pipeline Security and
Incident Recovery Protocol Plan to ensure the plan reflects relevant
changes in pipeline security threats, specifically cybersecurity. As of
November 2024, TSA officials reported that the Protocol Plan is being
revised to bring it into conformity with several national-level policy
documents, such as the National Response Framework, the National
Cybersecurity Incident Response Plan, and the National Terrorism
Advisory System. The officials stated that they anticipate completion
of the updated Protocol Plan by end of July 2025.
In May 2021, the Colonial Pipeline Company learned that it was a
victim of a cyber attack, and malicious actors reportedly deployed
ransomware against the pipeline company's business systems. To prevent
further compromise, the company temporarily halted all pipeline
operations, leading to gasoline shortages throughout the southeast
United States. This example highlights the importance of having
response plans and protocols in place for responding to cybersecurity
incidents in the sector.
Internet of things and operational technology risk reduction.--In
December 2022, we found that TSA had taken steps to enhance the
cybersecurity of the transportation systems sector's internet of things
\23\ and operational technology \24\ environments.\25\ For example, TSA
issued threat briefings specific to operational technology and
published a Surface Transportation Cybersecurity Toolkit designed to
provide informative cyber risk management tools and resources.
Additionally, as discussed above, TSA issued security directives for
higher-risk railroads and rail transit and pipeline owners and
operators that require certain actions to improve cybersecurity
preparedness. The actions include appointment of cybersecurity
coordinators, reporting of cybersecurity incidents to CISA, conducting
a cybersecurity vulnerability assessment, and development of
cybersecurity incident response plans.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Internet of things generally refers to the technologies and
devices that allow for the network connection and interaction of a wide
array of devices, or ``things,'' throughout such places as buildings,
vehicles, transportation infrastructure, or homes.
\24\ The National Institute of Standards and Technology defines
operational technology as programmable systems or devices that interact
with the physical environment (or manage devices that interact with the
physical environment).
\25\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure: Actions Needed to Better Secure
Internet-Connected Devices, GAO-23-105327 (Washington, DC: Dec. 1,
2022).
\26\ Department of Homeland Security, Transportation Security
Administration, Enhancing Rail Cybersecurity, Security Directive 1580-
21-01 (Springfield, VA: Dec. 31, 2021), accessed Nov. 13, 2024, https:/
/www.tsa.gov/sites/default/files/sd-1580-21-01_signed.pdf; Enhancing
Public Transportation and Passenger Railroad Cybersecurity, Security
Directive 1582-21-01, (Springfield, VA: Dec. 31, 2021), accessed Nov.
13, 2024, https://www.tsa.gov/sites/default/files/sd-1582-21-
01_signed.pdf; Revision to the Security Directive Pipeline-2021-02
series: Pipeline Cybersecurity Mitigation Actions, Contingency
Planning, and Testing, Security Directive Pipeline-2021-02C
(Springfield, VA: July 27, 2022), accessed Nov. 13, 2024, https://
www.tsa.gov/sites/default/files/tsa_sd_pipeline-2021-02-july-
21_2022.pdf; and Enhancing Pipeline Cybersecurity, Security Directive
Pipeline-2021-01B (Springfield, VA: May 29, 2022), accessed Nov. 13,
2024, https://www.tsa.gov/sites/default/files/sd_pipeline-2021-01b_05-
29-2022.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, TSA had not developed qualitative or quantitative metrics
to measure the effectiveness of their efforts. In addition, TSA and the
co-sector risk management agencies (U.S. Coast Guard and Department of
Transportation) had not conducted sector-wide cybersecurity risk
assessments specific to internet of things and operational technology
devices. We recommended that TSA along with the co-sector risk
management agencies develop a sector-specific plan that includes
metrics for measuring the effectiveness of their efforts and include
internet of things and operational technology devices as part of risk
assessments of their sector's cyber environment. As of November 2024,
these recommendations were not yet implemented.
Ransomware risk reduction. In January 2024, we reported that
ransomware--software that makes data and systems unusable unless ransom
payments are made--was having increasingly devastating impacts.\27\ We
found that TSA required owners and operators of freight and passenger
rail, pipelines, public transportation, and surface transportation to
implement certain cybersecurity measures as a protection against
malicious cyber intrusions. However, we also found that TSA, and other
SRMAs, had not fully assessed the effectiveness of their ransomware-
related support. Therefore, we recommended that DHS develop and
implement routine evaluation procedures that measure the effectiveness
of Federal support in helping reduce the risk of ransomware to the
transportation systems sector.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ GAO-24-106221.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, we found that TSA's security directives for freight
and passenger rail, pipelines, and public transportation did not align
with National Institute of Science and Technology's Ransomware leading
practices. We recommended that DHS determine the extent to which the
transportation systems sector is adopting leading cybersecurity
practices that help reduce the sector's risk of ransomware. As of
November 2024, these recommendations were not yet implemented.
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of the
subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be pleased
to respond to any questions that you may have at this time.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Ms. Sherman. Members will be
recognized by order of seniority for their 5 minutes of
questioning.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
Back to you, Ms. Sherman, this 300-page document, what do
you consider that? Is it more check-the-box reporting
requirements, or does it actually help industry in protecting
itself from cyber attacks?
Ms. Sherman. While we haven't done an in-depth analysis of
the recent rule making, we know that there's a number of the
requirements that are carried over from the existing security
directives, intended to help, of course, improve the
cybersecurity of surface transportation.
We also think that training that's to be--potentially to be
implemented that's included as part of the rule making is a
positive step forward.
Deterrence is always really difficult, of course, to
measure, but we do see this as an important step forward by
TSA.
Mr. Gimenez. Mr. Gorman, in terms of the rule making
itself, I mean, I'm--you know, as you were speaking, I'm
looking at--let's focus, say, on rail. OK? So much of this
country's commerce, energy, et cetera, runs on rails.
How much of our infrastructure now is interconnected and
dependent on electronic systems for switching, scheduling, et
cetera, you know, making sure that that train is on this track
at this time, et cetera, et cetera? How much of that is
automated? How much of it is really susceptible to a cyber
attack?
Mr. Gorman. Specifically in the rail environment?
Mr. Gimenez. Yes.
Mr. Gorman. So I don't have an exact number for you,
Chairman, but it is a large portion, particularly with the
enactment of systems like mandatory positive train control, and
the interconnectedness there of the rail network.
It is a Federal requirement that those rail entities
actually have that system in operation for safety purposes, and
so that system, as well as things like switching and others,
are what provided TSA the methodology by which we scoped in
those rail entities that you see within the NPRM language,
particularly those class I rail entities that provide the bulk
of the movement for the goods and services that you just
referenced, sir, as well as a small amount of short line and
regional railroads that, while of a smaller entity size,
provide critical functions to the function of the overall
system, or provide critical national security functions in the
rail environment that we deemed as necessary for the protection
of this rule.
Mr. Gimenez. How vulnerable are we to, say, a massive cyber
attack on our rail system that basically paralyzes our rail
system in the United States?
Mr. Gorman. I think it varies across the system, sir, and
these measures particularly are meant to raise the cyber
resiliency of both rail, pipeline, and other entities that fall
within the scope, and built off of specifically industry
standards as listed in things like existing NIST Cybersecurity
Frameworks, as well as CISA's recent cybersecurity performance
goals to make sure that we are continuing to raise the bar for
cybersecurity, particularly in these critical assets in
transportation.
Mr. Gimenez. But no matter how much you raise the bar for
cybersecurity, this is a constant game of one-upmanship, right,
and eventually, if somebody really wants to penetrate it,
eventually you have to account for the eventuality of us losing
that or somebody penetrating the system and wreaking havoc on
the United States.
In these rules, do you account for that, and do you mandate
resiliency so that, worst-case scenario, you have to get off
the grid, will we be able to still transport goods and services
by the old method? Or are we so reliant on the new method that
we've forgotten the old method, and we'll be basically stuck in
gridlock?
Mr. Gorman. So given the dynamic nature of the
cybersecurity threat that we face now and we anticipate facing
in the future, I think there's 3 primary areas of this rule
that are germane to your question.
First, we learned, based on the performance of the
requirements that are existing in our current issued SDs, of a
performance-based model is the model to move into, both now and
into the future.
These requirements that we have in the NPRM as posted, we
believe, have--provide both specificity in the outcomes that we
are requiring, as well as flexibility for operators to adapt
those to their specific operations, systems, and technologies
to achieve those, as well as our overall goal is to prevent the
disruption of critical services.
So as we are looking to work with industry, we drive these
requirements at those critical assets that are determined
within their operations.
Third, we are mandating that these owner-operators develop,
maintain, and regularly exercise response plan, particularly
for potential incidents that may occur on and directly to their
networks, to provide redundancy and ability to quickly respond
and recover from those instances.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. My time is up.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Thanedar, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Thanedar. I thank the Chairman.
Mr. Lorincz and Mr. Gorman, in the aftermath of the
Colonial Pipeline attack, Congress has consistently supported
TSA's request for additional cybersecurity resources and
personnel.
For fiscal year 2025, the Biden-Harris administration has
requested an additional $8 million and 41 positions for TSA
cybersecurity activities.
How will that funding and those positions be used to
enhance TSA's efforts, and what more does TSA need from
Congress to further advance transportation cybersecurity?
Mr. Lorincz. Thank you for that question. First of all, I
think it's really important to acknowledge the support that we
have received and continue to receive, and we're very, very
appreciative of that.
Currently, in the aviation sector, we have oversight of 168
entities. In the surface sector, we have oversight of 155, and
that's going to also grow moving into next year.
The resource allocation, the 41 positions that you alluded
to is going to help tremendously as we continue to move
forward.
Currently within our security operation structure for both
aviation, we have 32 employees that are allocated to provide
support for those 168 entities. So as you could tell, the scope
of the work is great, especially with some of the requirements
and some of the pivoting that we have done based on industry
feedback.
I just want to share one of those things. So industry has
been instrumental in building this partnership and support with
TSA, and they requested a couple things which we worked with
them on.
One is to not submit their information to us. So our
inspection time line went from 2 days to maybe a week, so that
drives additional resources.
Also within the surface sector, we have about 60 employees
that are allocated to handle about 155 entities.
So the workload is there, but we truly appreciate the
support that we continue to receive, and we look forward to
also the President's budget which identifies these positions.
Thank you.
Mr. Gorman. I would add one more thing to Mr. Lorincz's
response there as well is that we also have critical
responsibilities, as a sector risk management agency, to not
only regulate within this space, but then also specifically to
provide support to the industry stakeholders, both in the
surface and aviation domains.
These resources would also provide greater ability for us
to engage on a regular, repeating basis with our industry
stakeholders as they both implement these measures but also
face cybersecurity threats directly at their networks, as well
as provide actionable intelligence directly to CIOs and CISOs
within these companies' structures, so they can help best guide
threat-hunting teams and other preparatory measures above and
beyond those measures that are required to additionally provide
protections across transportation.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
Now, at times, we have heard complaints about TSA's use of,
and reliance on, security directives.
However, statute requires the TSA administrator to
immediately issue a security directive whenever the
administrator determines that doing so is necessary to protect
transportation security.
The authority to issue security directives allows the TSA
administrator to respond quickly and effectively to imminent
threats. The regulatory process is simply not always fast
enough to keep up with the evolving intelligence landscape.
My question is, how critical is TSA's security directive
authority to the agency's ability to carry out its mission?
Aside from TSA's recent cybersecurity efforts, how else has
TSA used the security directives to protect transportation
security?
If TSA had not moved immediately following the Colonial
Pipeline attack to issue cybersecurity directives across
several transportation modes, would our transportation sector
have been left vulnerable to additional attacks?
Mr. Gorman. So to answer your first question--thank you for
the question--we believe that the administrator's emergency
authorities are vital to the security of the transportation
sector.
We have used these authorities both, as you've mentioned
here in this hearing, on several instances over the last
several years, to ensure that we were rapidly responding to the
ever-persistent and then direct threats posed by our
cybersecurity adversaries.
With regards to other instances beyond cybersecurity, we
would be happy to provide the Members a listing of that as that
information is sensitive security information, and we cannot
discuss those details here in this hearing. But we will be able
to follow up with you directly after this hearing to provide
you a summary of several examples of their uses.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you to the Ranking Member.
I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lorincz, you are the deputy executive assistant
administrator for security operations for TSA under the United
States Department of Homeland Security, correct?
Mr. Lorincz. That's correct.
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Gorman, you are the deputy executive
assistant administrator for operations support with TSA under
the DHS, correct?
Mr. Gorman. Correct.
Mr. Higgins. OK. So just so America knows, we got two of
the honchos here in front of us as it relates to TSA
regulations and the effort to introduce security enhancements
for our industry partners that fall under the jurisdictional
authority of TSA like our stakeholders running rail and
pipelines, in an effort to protect our Nation's infrastructure
from cyber threat.
Largely, Americans feel quite vulnerable from cyber threat.
From sea to shining sea, we do not--we are not reassured by
what we read in the news every day about a major cyber breach
in this industry, a major cyber breach from that massive bank,
another major cyber breach in this large Government entity.
Americans generally get it, that this thing is a moving
target, and it is a serious threat, and we, as a Nation, we
have to respond. So TSA has its role to play, and Congress has
given the Transportation Security Administration the authority
to issue what are called security directives. Is that correct,
gentlemen?
Mr. Gorman. That is correct.
Mr. Lorincz. Yes, correct.
Mr. Higgins. OK. So in that time frame, which is recent
history, since 2021, in the effort, as a Nation, to respond to
cyber threats, the TSA has issued security directives intended
for use against specific threat assessment, or threats.
However, those security directives have been referenced as
generally disruptive to operations and requiring a great deal
of coordinated effort at the implementation point, that takes
away from actual monitoring of threat.
There's only so many staff available within the actual
entities that operate, say, in our rail and pipelines, and if
those men and women that are dedicated, that work in that
office, if they have to spend so much of their time and energy
complying with the regulatory requirements, then they're not
investing that energy into actual monitoring of threats and
responding to threats.
So we have a responsibility to attempt to do better. Not
that the initial effort was not well-intended, it's just that
we're dealing with an emerging and complex threat for the first
time in our history.
So Mr. Lorincz and Mr. Gorman, 2 years ago, Congress passed
legislation, setting guidelines for reporting cyber attacks at
72 hours. You have to report this within 72 hours, to
streamline this in the interest of time.
In TSA's rule, TSA--I'm sorry--72 hours. So--and TSA's rule
said, Well, we're going to do it within 24 hours, and the
Securities and Exchange Commission finalized rules in 2022,
saying it had 4 business days.
So there's a variety of actual implementation responses
happening across the Government entities that we must
harmonize.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to introduce into the
record a media report from November of this year regarding the
bipartisan effort to clean up cyber regulations, and to pass
legislation that indeed does harmonize our cybersecurity
efforts. That would be H.R. 10123.
Mr. Gimenez. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Article Submitted by Honorable Clay Higgins

bipartisan effort to clean up cyber regulations gets a boost in house,
but calendar is tight

By Martin Matishak, November 18, 2024, The Record, Recorded Future News
A House Republican late last week introduced legislation to
untangle the country's jumble of cybersecurity regulations, keeping the
bipartisan proposal alive as Congress finishes its work for 2024.
The measure from Rep. Clay Higgins of Louisiana, a member of both
the House Homeland Security and Oversight committees, is a companion
bill to bipartisan legislation that sailed through the panel's Senate
counterpart in July by a 14-1 vote. Recorded Future News first reported
on the proposed law.
Both would require the White House's national cyber director to
establish a committee to harmonize the patchwork of cyber requirements
imposed on the private sector by Federal regulatory agencies.
The Biden administration has given the legislation its full-
throated support, arguing the existing landscape is a myriad of
inadequate, and often redundant, requirements that actually harm the
nation's digital defenses.
``Duplicative requirements . . . can, perversely, result in worse
cybersecurity outcomes, because teams have to focus on compliance
instead of directly mitigating cyber risk,'' Harry Coker, the country's
current cyber czar, said at Columbia SIPA cyber conference last week.
But the click is ticking. There are only a few weeks left in the
lame-duck session of Congress and there are only a handful of
legislative vehicles the regulatory bill--which still has to be
approved by committee and then the full chamber--could be attached to.
A new Congress starts January 3, and President-elect Donald Trump will
take office soon after that, resetting the legislative agenda.
Higgins' legislation could hitch a ride on another short-term
government funding bill. The current spending bill expires on December
20. Republicans leaders have already signaled they will punt the issue
into 2025 after the GOP secured a trifecta in government by seizing
control of the White House and both chambers of Congress.
However, it's possible the proposed regulation overhaul ultimately
expires at the end of the current two-year congressional term, meaning
proponents would have to try again in the future.
Nicholas Leiserson, assistant national cyber director for cyber
policy and programs, held out hope that the legislation would make it
through the year-end gauntlet.
``As ever in a lame duck, there's a lot of activity going on at the
end of the Congress. But, from our standpoint, this has been a
bipartisan issue from the beginning,'' he told Recorded Future News on
Friday during a phone interview.
Leiserson said that ``folks from across the political spectrum''
have come to support the legislation's goal because it's one of only a
``few cases in government where you can actually get better
cybersecurity outcomes for less money,'' noting Auburn University's
McCrary Institute last month issued a list dozens of recommendations to
revamp Federal cyber policy with harmonizationin the top spot.
Leiserson declined to speculate about what would happen if the bill
isn't approved before lawmakers adjourn for the year.
``Our hope is certainly that this is going to get done as soon as
possible. That's our priority,'' he said.
``What happens if it doesn't is really up to the next
administration.''

Martin Matishak is the senior cybersecurity reporter for The Record.
Prior to joining Recorded Future News in 2021, he spent more than 5
years at Politico, where he covered digital and national security
developments across Capitol Hill, the Pentagon, and the U.S.
intelligence community. He previously was a reporter at The Hill,
National Journal Group and Inside Washington Publishers.

Mr. Higgins. Thank you.
Gentlemen, we probably have time if the Chairman would
indulge, do you see anything more important, Mr. Lorincz and
Mr. Gorman, anything more important than harmonization of our
security efforts to protect our Nation's infrastructure from
cyber threat?
Mr. Gorman. TSA supports the overall goal of harmonizing
cybersecurity requirements with our industry stakeholders. This
is an area specifically where we've asked for feedback, in the
NPRM, and based on that feedback, based on other efforts and
interagency discussions that are on-going, we anticipate to be
able to incorporate that as we move forward into the final rule
stage.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you.
Mr. Lorincz.
Mr. Lorincz. Yes, I just wanted to also add to Chad's
point, that it's really important for us to make sure that we
continue to collaborate with our stakeholders and provide and
receive feedback.
To your question and to your comment, I think it's really
important to also address, since May 2021, just in the surface
realm, we have held over 300 industry engagements, whether it's
briefings or calls, to make sure that industry had the
opportunity to provide feedback, so we can receive that
feedback and pivot accordingly.
Also within the aviation sector, just this year alone, we
have had the opportunity to receive feedback from our aviation
partners over 126 times, to make sure that we understood and we
received the feedback based on their operational needs and
necessities.
So we continue to listen because I think it's really,
really important to understand that we're on a journey
together, and I really, really appreciate the question and the
thought about harmonization as we move forward. Thank you.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the indulgence.
Mr. Gimenez. I thank the gentleman from Louisiana.
I now recognize the gentlewoman from Florida, Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Good morning, and thank you all so much for being
here with us today.
Mr. Lorincz, Mr. Gorman, I'd like to start by addressing
this question to both of you, and that is, I'm interested in
what are some of the critical things, that you identified or
addressed through security directives, that TSA is considering
as part of the formal regulatory process?
Mr. Gorman. I think the most important lesson that we
learned collectively with our industry stakeholders in the
issuance and the performance of the requirements within our
current security directives, is that there is no one-size-fits-
all when it comes to cybersecurity, particularly when it comes
to the complexity of the threat and the complexity of business
and operational technology networks in place today.
So, we believe and have learned the lesson through the
issuance and the maintenance of those requirements in the SDs,
and in moving those into this proposed rule, that a
performance-based model is the only way that we will be
successful, and our partners will be successful in continuing
to prevent disruptive attacks against our Nation's
transportation infrastructure.
We believe that as you look at the requirements of this
rule set, those--that theme has carried over, but particularly,
we are interested in industry feedback as it relates to both
the opportunities that it provides them to customize these
performance-based requirements for their own business
operations, as well as potential challenges that they see and
how we can incorporate that into the final rule.
Ms. Lee. Tell me, if you would, how that performance-based
model accommodates the different sectors that you are
attempting to regulate?
Mr. Gorman. So I believe, again, in the same model is that
we establish outcome-based goals across our requirements that
are based, again, in industry standards. Like we see in NIST's
Cybersecurity Framework, the Cyber and Infrastructure Security
Agency's performance-based cyber goals have given those as the
platform.
Given the model that we have put in place and are seeing
results already of in the SDs, we then work with individual
owners and operators to craft specific implementation plans for
those measures that are specific to their industry, their
technologies, their operations, and the size and scope of those
operations, and the technologies, both from a business and from
an operational technology perspective that they operate.
Then based on that and based on an assessment of
criticality, they then propose to TSA a time line of
investments and actions to drive toward those requirements, and
we have seen early successes in that model and anticipate
continuing that as we move into the final rule.
Ms. Lee. So is it your assessment that that is a sufficient
way to identify regulatory requirements that are unique enough
for each of the different sectors, that that is a sufficient
way to accommodate the notion that each of them needs something
a little bit different, and the best practices and requirements
for each of those different sub sectors should be a little bit
different? You think that's an adequate way to address it?
Mr. Gorman. I think not only do we believe it's adequate,
we believe that is one, again, an essential way to provide the
flexibility across infrastructure, as well as provide
flexibility for continuing adapting in persistent threat
environment. So as we, again, move into a permanent rule stage,
we believe that is the way that we will provide and actually
work with our partners for ultimate success.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Lorincz, anything to add on that subject?
Mr. Lorincz. Yes, thank you. I think to the points that
were made earlier, I think for us, the relationship building is
really, really critical, understanding industry, and to the
previous answer that one size does not fit every one of those
entities, making sure that they're able to work together.
One thing that's really, really important to mention is
that as they build those plans, those plans are built with us.
We help them through that journey.
It's also important to note before we send out any teams to
do any inspections or assessments, we have conversations that
take place weeks before to make sure that they're ready. This
is not a gotcha mentality.
This is all about making sure that we keep the system safe.
So we spend a lot of time investing, making sure that at the
end, we have a great product and that product is safe. If
there's anything that we need to do to pivot, to make sure that
we're able to adjust, that we do that accordingly.
Ms. Lee. Is TSA adequately resourced to implement what the
proposed rules require?
Mr. Lorincz. So we are very--we appreciate the support that
we have received, as I stated earlier, and we look forward to
receiving the additional 41 assets that is in the fiscal year
2025 President's budget.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you to the gentlewoman from Florida.
I want to thank the witnesses, Mr. Lorincz, Mr. Gorman, and
Dr. Sherman, for your valuable testimony, and the Members for
their questions. The witnesses are now dismissed, and the
committee will stand in brief recess--very brief recess--while
the clerk shall arrange for the second panel of witnesses.
[Recess.]
Mr. Gimenez. The committee will come to order. I am pleased
to welcome our second panel of witnesses. I ask that the
witnesses please rise and raise their right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Gimenez. Let the record reflect that the witnesses have
answered in the affirmative, thank you, and please be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our second panel of
witnesses. Mr. Ian Jefferies serves as the president and chief
executive officer of the Association of American Railroads.
Ms. Kimberly Denbow serves as the vice president of
security and operations for the American Gas Association.
I thank each of our distinguished witnesses for being here
today. I now recognize Mr. Jefferies for 5 minutes to summarize
his opening statements.

STATEMENT OF IAN JEFFERIES, PRESIDENT & CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN RAILROADS

Mr. Jefferies. Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Members of
the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to be here
today where I have the privilege of representing the Nation's
freight railroads.
Running across 140,000 miles of privately-funded
infrastructure, railroads rely on advance technology and
skilled employees to operate safely and keep goods moving every
day.
Safety, physical and digital, is at the core of all
railroads do, and pertaining to cybersecurity specifically, as
you know, it is a continuous arms race between attackers and
defenders, with railroads committed to constantly improving
protection.
If you take away one thing from me today, I hope it is
this: Railroads have a track record and a system in place to
meet the cyber challenges of today and tomorrow.
We prioritize cybersecurity through a well-established,
risk-based, and collaborative approach, actively working with
Government entities like TSA and CISA to improve and adapt
cybersecurity measures.
This includes regularly-scheduled interaction between
industry and our Government partners, where both threats and
preparedness levels are analyzed in depth.
Moreover, railroads have a long-standing commitment to
protecting their operations through coordinated efforts and
continuous evaluation of cybersecurity plans.
Our unified security plan evolves with input from private
and Government experts to address emerging threats effectively.
With that, let me turn to some details. As I mentioned,
railroads emphasize information sharing with agencies like TSA
and CISA to stay ahead of threats.
Rail industry leadership has played a central role as well,
starting with the establishment of a unified cybersecurity plan
over 20 years ago.
Cybersecurity plans are implemented by two bodies--the Rail
Security Working Committee, which focuses on countering
terrorism, and the Rail Information Security Committee,
composed of information security leaders from major railroads.
Together these committees form the Rail Sector Coordinating
Council, railroads' main channel for coordinating with
Government on cybersecurity.
Looking forward, while railroads and other entities have
been reporting incidents for several years, railroads would
benefit from CISA regularly updating its cyber profile based on
attack analyses across sectors, as timely reports back to
industry are crucial for staying informed about emerging
threats and potential bad actors.
In looking at the risk management rule, AAR appreciates the
open regulatory approach TSA has finally taken with regard to
its recent NPRM on cyber risk management. The industry is still
reviewing the rule, which just came out this month and will
offer detailed comments.
In our initial review of the NPRM, we did identify a few
long-standing issues railroads have repeatedly raised with TSA
that were not addressed in the NPRM.
For example, and as mentioned earlier, the proposed rule
requires the reporting of a cyber incident in 24 hours, which
conflicts with the statute requirement of 72 hours, further
conflicting with the SEC requirements of 4 days.
Not only could this conflict create confusion, and was
easily avoidable, but the earlier deadline may divert resources
from immediate on-going attack response to comply with the
reporting requirement.
The rule also continues to require that any security
coordinator be a U.S. citizen which is impossible for a
Canadian class I railroad to operate throughout the United
States as well.
We look forward to addressing these issues and others
throughout the public comment period and will continue to
engage in conversations with TSA and other Government partners
to ensure any final rule protects railroads, employees, and the
communities in which we operate.
As I said, we were pleased to see TSA issue this proposed
rule through a normal regulatory process after several years of
issuing security directives under its emergency authorities.
While emergency authorities might be necessary in the rare
instance of a true, identical immediate threat, AAR prefers the
collaborative regulation over TSA's use of directives, which,
while faster, bypass public input and risk leading to
unnecessary requirements that lack security justification.
One-size-fits-all prescriptive mandates can be
counterproductive by failing to recognize the modal differences
in their cyber preparedness. As I mentioned, railroads' first
cybersecurity plan was established over 20 years ago.
Overly prescriptive regulation also risks stifling
innovation necessary to adapt to constantly-changing threats,
something that is happening every day.
AAR supports performance-based standards--and that was a
welcome message from the prior panel--to allow flexibility in
responding to fast-evolving threats.
Thank you, and I look forward to our discussion today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jefferies follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ian Jefferies

November 19, 2024

introduction

On behalf of the members of the Association of American Railroads
(AAR), thank you for the opportunity to testify on how the rail
industry works with our Government counterparts to address cyber
threats and the impacts of emergency authority on those efforts. AAR's
members account for the vast majority of North American freight
railroad mileage, employees, and traffic.
Freight railroads integrate skilled personnel and ingenuity with
technology to keep the network infrastructure safe and the supply chain
moving every day. Advanced information and communications technology
are helping our employees in every aspect of our operations, including
train control, track and equipment inspections, emergency response,
dispatching, railcar tracking, locomotive fuel management, predictive
performance analysis, employee training, and much more. Cybersecurity
is an arms race between attackers and defenders, which is why our
highly-skilled, highly-trained employees work diligently to continually
enhance their capabilities and guard against cyber attacks that
threaten the safety and integrity of our operations.
For 25 years, railroads have maintained a dedicated coordinating
committee focused on cyber threats, effective risk mitigation
practices, and engagement with appropriate Government entities.
Railroads leverage a strong mix of private and public capabilities to
effectively prevent and respond to malicious cyber activity. As threats
evolve, our industry strives to stay agile and innovative to address
the dynamic threat landscape.

a unified commitment to overall security preparedness

The rail industry addresses cybersecurity head-on through a long-
standing industry-wide, risk-based, and intelligence-driven plan.
Railroads' highly specialized cybersecurity teams carry out
comprehensive, multi-faceted cybersecurity plans focused on 4 factors
identified by experts as the most likely way to stop cyber attacks: the
tactics most commonly used to gain illicit access to computer systems;
the vulnerabilities most commonly exploited; illicit activities missed
or disregarded in prior analysis but identified after the incident; and
protective measures that could have made a difference had they been
implemented.
Responsibility for implementing and sustaining cybersecurity plans
lies with two specialized industry coordinating bodies. First, the Rail
Security Working Committee includes senior law enforcement and security
officials focused on countering domestic and international terrorism.
Second, the Rail Information Security Committee (RISC) is comprised of
chief information security officers and information assurance leaders
from major North American railroads. The RISC was established in 1999
and is supported by security experts from the AAR and the American
Short Line and Regional Railroad Association (ASLRRA). Together, these
committees form the Rail Sector Coordinating Council (RSCC), the rail
industry's primary channel for communication and coordination with
Government agencies on cybersecurity initiatives.
The rail industry's security plan does not just sit on a shelf. It
is a living document, continuously evaluated and enhanced through
recurring exercises and frequent consultations with Government and
private-sector security experts to ensure maximum sustained
effectiveness supported by a strong working relationship with the
Federal Government.

information sharing is vital for success

For railroads, cyber awareness is a fundamental component of their
day-to-day operations, but even the best cybersecurity plans and
practices will falter if useful information on cyber threats is not
shared. Information sharing allows organizations to learn from one
another, reduce their vulnerabilities, and quickly adapt to changing
conditions. Insights gained from risk assessments and threat
advisories, along with experience gained in drills, enable railroads
and industry organizations to incorporate effective safeguards and
protective measures into their own systems.
For this reason, railroads and industry organizations prioritize
proactive engagement with Government partners, including the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), to share information on cyber
threats and effective countermeasures. These open lines of
communication are maintained through frequent calls and meetings
between AAR, its members, and TSA, ensuring our Federal Government
partners are aware of how rail operations interact with cybersecurity
measures.

noticed of proposed rulemaking (nprm)

Earlier this month, TSA issued a lengthy NPRM that builds upon
existing cybersecurity requirements previously issued through security
directives. While the industry was pleased to see TSA issue this rule
through the regulatory process and allow for robust public comment, the
NPRM would have greatly benefited from earlier discussions with
industry about potential requirements in a more informal setting like
negotiated rule making. The industry is still digesting the very
lengthy proposal and will provide robust comments. There are a few
long-standing concerns for the railroads that the NPRM does not fully
address.
For example, the NPRM would require railroads to report an incident
within 24 hours of it occurring. Congress specifically set the time
frame for reporting incidents at 72 hours under the Cyber Incident
Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act (CIRCIA). Not only does this
lack of harmonization create confusion, the 24-hour window is
impractical. Within 24 hours, an attack could still be occurring, the
information about the incident will be less complete, if not
inaccurate, and railroads would be pulling resources and manpower away
from responding to the attack and toward complying with reporting
requirements. The railroads would have to then supplement the initial
report as their information becomes available or changes.
Similarly, the NPRM also requires that a railroad's security
coordinator be a U.S. citizen, which the railroads have flagged with
TSA as a major concern for several years. Two large railroads in the
United States are headquartered in Canada and employ Canadian citizens
in high-level cybersecurity roles. Prohibiting these highly-skilled
senior-level employees from representing their companies as security
coordinators serves no clear security benefit and makes it extremely
difficult for these Canadian railroads to comply.

use of tsa emergency authority

AAR was pleased that TSA finally issued this NPRM. For several
years, the industry was operating under security directives issued
under TSA's emergency authority. We recognize the importance of TSA
having the appropriate authority to act quickly in the face of an
emergency. However, following the Colonial Pipeline attack in 2021, TSA
used its emergency authority to issue security directives aimed at
freight railroads and other modes of critical infrastructure mandating
specific requirements effective immediately. AAR was unaware of, nor
was it made aware of, any prevailing freight rail emergency conditions
that would require use of emergency authority, and the security
directives circumvented the notice and comment period that allows for
industry feedback to improve regulations. The broad mandates TSA issued
also treated every mode as if they were starting from scratch with
developing a cybersecurity plan when railroads had been properly
monitoring their network for decades. The decision by TSA to issue the
recent NPRM and move away from security directives and toward the
normal rule-making process is a welcome one that will make these
regulations more effective.

other areas for improvement

AAR has identified 2 other areas where our work with TSA and other
agencies could be improved. First, the lack of analysis of cyber
incidents by the Government can leave railroads and other modes unaware
of future threats or how to reduce susceptibility to future attacks.
Further analysis of an attack or other incidents by the Government can
inform railroads' decisions about strengthening our network. Second,
the Government's focus on the cybersecurity risks of transportation
companies overlooks the importance of ensuring the security of
suppliers to the industry. Suppliers play a critical role in various
aspects of railroad operations, and the Government should consider how
best to directly address their vulnerability to cyber incidents.

conclusion

The railroad industry, TSA, and CISA share a common purpose:
ensuring that effective, up-to-date, and sustainable measures are in
place to mitigate risk in the face of evolving cyber threats. Railroads
have a proven track record of cooperative engagement with Federal
agencies, and they firmly believe that collaborative effort is the best
way to achieve this goal. Railroad operations are resilient thanks to
years of proactive and extensive efforts by highly-skilled railroad
employees to develop, implement, and continuously improve plans,
practices, and measures for cybersecurity as threats and security
concerns emerge. Cybersecurity is always evolving, and real-time
adaptation is essential to reduce risk. Railroads and their employees
will continue to work cooperatively with private and public entities to
ensure that our Nation's rail network and the people, firms, and
communities we serve remain safe, efficient, and secure.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Jefferies.
I now recognize Ms. Denbow--Denbow or Denbow?
Ms. Denbow. Denbow, sir.
Mr. Gimenez [continuing]. For 5 minutes to summarize her
opening statements.

STATEMENT OF KIMBERLY DENBOW, VICE PRESIDENT,
SECURITY OPERATIONS, AMERICAN GAS ASSOCIATION

Ms. Denbow. Thank you, Chairman. Chairman Gimenez, Members
of the subcommittee, I am Kimberly Denbow, vice president of
security and operations of the American Gas Association, AGA.
AGA represents more than 200 local energy companies that
deliver clean and affordable natural gas to 95 percent of
natural gas customers across the United States.
I have led AGA security policy and technical program for
nearly 3 decades. I'm a former voting member of the TSA Surface
Transportation Security Advisory Committee and co-chaired the
standing-up of its cyber subcommittee.
Thank you for inviting me to this hearing to share our
experiences as they relate to how TSA puts its regulatory
authority into practice.
America's natural gas utilities and TSA share a common
mission--critical infrastructure and operator security.
For over 2 decades, TSA and natural gas utilities have
challenged the traditional regulatory model, piloting forward-
leaning approaches to achieve a common mission, to achieve our
common mission--critical infrastructure and operator security.
While TSA has full authority to regulate pipeline security,
it boldly opted for an unconventional and more effective model
TSA coins as structured oversight.
TSA recognized early on the strength in the pipeline
sector's operational diversity and that system disruptions and
consequences differ substantially across the natural gas and
oil value chains.
While the Colonial Pipeline ransomware incident in 2021
propelled TSA into regulating pipeline cybersecurity, TSA and
owner-operators had been weighing the importance of pipeline
cybersecurity well before 2021.
Over the decade following the 2012 Chinese cybersecurity
campaign that targeted pipelines, TSA and pipeline owner-
operators worked collaboratively to advance pipeline
cybersecurity maturity.
Beyond basic cybersecurity hygiene, TSA realized there is
no single cybersecurity law, regulation, or standard that can
be universally applied across pipelines without having to allow
the option of alternative measures or system-by-system
customization.
Regardless, public pressure in the aftermath of the
Colonial Pipeline ransomware incident drove TSA to issue a
series of prescriptive, emergency security directives covering
pipeline cybersecurity.
The first iteration of security directives was depicted by
inapplicable cybersecurity measures and unattainable compliance
time lines.
AGA worked tirelessly educating TSA about the operators'
concerns. TSA ultimately hosted a series of pipeline security
directive technical roundtables, and listened and learned
directly from owners and operators about alternative and in
many cases, more effective approaches to achieving the same
cybersecurity outcome as required by the prescriptive measures.
The technical roundtables resulted in a major regulatory
course correction of the security directives toward a risk-
based, outcome-focused approach.
Let's get real. A proactively informed regulator is less
likely to promulgate unclear, misinformed, and unworkable
regulations.
We recognize security directives serve a logical purpose.
Imminent threats require immediate action.
As demonstrated by the technical roundtables and subsequent
TSA-hosted forums, there are benefits from leveraging security
directives to improve security requirements before embedded
into final rules.
There must be a balance, however, because each iteration of
the pipeline security directives results in reallocation of
security resources on the part of the owner-operator.
Congress should place guardrails on this regulatory
mechanism to reduce its potential for future abuse or misuse.
Hallelujah. After 4 years of being regulated by security
directives, TSA finally issued cybersecurity regulations--
proposed cybersecurity regulations.
AGA member utilities favor reasonable pipeline
cybersecurity regulations that are attainable, sustainable, and
auditable, and we applaud TSA for sticking with a risk-based,
outcome-focused approach.
We look forward to submitting constructive comments
intended to advance TSA's and AGA-member, natural gas
utilities' common mission.
I would like to add--and I think that this is very
important to spotlight--I want to spotlight unresolved concern
that applies to the pipeline security directives, to the TSA
cybersecurity rule making, and appears to be a systemic problem
across the Government--the fixation on collecting and
aggregating security operations-related sensitive information
of critical infrastructure.
There lacks rhyme and reason as to why any Government
entity in this threat environment would be compelled to take
possession of critical infrastructure's most sensitive,
security operations-related information.
It's ironic the onus is on the owner and operator to limit
the vulnerabilities introduced by sub-par Government
cybersecurity performance, which continues to play itself out
incident after incident. This is the one area where the
Government continues to fail in our common mission.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
the exchange.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Denbow follows:]

Prepared Statement of Kimberly Denbow

November 19, 2024

Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of the
subcommittee, I am Kimberly Denbow, vice president of security and
operations, at the American Gas Association (AGA). I have led AGA's
security policy and technical program for nearly 3 decades. I am a
former voting member of the Transportation Security Administration
(TSA) Surface Transportation Security Advisory Committee and helped
stand up and co-chaired the Cybersecurity Subcommittee. I also stood up
and presently co-chair the Cybersecurity Working Group of the Oil &
Natural Gas Subsector Coordinating Council. Additionally, I have worked
with TSA and its pipeline security section since TSA's inception. Thank
you for inviting me to share my perspectives on the natural gas utility
experience with TSA, specifically as they relate to how TSA puts its
regulatory authority into practice.
AGA, founded in 1918, represents more than 200 local energy
companies that deliver clean, domestic, and reliable natural gas
throughout the United States. There are more than 78 million
residential, commercial, and industrial natural gas customers in the
United States, of which 95%--more than 74 million customers--receive
their gas from AGA members. Today, natural gas meets more than one-
third of our Nation's energy needs. AGA members recognize that with the
benefits and opportunities natural gas offers our country, there comes
great responsibility to protect our distribution pipeline system
network from cyber compromise.
AGA members have been at the forefront of cybersecurity investment
and are continually seeking ways to improve their cybersecurity
readiness. The AGA board of directors passed a resolution in 2021 in
favor of reasonable cybersecurity regulations, and AGA and its members
engage in every opportunity to work with Federal Government partners
and regulators to promote risk-based cybersecurity programs that
support security measures that are attainable, sustainable, and
auditable. This includes extensive work with TSA to help strengthen and
add value to the pipeline Security Directives (SDs)\1\ and reduce risk
for the industry. Risk-based cybersecurity aligns with the National
Security Memorandum on Critical Infrastructure Security and
Resilience.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Security Directive Pipeline 2021-01, issued May 26, 2021:
Enhancing Pipeline Cybersecurity (SD1), and Security Directive Pipeline
2021-02, issued July 19, 2021: Pipeline Cybersecurity Mitigation
Actions, Contingency Planning, and Testing (SD2). The SD's have been
reissued annually since 2021. Per TSA Administrator David Pekoske, the
SDs will continue to be reissued until cybersecurity regulations are
promulgated.
\2\ National Security Memorandum on Critical Infrastructure
Security and Resilience, The White House, (April 30, 2024), available
at https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2024/
04/30/national-security-memorandum-on-critical-infrastructure-security-
and-resilience/ (last visited November 15, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Technological advances continue to make natural gas operations
safer, more cost-effective, and better able to serve customers via web-
based programs and tools. The corollary to a more connected and more
efficient industry is our attractiveness as a target for increasingly
sophisticated nefarious cyber actors. This said, America's natural gas
utilities are combatting the threat daily via:

Skilled personnel,

Robust cybersecurity system protections,

Industry commitment to security,

Collaboration with other industries and associations,

On-going cybersecurity partnerships with the Federal
Government, and

Interaction with the Downstream Natural Gas Information
Sharing & Analysis Center (DNG-ISAC) Community for real-time
awareness and action.
a common mission--protecting america's natural gas utilities
AGA and its member companies are committed to utilizing leading
security practices and training, investing in purposeful security
technologies, and promoting an industry-wide vigilant security culture
to fortify our security defenses and enhance all aspects of safety.
TSA's mission is to ``Protect the nation's transportation systems to
ensure the freedom of movement of people and commerce''.\3\ To that
end, America's natural gas utilities and TSA share a common mission--
critical infrastructure and operator security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ TSA's Mission Statement, TSA, available at https://www.tsa.gov/
about/tsa-mission (last visited November 15, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In a cojoined journey over 2 decades, TSA and natural gas utilities
have challenged the traditional prescriptive regulatory model, piloting
unconventional approaches to achieve this common mission. All parties
acknowledge that ``check-the-box'' compliance does not equate to
security, and that numerous paths can lead to the same security
outcome. The following provides an overview of AGA and AGA-member
natural gas utility experience with TSA in its role as the Federal
pipeline security regulator but also as a model of functional public/
private partnership.

structured oversight

TSA was created in the aftermath of 9/11 to oversee the security of
multiple transportation modes including commercial and general
aviation, mass transit systems, freight and passenger rail, and
highways, pipelines and ports.\4\ TSA became part of the Department of
Homeland Security in March 2003 and organizationally consists of 2
primary divisions, aviation and surface transportation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ TSA at a Glance Factsheet, TSA, available at https://
www.tsa.gov/news/press/factsheets/tsa-glance-factsheet (last visited
November 15, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The general public associates TSA with airport security, and
historically, the majority of transportation security funding goes to
aviation security. Secondary to aviation, TSA regulates security
operations for the 4 surface transportation modes--mass transit,
freight rail, highway motor carrier, and pipeline.
TSA's first decade of surface transportation security operations
was organized by mode. For example, TSA operated a Pipeline Security
Branch, staffed by subject-matter experts, who understood the
complexities of pipeline commerce (e.g., transporting liquids differs
from transporting natural gas) and collaborated with pipeline owners/
operators to learn the security nuances of individual pipeline systems.
While this branch of TSA had full authority to regulate pipeline
security, it opted for an unconventional and more effective non-
regulatory, collaborative model TSA coined as ``structured oversight.''
TSA chose this methodology in part because a one-size-fits-all
regulatory approach was inappropriate given operational variations
between the natural gas and liquid hydrocarbons (e.g., oil) value
chains. While the structured oversight approach is resource-intensive
for TSA to effectively prepare, conduct, and follow up on security
inspections (as well as track security threats), this collaborative
method represents a common public-private mission, benefits both the
regulator and regulated entity, and advances pipeline sector security.
This organizational structure changed in the 2012/2013 time frame.
TSA eliminated dedicated modal branch security operations for each
surface transportation sector in favor of a multi-modal oversight
system where TSA surface transportation staff may or may not have
specific expertise necessary to evaluate the infrastructure they were
assigned. The Pipeline Security Branch's full-time equivalents (FTEs)
were reduced by 93% (from 14 down to 1).\5\ AGA publicly expressed
concern about replacing TSA pipeline subject-matter experts with
generalists. Nevertheless, and despite this ill-advised decision, the
collaboration between TSA and pipeline owners/operators did not wane.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Critical Infrastructure Protection: Actions Needed to Address
Significant Weaknesses in TSA's Pipeline Security Program Management,
GAO, (Dec. 18, 2018), available at https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-19-
48 (last visited November 15, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Over time at industry's urging, TSA has steadily rebuilt pipeline
security capability and personnel. For example, TSA Administrator David
Pekoske's testimony before the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation on July 27, 2021, notes that passage of the
TSA Modernization Act allowed TSA to`` . . . expand pipeline security
staff to 39 FTEs working in field operations, headquarters operations,
and policy development . . . [and] trained a 20-member field-based
Pipeline Security Assessment Team (PSAT) . . . ''.\6\ Today, TSA
continues to collaborate with owners/operators to learn about their
pipeline systems and improve methods to secure pipeline infrastructure
overall.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Pipeline Cybersecurity: Protecting Critical Infrastructure,
TSA, (July 7, 2021), available at https://www.tsa.gov/news/press/
testimony/2021/07/27/pipeline-cybersecurity-protecting-critical-
infrastructure (last visited November 15, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSA Pipeline Security Guidelines
The TSA Pipeline Security Guidelines (Guidelines)\7\ are the heart
of the structured oversight model and serve as a foundation upon which
pipeline owners/operators have built their security programs for the
last 2 decades. The Guidelines were developed and updated in tandem
with pipeline owners/operators and Government cohorts, including the
Pipeline & Hazardous Materials Administration, the Department of
Energy, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), and the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). While adoption of the Guidelines
is voluntary, TSA maintains the authority to regulate as necessary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Pipeline Security Guidelines, TSA, (March 2018), available at
https://www.tsa.gov/sites/default/files/
pipeline_security_guidelines.pdf (last visited November 15, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The first edition of the Guidelines in 2010 mainly focused on
physical security (given the events of 9/11) rather than cybersecurity.
Following the targeted Chinese cybersecurity campaign \8\ against
pipelines in 2013, the Guidelines were revised to align with the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity
Framework.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Chinese Gas Pipeline Intrusion Campaign, 2011 to 2013, CISA,
(July 2021), available at https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/
cybersecurity-advisories/aa21-201a (last visited November 15, 2024).
\9\ Cybersecurity Framework/NIST (last visited November 15, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Implementing the Guidelines prepares pipeline owners/operators for
TSA on-site Corporate Security Reviews (CSR) and Critical Facility
Security Reviews (CFSR). CSRs assess the degree to which the
Guidelines' physical and cybersecurity measures are integrated into the
operator's corporate security plan. CFSRs are conducted at critical
pipeline facilities to collect site-specific information on facility
security policies, procedures, and physical security measures.\10\
Overall, CSRs and CFSRs have historically focused more on physical
security and are intended to serve as an opportunity for TSA to work
collaboratively with owners/operators to advance security, in notable
contrast to an adversarial standard regulatory compliance methodology.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Pipeline Cybersecurity: Protecting Critical Infrastructure,
TSA, available at https://www.tsa.gov/news/press/testimony/2021/07/27/
pipeline-cybersecurity-protecting-critical-
infrastructure#:?:text=Working%20with%20pipeline%20operators%27%20'secur
ity,the%20opera- tor%27s%20corporate%20'security%20plan. (last visited
November 15, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As TSA develops cybersecurity capabilities, AGA encourages TSA to
also maintain its attention on physical security. For example, a
widely-used TSA resource, the Pipeline Security Smart Practices,\11\ is
a compilation of valuable physical security practices observed from
CSRs and CFSRs. For a few years, TSA did not update the resource due to
directing full attention to the SDs. Regularly adding to this resource
assists those owners/operators that have not yet undergone a CSR or
CFSR.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Pipeline Security Smart Practice Observations, TSA, (September
19, 2011), available at https://www.tsa.gov/sites/default/files/
tsapipelinesecuritysmartpracticeobservations_2011- _508.pdf (last
visited November 15, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, from a threat perspective, TSA continues to miss the
mark in characterizing the physical security threat level to domestic
pipelines. Despite owners/operators reporting increasing incidences of
pipeline sabotage activity, including malicious vandalism, intentional
damage to pipeline infrastructure, trespassing and unauthorized
operation of pipeline valves and other equipment, finding improvised
explosive devices on pipeline infrastructure, and assaults on pipeline
operators and contractors, TSA consistently presents the physical
security threat level as low. It is our understanding that this threat
level assessment is not sourced from within TSA. Regardless, it is
incumbent on TSA to reconcile the discrepancy between what the Federal
Government intelligence community is observing and what the pipeline
owners/operators are experiencing. The Federal Government's
mischaracterization of the pipeline physical security threat level not
only threatens pipeline security readiness, it also negatively impacts
gas utility security investment. Natural gas utilities are State-
regulated via public utility commissions (PUCs), which oversee customer
rates and utility expenses and investments. The more TSA continues to
underestimate pipeline security threats, the more difficult it is for
natural gas utility owners/operators to justify pipeline security
investments to State PUCs.

Growing Cybersecurity Capabilities

While the Colonial Pipeline ransomware incident in 2021 propelled
TSA into regulating pipeline cybersecurity, TSA considered the
importance of pipeline cybersecurity well before 2021. The Chinese
cyber campaign targeting pipelines that surfaced in 2012 \12\ led to a
cybersecurity paradigm shift across the pipeline industry and TSA. Over
the decade that followed, TSA and pipeline owners/operators worked
collaboratively on:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Chinese Gas Pipeline Intrusion Campaign, 2011 to 2013, CISA
(July 21, 2021), available at https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/
cybersecurity-advisories/aa21-201a (last visited November 15, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Applying existing Federal Government-developed cyber
assessments tools,

Developing a pipeline-specific cyber assessment,

Conducting DHS Validated Architectural Design Reviews,\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Validated Architecture Design Reviews (VADR) Sample Report,
CISA, (December 17, 2020), available at https://www.cisa.gov/resources-
tools/resources/validated-architecture-design-review-vadr-sample-report
(last visited November 17, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Updating the cyber section of the Pipeline Security
Guidelines to align with the NIST Cyber Security Framework,\14\
and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Cybersecurity Framework, NIST, available at https://
www.nist.gov/cyberframework (last visited November 17, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Developing API 1164 3d edition, Pipeline Control Systems
Cybersecurity,\15\ a consensus-based standard worked on by
owners/operators, vendors, and Federal Government
representatives (including TSA and FERC).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ API Standard 1164, 3d Edition, API, (August 2021) available at
https://www.api.org/products-and-services/standards/important-
standards-announcements/1164 (last visited November 17, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By that time, TSA had worked with pipeline owners/operators long
enough to recognize that there is strength in operational diversity and
that system disruptions and consequences will differ substantially
across the natural gas and oil value chains--and further within the
different segments of each value chain (e.g., natural gas utility,
natural gas transmission, LNG operations). Beyond basic cybersecurity
hygiene, there is no single cybersecurity law, regulation, or standard
that can be universally applied across pipelines and LNG operations
without having to allow the option of alternative measures or system-
by-system customization. TSA further recognized it needed to build up
its internal cybersecurity expertise despite minimal funding available
for pipeline security, let alone for pipeline cybersecurity.
Despite this concerted effort by TSA to thoughtfully approach the
development of cybersecurity regulations for the broader pipeline
industry, public pressure in the aftermath of the Colonial Pipeline
ransomware incident drove TSA to immediately issue a series of
prescriptive emergency Security Directives (SDs) covering pipeline
cybersecurity. The initial SDs were filled with unattainable
cybersecurity measures and compliance time lines that, rather than
improving sector cybersecurity, actually increased pipeline system
vulnerability and threatened system reliability. The first iteration of
pipeline cyber SDs was a textbook case study of what a regulator should
not do.

tsa as cybersecurity regulator

Pipeline Security Directives--An Informed Regulator

The first iteration of SDs, specifically the Security Directive
Pipeline-2021-02 series (known as SD2\16\), was unreasonably
prescriptive, without regard for pipeline owners/operators
cybersecurity system applicability, operational feasibility, and
compliance time lines. They were issued as a one-size-fits-all,
prescriptive cybersecurity measures to TSA-designated critical oil and
natural gas pipeline systems. AGA worked tirelessly with every level of
TSA to draw attention to the impracticality, ineffectiveness, and
financial irresponsibility of these prescriptive measures, which would
have resulted in minimally improved security, but at the expense of
increased cybersecurity vulnerability in many pipeline systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Security Directive Pipeline 2021-02, issued July 19, 2021:
Pipeline Cybersecurity Mitigation Actions, Contingency Planning, and
Testing (SD2). The SD2 is labeled Sensitive Security Information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reflecting 2 decades of genuine collaboration between TSA and
pipeline owners/operators, TSA ultimately agreed to host Pipeline
Security Directive (PSD) Technical Roundtables (Technical Roundtables)
on SD2 to hear directly from owners/operators about how these mandated
cybersecurity measures were unattainable, and that there were
alternative and more effective approaches TSA should consider. ``On
July 21, 2022, TSA issued Security Directive Pipeline-2021-02C,
transitioning the requirements of the previous versions in the [SD2]
series to be more performance-based and less prescriptive. The
performance-based approach enhanced security by mandating that critical
security outcomes are achieved while allowing owners/operators to
choose the most appropriate security measures for their specific
systems and operations.''\17\ Bottom line, the TSA Technical
Roundtables resulted in a major regulatory course correction that
eliminated prescriptive and unworkable cybersecurity requirements in
favor of an almost entirely performance-based and outcome-focused
regulation. The credibility established between TSA and owners/
operators prior to the Colonial Pipeline ransomware incident and
reinforced through Technical Roundtables continues to inform
improvements to subsequent iterations of the SDs. Particularly
noteworthy, TSA's Surface Operations leadership regularly hosts forums
to garner feedback from owners/operators regarding ways to strengthen
SD implementation and owners/operator compliance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Federal Register: Ratification of Security Directives (last
visited November 17, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The pipeline sector has now complied with nearly 4 years of
emergency TSA SDs, and it is highly possible the SDs will be extended
into a fifth year or longer. With each iteration, there is a refinement
of components in the expiring SD. This is positive. Not so positive is
the addition of cybersecurity technical mandates in each new iteration
that are inapplicable, confusing, extremely costly, and disruptive to
owners/operators, who must substantially alter their compliance
procedures from those required by a previous version of the SD. TSA can
avoid this ineffectiveness by conducting regular Technical Roundtables
in advance of each future iteration. Proactive Technical Roundtables
offer owners/operators the chance to clarify new regulatory
definitions, requirements, and compliance measures as well as limit
potential misinterpretations by TSA and pipeline owners/operators. A
proactively-informed regulator is less likely to promulgate unclear,
misinformed, and unworkable regulations.

SD Governance--While Purposeful, Needs Guardrails

SDs serve a logical purpose--imminent threats require immediate
action. That said, long-term compliance with multiple iterations of SDs
over multiple years raises due process concerns because, unlike the
standard regulatory process, regulated entities have minimal official
input into how SDs are developed and enforced. While there is benefit
with leveraging SDs to improve on regulatory requirements before the
mandates are embedded into final rules, each iteration of the current
SDs has resulted in reallocation of industry resources. This constant
pivoting for the sake of regulatory compliance distracts from an
owners/operators risk reduction efforts, and it makes securing
resources (e.g., such as qualified labor force) difficult.
Furthermore, regulating by SD is at odds with how natural gas
utilities operate. SDs, by design, do not allow long-term planning. In
contrast, natural gas utilities necessarily rely on multi-year capital
budgeting and infrastructure investments. Even nominal increases in
annual costs can be extremely challenging. Internally, well-planned
cybersecurity plans must be reprioritized if the owners/operators must
wait for TSA to ``approve'' changes in cyber plans and assigned
personnel. Externally, State PUCs maintain regulatory oversight over
natural gas utility expenses and require owners/operators to have
clearly-defined plans for implementation, sustainability, and benefit
to the gas utility customer.
Finally, SDs have a different governance framework than traditional
rule makings. SDs can be issued by the TSA administrator in response to
an imminent threat without due process procedures and activities, such
as public comment or economic burden analysis. SDs expire after 12
months, at which time they can be reissued. While recognizing that TSA
should maintain some reasonable emergency authority to issue SDs,
Congress should consider placing guardrails and time limits on this
regulatory mechanism to reduce its potential to be abused or misused.

Rule Making

In late 2022, following the extension of the original SDs into a
second year, TSA issued an Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. AGA
member utilities supported this action, favoring reasonable pipeline
cybersecurity regulations provided they are attainable, sustainable,
and auditable by TSA. As 2023 progressed, pipeline owners/operators
urged TSA to proceed with a pipeline cybersecurity rule making rather
than continuing to regulate by SDs. The Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
for this, now multi-modal, rule was not released until November 7,
2024. Had TSA moved a pipeline-only cybersecurity rule making, the
whole process would have likely concluded a year ago. While we
understand TSA's interest in consolidating 3 surface modes into a
single rule making, this has unnecessarily prolonged the SD process for
pipelines. Bottom line, we recognize the urgency that drives the
issuance of SDs, however, there need to be guardrails to limit the
``regulating-by-SD'' approach so that Government and the affected
industry can quickly and appropriately move toward a standard
regulatory process.
Relative to the recently-released NPRM, AGA commends TSA for
issuing proposed rules that are risk-based, outcome-focused, and for
the most part, an extension of the recent iterations of the pipeline
SDs. That said, 2 areas within the NPRM, corporate cybersecurity
governance responsibilities and supply chain cybersecurity integrity
are prescriptive, confusing, and in some cases unachievable and were
never covered in TSA's previous pipeline SDs. A third area, employee
cyber training, was introduced in the most recent SD, but is fully and
unhelpfully prescriptive in the NPRM. These unexpected regulatory
roadblocks could have been circumvented had TSA hosted Pipeline
Security Technical Roundtables (similar in structure to the Pipeline
Security Directive Technical Roundtables) before drafting the proposed
regulation. TSA missed opportunities to gain useful owners/operator
insight and avoid stakeholder confusion.

Federal Government Possession of Owners/Operators Sensitive Operational
Information

While the Federal Government is driving itself to a zero trust \18\
approach, TSA's NPRM proposes to collect and aggregate security and
operations-related sensitive information of critical infrastructure;
thus, preventing those owners/operators from achieving the same zero
trust environment the Federal Government has been directed to achieve.
Many entities in the Federal Government have been negligent and
unsuccessful at protecting owners/operators sensitive information. One
glaring example occurred when the DHS Cybersecurity & Infrastructure
Security Agency's (CISA) Chemical Security Assessment Tool (CSAT)\19\
was successfully hacked and compromised for multiple days before CISA
realized the breach had occurred. The CSAT contains chemical facility
security vulnerabilities and plans that owners/operators were mandated
to submit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ No entity is trusted by default from inside or outside the
network, and verification is required from everyone trying to gain
access. See Zero Trust Architecture, GSA, available at https://
www.gsa.gov/technology/it-contract-vehicles-and-purchasing-programs/
information-technology-category/it-security/zero-trust-
architecture#:?:text=Zero%20trust%20is%20an%20-
approach,and%20enterprise%20infrastructure%20and%20workflows (last
visited November 15, 2024).
\19\ Top-Screen Surveys, Security Vulnerability Assessments, Site
Security Plans/Alternative Security Programs, Personnel Surety Program
Data, and CSAT User Information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the significant implications of the CSAT breach, it is
imperative to address the need for all Government entities, including
TSA, to be held accountable for the collection, aggregation, and
protection of sensitive operations information. What were at one time
considered adequate cybersecurity measures for the CSAT data storage
still resulted in a breach. Despite Government's stringent safeguards
and robust incident response protocols, no systems are impenetrable.
Effective oversight and enhanced security frameworks on the
Government's own networks are essential to protect national security
interests and not create risks for the owners/operators. More
importantly, Government should ask itself, ``why is possession of
sensitive private-sector operational information necessary?'' AGA and
its member companies value Government partnership but also seek to
limit the vulnerabilities introduced by demonstrably subpar Government
cybersecurity performance.

Cybersecurity Reciprocity and Harmonization

Cybersecurity harmonization has become a catchphrase that deserves
to be placed in perspective. While applicable for cybersecurity
assessments and cybersecurity incident reporting, harmonization of
cybersecurity regulations is a chokehold for any risk-based, outcome-
focused cybersecurity regulatory approach. The majority (if not all) of
existing cybersecurity regulations involve prescriptive, check-the-box
compliance, which is simpler for the Government to measure than
performance-based security. Given this landscape, harmonization
approaches that do not explicitly endorse performance-based
cybersecurity will fail to recognize the operational differences across
the oil and natural gas value chains that drive the necessity of risk-
based cybersecurity regulations. Along similar lines, Government-wide
reciprocity for relevant agency-led cybersecurity inspections and
audits would benefit sector regulators by reducing duplicative
evaluations and help improve regulated communities' cyber readiness.
Arguably, inspection reciprocity has greater potential than
harmonization and can be acted on with less bureaucracy for all
stakeholders.

in closing

America's natural gas utilities recognize their attractiveness as a
vector and target for nefarious nation-state hackers and cyber
criminals. AGA member utilities combat the threat daily by leveraging
top-notch cybersecurity technologies and personnel and maintaining a
productive security partnership with the Federal Government, in
particular TSA. No single standard or prescriptive regulation can
secure all pipeline systems along both the natural gas and oil value
chains. TSA recognizes this and is admirably taking the more
difficult--while more sound and effective--path of implementing
performance-based cyber requirements that will be attainable and
sustainable by the owners/operators and auditable by the regulator. AGA
encourages the Government to learn from the successes of TSA in their
genuine collaboration with industry owners/operators and encourages TSA
to recount the security successes that result from proactive
collaboration. Over the decades, TSA and pipeline owners/operators have
carried a similar banner into battle in support of our common mission.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Ms. Denbow.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Ms. Denbow, can you elaborate on your last statement? You
seem to be, you know, heaping praise on TSA and the new
regulations, hoping that new directives will be fewer and
fewer. But then you ended up on kind-of a sour note, so I'd
like to home in on that.
Can you elaborate on what you just said at the end?
Ms. Denbow. Yes, sir, and thank you very much for your
firefighting service. Appreciate that.
This has been an on-going point of contention between the
pipeline sector and TSA, and I will tell you, we have a very
positive relationship with TSA from over many, many--2 decades
of working with them.
Our concern is that there seems to be this, like I said,
fixation on the part of every Government entity, including TSA,
that in order for them to prove that operators are doing what
they're doing, or in order for the nonperformance-based
regulations to check the box for compliance, the Government has
to take control or possession of our sensitive operations-
related information.
When I refer to that, I'm talking about specifically,
example in the proposed rule, TSA talks about us submitting
identification of critical cyber systems, specific network
architecture, baseline communications, detailed measures to
protect our critical cyber systems, measures to address
response to, recovery from, and--from a cyber incident.
If we're going to give all of this to TSA for them to hold
on to, we might as well just give it to China or to Russia
because there is no storage system that--for data--that is
impenetrable and from third-party--unauthorized third-party
access to insider threat, which is my bigger concern. There is
no reason for the Government to have to have possession of this
information.
We have worked diligently with TSA, and as pointed out by
the recent panelists, that they are coming on-site for on-site
inspections. Yes, it takes longer for the inspections, but then
it allows us to prevent that vulnerability of TSA taking
possession of our critical information.
Mr. Gimenez. Do you have any--has TSA given you a reason
why they require that? Because I actually agree with you that
once you give it away to the Government, to us, there is no
guarantee that an adversary nation-state can't access it
through us, and therefore, put you at risk.
Why does TSA need this?
Ms. Denbow. I don't necessarily think it's just TSA. I
think it is a Federal Government and State government belief
that in order for them to protect us, they need to have our
critical information. It's our job as the owner-operator to
protect us. It's TSA's and the Federal Government's job to
protect the community, the Nation. We should be able to do that
together without putting the owner-operators in a vulnerable
position that they would otherwise not be if they do not have
to share that information.
TSA's concern, as I understand it, has been the increased
amount of time that they would have to spend on-site for
inspections. While I recognize that and I do say that TSA does
not have the resources that it needs, it is working diligently
to really achieve all that it needs to.
But making an inspection on-site lasts for a couple of days
longer so that my owner-operators can sleep better at night,
not worried that an insider threat or a nation-state could hack
into a system that has been proven through DHS, through DOE--
name the 3-letter Government organization that has not been
compromised. That is why.
Mr. Gimenez. Ms. Denbow, I think all entities can be
compromised.
Ms. Denbow. Yes.
Mr. Gimenez. At the end, no matter what we do, if somebody
puts their mind to it, they can probably get into wherever it
is that they want to get into.
Ms. Denbow. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to add--I would like to add because it would
be remiss if I didn't--TSA has gone above and beyond to try to
protect this information, but we just have to accept the
reality that nothing is impenetrable.
Mr. Gimenez. Because of that I've always--my belief is
that, yes, we try to put up as many safeguards as possible so
that there's no penetration and no corruption. However, I'm
more inclined to say, OK, assume that you are corrupted and
assume that you are attacked, how can you get back to
operations as quickly as possible knowing that you will be
attacked, and that you will be disabled?
So our--my problem with the entire cyber world is our
overreliance on it, and also, the lack of institutional
knowledge of how to operate things without technology, the old-
fashioned way, because we may have to resort to that.
Unfortunately, we just keep becoming more and more reliant on
electronic systems, on digital systems where we're becoming
more and more vulnerable to it. That's my problem.
Anyway, my 5 minutes are up.
I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jeffries, regulations that are meant to enhance
security should not be all really burdensome, and we're going
to get to the gentlelady's point, because I think that's an
important conversation. But regarding rail, the operation of
our rail systems is absolutely critical to the performance of
our Nation. The historical significance of rail systems working
in a cooperative manner with every sovereign State's government
and local municipalities, and with operating under Federal
regulation and with thousands and thousands of industry
stakeholders that are required to plug into the rail systems,
it's quite a complex thing when you really look at it.
So the regulations that the Federal Government places upon
you, intended to enhance security, yes, of course, but my
assessment is that it's far too burdensome and can interfere
with business as, again, as the gentlelady pointed out.
But how does that relate to financial costs? Do you find
that in your interactions with TSA and the effort to enhance
security regulations and cyber threat for rail, is there fair
and due consideration given to the financial impact in the rail
industry?
Mr. Jeffries. Well, thank you, Congressman, for the
question.
You know, we've been at this a long time. You kind-of
referenced that, about 200 years of----
Mr. Higgins. Right.
Mr. Jeffries [continuing]. Moving things around the country
and doing it to a high degree of safety. We take our
responsibility with the utmost of seriousness to move goods
safely and securely, because we move all variety of goods that
Americans rely on every single day. Cybersecurity is a key
portion of that, and as I mentioned, we've been at that since
before the year 2000, in advance of Y2K, and we have had a
productive relationship overall with the TSA. Certainly can't
say that for every Government agency, so it's worth
highlighting that.
But, to your point, we've got to be--we've got to think
about the cost-benefit equation. So, to my colleague's point,
are we spending more time checking boxes and fulfilling
requirements for requirements' sake, or are we maximizing
security for maximizing security's sake? Certainly there's a
cost of--there's a financial cost. There's a human resource
cost. There's a physical and digital asset cost----
Mr. Higgins. So is that fairly evaluated is my question? In
your interaction with TSA, is the financial impact fairly
evaluated?
Mr. Jeffries. So I would say it's acknowledged. Whether or
not it's fairly evaluated, I'll let you know when we file our
comments once we get through this massive rule.
Mr. Higgins. OK. Well, I'll take that as your answer. Be
reassured, and for your partners across the country, and we are
watching that. I mean, the financial impact is significant, and
it has to be part of the formula.
Mr. Jeffries. I would quickly say that I think that's why
it's so important that you have a designated problem you're
trying to solve, an outcomes-based approach versus an inputs-
based approach. So, that's a core philosophy of ours and----
Mr. Higgins. Well, that's a common-sense answer, so I'm not
sure that's allowed in the District of Columbia.
Mr. Jeffries. OK. Fair enough.
Mr. Higgins. Ms. Denbow, quoting you, you said that the
Government essentially seeks control or possession of your
critical infrastructure systems, and you're saying that in
order for the Government to check your cybersecurity
compliance, the Government is compromising your cybersecurity
infrastructure. This is exactly the conservative perspective of
Government overreach. So would you please expound upon that?
What would be your suggestion to the Federal Government to get
the hell out of your way unless you protect your systems?
Ms. Denbow. Thank you for that colorful opening.
AGA, the American Gas Association, we support reasonable
cybersecurity regulations. From the natural gas utility
perspective, we do not just have to answer to the Federal
Government. We also answer to their State Public Utility
Commission, and for that, we have--we are required to do long-
term planning. So we need a system. We need reasonable
regulations that are not constantly changing so that we can do
that long-term planning and justify the expenses for the sake
of security.
We applaud TSA for sticking with the performance-based
approach. What we need TSA to do is to rely on the fact that,
No. 1, reasonable cybersecurity regulations have to be
attainable. The operators have to be able to achieve them. They
have to be sustainable. The operators have to be able to
sustain them and keep them going. Otherwise, it's wasted money.
Then TSA feels that last part is for them to be auditable.
That's the part where we're always rubbing--where we're always
bumping heads, and that is because there are ways where TSA can
audit and verify without having to take possession of our
critical infrastructure information.
Mr. Higgins. Because when you say taking possession, you
mean to document your security mechanisms you have in place,
and therefore, they're exposing your security mechanisms
themselves to breach by the cyber threat operators and bad
actors across the world. Is that essentially what you're
saying?
Ms. Denbow. In a nutshell, basically it is, rather than
showing what they would like is to get a copy. As soon as--we
have no problems showing TSA that information. Where the
challenge is is when that information physically or
electronically leaves our environment.
Mr. Higgins. I understand. You have my commitment to
address that. That's precisely the kind of thing we intend to
push back against.
Mr. Chairman, my time has well expired. Thank you for this
hearing. I yield.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you to the gentleman from Louisiana.
I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony
and the Members for their questions. The Members of the
subcommittee may have some additional questions for the
witnesses, and we would ask the witnesses to respond to these
in writing. Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing
record will be open for 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:17 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Statement of Airlines For America

November 19, 2024

On behalf of our members,\1\ Airlines for America (A4A) submits
this written testimony for the record for the House Homeland Security
Committee's hearing on Impacts of Emergency Authority Cybersecurity
Regulations on the Transportation Sector. We thank the committee for
holding this important hearing because harmonizing cybersecurity
requirements and improving information sharing across the Federal
Government is much-needed and long-overdue.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See A4A's members are: Alaska Air Group, Inc.; American
Airlines Group, Inc.; Atlas Air Worldwide Holdings, Inc.; Delta Air
Lines, Inc.; FedEx Corp.; JetBlue Airways Corp.; Southwest Airlines
Co.; United Airlines Holdings, Inc.; and United Parcel Service Co. Air
Canada is an associate member.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A4A supports policies and measures that promote safety, security,
and a healthy U.S. airline industry, including those dealing with
cybersecurity. Cybersecurity is increasingly important to aviation
safety and security. It requires effective policies, practices, and
processes, as well as shared, mutual cybersecurity goals among air
carriers, Congress, and the rest of the Federal Government. As an
industry with multiple Federal regulators, we are concerned with the
lack of harmonization of cybersecurity requirements across Federal
agencies especially when agencies use their emergency authorities
bypassing traditional interagency coordination. We believe that
improving harmonization of Federal policies will lead to better
outcomes for both the private and public sectors.
A4A believes that protecting critical infrastructure requires
consistent, streamlined, and harmonized cybersecurity requirements.
Therefore, we strongly encourage Congress and the administration to
prioritize the harmonization of both cybersecurity incident reporting
and mandatory cybersecurity measures, especially before introducing any
new requirements. The current practice of requiring multiple reports
with different reporting triggers and standards to different Federal
agencies is a significant and unnecessary burden on industry that
materially reduces the effectiveness of voluntary and mandatory
reporting frameworks to combat cybersecurity risks.
A4A also supports efforts to improve information sharing among
Federal agencies and between the private and public sectors. There is
no ``silver bullet'' for addressing cybersecurity risks, but rather,
the best, mature cybersecurity programs are risk-based, threat-
informed, and constantly evolving to stay ahead of a dynamic threat
landscape. This must include a strong partnership of information
sharing with the Federal Government and other stakeholders to ensure
critical infrastructure sectors stay ahead of evolving cybersecurity
threats.

transportation security administration (tsa) cybersecurity requirements

Over the past 3 years, TSA has issued a number of cybersecurity
provisions under its standard security program for aviation operators.
These include Change 66 and Change 27 to the Standard Security
Program,\2\ \3\ Joint Emergency Amendment (Joint EA),\4\ Policy
Clarification Notice (Critical Systems),\5\ and Joint National
Alternative Measure (Joint NAM) 23-01.\6\ The requirements within these
documents form the foundation of TSA's aviation cybersecurity
regulatory framework.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Change 66 to Aircraft Operator Standard Security Program, June
30, 2022.
\3\ Change 27 to Full All Cargo Aircraft Operator Standard Security
Program, June 30, 2022.
\4\ Joint Emergency Amendment 23-01, Cybersecurity--Performance-
Based Measures, March 07, 2023.
\5\ Transportation Security Administration Policy Clarification
Notice, Critical Systems, September 8, 2023.
\6\ Joint National Alternative Measure 23-01A, Alternative Measures
for Certain Requirements in Joint EA, February 28, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although TSA's use of emergency authorities to issue the Joint EA
and Joint NAM did not provide airlines the opportunity to comment, TSA
has conducted industry outreach, including Classified briefings. Refle
cting industry's input, TSA modified its traditional physical security
processes to account for the significant differences between
cybersecurity and physical security. Over the past 6 months, TSA has
also taken the lead in establishing an interagency information sharing
working group focused on the unique information and intelligence needs
of the aviation sector. TSA is also co-leading a new Cybersecurity
Policy Working Group with A4A, providing a forum for our members to
better understand TSA's compliance requirements, as well as develop
recommendations for future changes to TSA's regulatory program.
This is an example for other Federal agencies on how meaningful
collaboration can ensure critical sectors stay ahead of the evolving
cybersecurity threat environment. We believe the best regulatory
frameworks are those that incorporate stakeholder collaboration, use
accepted industry standards, are agile, risk-based, and threat-
informed. However, the Federal Government's overall cybersecurity
regulatory approach lacks harmonization and needs better information
sharing to ensure all critical infrastructure sectors stay ahead of
threat actors.

federal cybersecurity dis-harmony--incident reporting

In the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) report,
Harmonization of Cyber Incident Reporting to the Federal Government,\7\
the authors identified 45 Federal cybersecurity incident reporting
requirements currently in effect. They also identified 7 proposed
rules, 5 potential new requirements under consideration, and 1 future
rule (Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act
(CIRCIA)). It serves as a stark reminder of the Federal bureaucracy's
``seemingly insatiable appetite for data'' that Congress has quelled in
the past.\8\ In fact, other than CIRCIA, none of the 58 final or
proposed cybersecurity incident reporting requirements address
harmonization or contemplates streamlining reporting requirements
across Federal agencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ DHS Congressional Report, Harmonization of Cyber Incident
Reporting to the Federal Government, September 19, 2023.
\8\ See Dole v. United Steelworkers, 494 U.S. 26, 32 (1990).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although the aviation industry is not subject to all 58 reporting
requirements, airlines are currently subject to 10 different Federal
departments and agencies existing or proposed, mandatory and voluntary
incident-reporting frameworks. These Federal agency and department
frameworks include:
1. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).--Mandatory Reporting
(Advisory Circular 119-1A, ``Aircraft Network Security
Program,'' 28 September 2023);
2. Transportation Security Administration (TSA).--Mandatory
Reporting (Standard Security Program Change, 10 January 2022);
3. Department of Defense (DoD).--Mandatory Reporting (Defense
Federal Acquisition Regulations Supplement (DFARs) 252.204-7012
and 10 U.S.C.  391--U.S. Code--Unannotated Title 10. Armed
Forces  391);
4. U.S. Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM).--(General Cyber
Security Requirements in USTRANSCOM contracts, Civil Reserve
Air Fleet, Appendix 6);
5. Customs and Border Protection (CBP).--Mandatory Reporting (Cargo
Systems Messaging Service (CSMS) No. 5285040--``Reporting a
Cybersecurity Event to CBP,'' 12 September 2022 and CSMS No.
60261003);
6. Security and Exchange Commission (SEC).--Mandatory Reporting
(Cybersecurity Risk Management, Strategy, Governance, and
Incident Disclosure by Public Companies (In Effect on September
5, 2023)):
7. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA).--
Voluntary Reporting (Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act
(CISA) of 2015), pending mandatory reporting (Cyber Incident
Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act (CIRCIA) of 2022);
8. General Services Administration (GSA).--Mandatory Reporting
((Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) subpart 4.4 & 52.204-
232, C.F.R part 117) & (32 C.F.R 117.8));
9. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).--Voluntary Reporting
(Report a Crime or Fraud);
10. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).--
Mandatory Reporting ((FAR subpart 4.4 & 52.204-232, C.F.R part
117) & (32 C.F.R 117.8)); and
it is important to note, these 10 different Federal requirements differ
on definitions, thresholds, processes, time lines, data protections,
compliance regimes, and content requirements. We doubt that the Federal
Government intended to create an environment where 58 cybersecurity
incident reporting frameworks with divergent requirements are in
effect, but this is the environment that regulated entities must
currently navigate to ensure compliance. For sectors like
transportation with numerous regulators and relationships across
sectors, this complex patchwork of unharmonized cybersecurity incident
reporting requirements is especially burdensome.
Finally, harmonization of cybersecurity incident reporting is a
good first step, but harmonization of mandatory cybersecurity measures
and compliance frameworks is also critically important. A4A supports
the Office of the National Cyber Director's (ONCD) efforts to harmonize
cybersecurity requirements across the Federal Government.
Representative Higgins' recent proposal, H.R. 10123, the Streamlining
Federal Cybersecurity Regulations Act, is also promising, as it is
intended to address the challenges associated with multiple regulatory
regimes by establishing an interagency Harmonization Committee at the
ONCD. Ensuring all mandatory requirements are risk- and threat-based,
streamlined, and harmonized is in the best interest of regulators and
operators, and it will lead to the best outcomes and drive down risk.
If harmonization is not possible, then agencies should support a
reciprocity framework that reduces unnecessary burdens and allows
regulated parties to prioritize critical resources on a threat-based,
risk-informed approach.
Information Sharing.--The industry supports and engages in a strong
partnership of information sharing with the Federal Government and
other stakeholders. Specifically, A4A members participate in and
contribute to regular and frequent engagements with:

ONCD, FAA, DHS, TSA, CISA, DoD, law enforcement, the
intelligence community, and other agencies;

The Defense Industrial Base, National Defense Transportation
Association, Aviation Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(A-ISAC), International Air Transport Association (IATA),
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), and other
cyber-related communities; and

With the Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) to further
understand and address possible threats.
As noted, our industry also appreciates TSA leading the
establishment of an interagency information-sharing working group
focused on the aviation sector. We look forward to participating and
providing recommendations to strengthen and improve information-sharing
processes. We believe that information sharing among aviation
regulators, the intelligence community, and private stakeholders is
foundational to the safety, security, and resiliency of the
transportation system aviation subsector. Information sharing is
necessary for both:

Near-real-time intelligence and information used to protect
aviation systems from existing and emerging threats; and

To inform policy development, verify the effectiveness of
policy outcomes, and determine if policy changes are necessary
to stay ahead of evolving threats and risks.
Although Federal agencies have made strides to improve information
sharing such as multi-agency threat bulletins, information sharing
among Federal agencies and with the aviation sector needs to improve.
The information airlines receive from Federal agencies is often not
timely or consistent. Additionally, it is not clear that processes
exist to rapidly update regulatory requirements at a speed necessary to
stay ahead of evolving threats. We look forward to continuing to work
with aviation regulators, the intelligence community, and Congress to
improve information sharing.

harmonization and information-sharing recommendations

While we are encouraged by recent ONCD and CISA efforts to discuss
harmonization across the Federal Government, we believe much more can
and should be done. Specifically, we recommend the following actions:

Create and adopt a single reporting framework that includes
agreed-upon reporting definitions, threshold, process, time
line, data protection, compliance regime, and content
requirements. Although we have concerns with the current CIRCIA
proposal, it could serve as the Federal Government's single
reporting framework.

The administration, independent regulators, and Congress
should prioritize cybersecurity incident reporting
harmonization before any new cybersecurity requirements are
implemented including proposed regulations or legislation for
contractors who handle Federal information.

Congress should remove any legal or statutory barriers to
harmonization.

The administration and Congress should work with industry to
pass legislation that balances regulatory compliance with
consensus standards and incentives.

Congress should pass legislation authorizing a Presidential
designee to convene independent regulatory agencies to exchange
best practices and coordinate cybersecurity incident reporting.

Provide CISA with the necessary resources to implement
CIRCIA and any future statutory incident reporting
requirements.

Increase funding to Federal agencies to increase the number
of industry members for a Top-Secret clearance. Sharing timely,
relevant information requires all parties to have access to the
right information.

conclusion

Critical infrastructure sectors are best positioned when
cybersecurity regulations and oversight are consistent across the
Federal Government. The best cybersecurity programs are those that are
threat- and risk-based, data-informed, outcome-focused, and flexible
enough to address evolving threats. The current state of cybersecurity
incident reporting and broader cybersecurity regulatory dis-
harmonization was created by the Federal Government, but the Federal
Government is also uniquely positioned to harmonize its requirements,
however, it will take a concerted effort by many to efficiently and
effectively put in place a harmonized framework. Information sharing
can improve as well, but it will require a renewed focus and
prioritization by Federal agencies.
Thank you for the opportunity to raise concerns and provide
recommendations to improve Federal harmonization of cybersecurity
incident reporting. We stand ready to work with the committee and other
stakeholders to find practical solutions to enhance cybersecurity.

[all]
