- ORGANIZATIONAL OVERSIGHT: EXAMINING TSA'S POST-MODERNIZATION EFFORTS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ORGANIZATIONAL OVERSIGHT: EXAMINING TSA'S
POST-MODERNIZATION EFFORTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 12, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-54

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-419 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman

Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida, Chairman
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Shri Thanedar, Michigan, Ranking
Nick LaLota, New York                    Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Robert Garcia, California
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Vacancy, Subcommittee Staff Director
Alex Marston, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Shri Thanedar, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

Witnesses

Ms. Stacey Fitzmaurice, Executive Assistant Administrator,
Operations Support, TSA:
Oral Statement.................................................     7
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     8
Ms. Julie Scanlon, Executive Assistant Administrator, Enterprise
Support, TSA:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     8
Mr. Brian C. Belcher, Executive Assistant Administrator, Director
for the Law Enforcement/Federal Air Marshal Service, TSA:
Oral Statement.................................................    16
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     8
Mr. Steve Lorincz, Deputy Executive Assistant Administrator,
Security Operations, TSA:
Oral Statement.................................................    16
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     8

Appendix

Question From Honorable Carlos Gimenez for the Department of
Homeland Security..............................................    25

ORGANIZATIONAL OVERSIGHT: EXAMINING TSA'S POST-MODERNIZATION EFFORTS

----------

Tuesday, March 12, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Transportation and
Maritime Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., at
Room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Carlos Gimenez
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Gimenez, Higgins, LaLota,
Thanedar, and Payne.
Chairman Gimenez. The Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Transportation and Maritime Security will come
to order. Without objection the Chair may declare the
subcommittee in recess at any point.
Today's hearing will examine TSA's post-modernization
efforts through organizational oversight.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today, our subcommittee is meeting to discuss the
organizational structure of the Transportation Security
Administration opportunities for Congress to ensure that the
agency carries out its mission effectively, efficiently, and in
a cost-effective manner. TSA is an organization that was formed
in response to the tragic acts of terrorism that took the lives
of nearly 3,000 innocent Americans on September 11, 2001. In
the aftermath of the terrible casualties and destruction, the
U.S. Government overhauled its approach to transportation
security to prevent similar attacks in the future. Now, 22
years later, TSA employs over 60,000 brave men and women who
take on the difficult mission each day to keep our
transportation sector safe, particularly at our airports.
As with all organizations, as TSA has matured, it has taken
on more responsibility and expanded its roles and capabilities.
This committee believes that TSA's organizational structure
must support its mission, and to do that, TSA must have clear
goals and be streamlined for effective operation. When I was
mayor of Miami-Dade County, I evaluated the structure and
corresponding costs of our system, and I find that by
implementing budget reductions, the system actually worked more
efficiently. In 2018, TSA underwent a significant
reorganization aimed at enhancing its efficiency,
effectiveness, and responsiveness to emerging threats.
We are here today to discuss how effective those
transitions have been and to hear from the deputies that are
tasked with executing Administrator Pekoske's vision. So far,
the 118th Congress, this subcommittee has covered several
critical issues TSA faces today. We are especially focused on
technology at TSA, work force pay, the impending Real ID
transition, and the on-going issue regarding the September 11
security fee. In previous hearings, we have discussed the
importance of developing and deploying new cutting-edge
technologies at airport security checkpoints that allow
transportation security officers to thoroughly screen all
passengers in a time-efficient and minimally-invasive manner.
However, TSA's current projections show a pessimistic outlook
for when the entire flying American public can expect to have
access to the most technologically up-to-date systems.
Administrator Pekoske has told the committee that we should not
expect to see a final roll-out of the technology until the
2040's.
We have also discussed the new pay plan that was
implemented on July 2, 2023. TSA employee satisfaction
consistently ranks low and attrition rates are high.
Administrator Pekoske has communicated to me that TSA has
already seen lower attrition levels because of these pay
increases. I have concerns about the current path to TSA's pay
equity, particularly the long-term viability of the new pay
plan. We have been told by TSA that unless the pay increase is
annualized, there is a possibility that TSA will have
significant issues moving forward. I think I speak for all of
us on the committee that we want to see the front-line
personnel paid a fair and equitable wage on parity with the
rest of the Federal Government. I am ready to work with my
colleagues across the aisle to find an effective long-term
solution.
Finally, we have also examined the September 11 security
fee, or passenger security fee and the current diversion of
this fee. While the fee, which stands at $5.60 per one way
trip, was intended to fund TSA's operations at airports, part
of the fees collected from U.S. air travellers is currently
being diverted to the Treasury to pay for interest on the
national debt. Additionally, there has been no effort from TSA
to prioritize checkpoint technology from funds provided by the
fee collection. TSA sets aside around $250 million annually
from this fee collected for checked baggage technology. This
time, the TSA prioritizes checkpoint technology, which all air
passengers interact with during their travels, in the same way
that the agency prioritizes checked baggage technology.
While the fee diversion is a difficult issue because of the
budgetary implications of ending the fee diversion, I am
confident that we can find a solution to ensure that TSA can
access the fee collected to accelerate deployment of new
technologies. I am also encouraged that in last year's
Administrative Intent, Administrator Pekoske prioritized
innovation in technology as well as investment in the agency's
front-line work force, two priorities of this subcommittee.
However, this subcommittee must continue to examine further
opportunities to make TSA more efficient and ensure safety
across the entire transportation sector. I look forward to
discussion and the solutions that are offered.
[The statement of Chairman Gimenez follows:]
Statement of Chairman Carlos A. Gimenez
Today, our subcommittee is meeting to discuss the organizational
structure of the Transportation Security Administration and
opportunities for Congress to ensure that the agency carries out its
mission effectively, efficiently, and in a cost-effective manner.
TSA is an organization that was formed in response to the tragic
acts of terrorism that took the lives of nearly 3,000 innocent
Americans on September 11, 2001.
In the aftermath of the terrible casualties and destruction, the
U.S. Government overhauled its approach to transportation security to
prevent similar attacks in the future.
Now, 22 years later, TSA employs over 60,000 brave men and women
who take on the difficult mission each day to keep our transportation
sector safe--particularly at our airports.
As with all organizations--as TSA has matured, it has taken on more
responsibility and expanded its roles and capabilities. This committee
believes that TSA's organizational structure must support its mission
and to do that, TSA must have clear goals and be streamlined for
effective execution.
When I was mayor of Miami-Dade County, I evaluated the structure
and corresponding costs for our system and I found that by implementing
budget reductions, the system actually worked more efficiently.
In 2018, TSA underwent a significant reorganization aimed at
enhancing its efficiency, effectiveness, and responsiveness to emerging
threats.
We are here today to discuss how effective those transitions have
been and to hear from the deputies that are tasked with executing
Administrator Pekoske's vision. So far during the 118th Congress, this
subcommittee has covered several critical issues TSA faces today.
We have especially focused on technology at TSA, workforce pay, the
impending REAL ID transition, and the on-going issue regarding the
September 11 Security Fee.
In previous hearings, we have discussed the importance of
developing and deploying new, cutting-edge technologies at airport
security checkpoints that allow Transportation Security Officers to
thoroughly screen all passengers in a time-efficient and minimally-
invasive manner.
However, TSA's current projections show a pessimistic outlook for
when the entire flying American public can expect to have access to the
most technologically up-to-date systems.
Administrator Pekoske has told this committee that we should not
expect to see a final roll-out of the technology until the 2040's.
We have also discussed the new Pay Plan that was implemented on
July 2, 2023.
TSA employee satisfaction consistently ranks low and attrition
rates are high.
Administrator Pekoske has communicated to me that TSA is already
seeing lower attrition levels because of these pay increases.
I have concerns about the current path to TSA's pay equity--
particularly the long-term viability of the new Pay Plan.
We have been told by TSA that unless the pay increase is
annualized, there is a possibility that TSA will have significant
issues moving forward.
I think I speak for all of us on the committee that we want to see
the front-line personnel paid a fair and equitable wage, on parity with
the rest of the Federal Government.
I am ready to work with my colleagues across the aisle to find an
effective, long-term solution.
Finally, we have also examined the September 11 Security Fee, or
Passenger Security Fee, and the current diversion of this fee.
While the fee--which stands at $5.60 per one-way trip--was intended
to fund TSA's operations at airports, part of the fees collected from
U.S. air travelers is currently being diverted to the Treasury to pay
for interest on our national debt.
Additionally, there has been no effort from TSA to prioritize
checkpoint technology from funds provided by the fee collection.
TSA sets aside $250 million annually from the fees collected for
checked baggage technology.
It is time that TSA prioritizes checkpoint technology--which all
air passengers interact with during their travels--in the same way that
the agency prioritizes checked baggage technology.
While the fee diversion is a difficult issue because of the
budgetary implications of ending the fee diversion, I am confident that
we can find a solution to ensure that TSA can access the fees collected
to accelerate the deployment of new technologies.
I am also encouraged that in last year's Administrator's Intent,
Administrator Pekoske prioritized innovation in technology as well as
investment in the agency's front-line workforce, two priorities of this
subcommittee.
However, this subcommittee must continue to examine further
opportunities to make TSA more efficient and ensure safety across the
entire transportations sector.
I look forward to the discussion and the solutions that are
offered.

Chairman Gimenez. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Thanedar, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Thanedar. Good morning. Good morning and thank you,
Chairman Gimenez, for calling today's hearing, and thank you to
all of our witnesses for being here. For 25-some years I ran
small businesses and running a small business, making sure that
I honor my payroll every 2 weeks, take care of my employees,
and still have a little bit of money left to invest, I
understand the importance of running an operation in an
efficient manner and having the revenues or the budget to serve
and do the mission that is critical to your organization.
The TSA was, as you know, established in the aftermath of
the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, making it one of the
Federal Government's youngest agencies. Over the past 2
decades, TSA has experienced numerous changes in leadership and
restructuring as it has matured into an efficient and an
effective agency. Most recently, in 2018, Congress passed the
TSA Modernization Act, which provided high-level direction for
TSA's organization structure, set a 5-year term for the
position of the TSA administrator, and required TSA to conduct
an efficiency review to streamline its operation. In addition,
TSA Administrator David Pekoske directed a realignment of
agency functions concurrent with to the development and passage
of the TSA Modernization Act. Under the restructuring, TSA
aligned functions under four pillars, which are represented by
the witnesses present today. Though there is always room for
improvement, I believe this structure is serving TSA well.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses about how
Congress can best support TSA as it continues to mature.
Conducting oversight of TSA's long-term priorities and
growth as an agency is important. But as we sit here today, TSA
faces dire short-term problems. Yet again, we find ourselves on
the verge of an unnecessary Government shutdown due to
Republican's failure to govern. A lapse in appropriations would
be devastating for TSA workers, almost all of whom would be
required to work without pay during a shutdown. However, even a
funding solution that continues at 2023 levels for the rest of
2024 would be hugely problematic for TSA, as the agency faces a
major funding shortfall.
In 2022, Democrats in Congress provided significant
resources in the omnibus funding bill to increase pay and
collective bargaining rights for TSA workers, finally putting
them on equal footing with the other Federal employees. It is
imperative that Congress dedicate additional funding in this
effort. Pay increases began last July, with workers seeing 30
percent raises on average, a difference that is truly life-
changing for workers who were previously living paycheck-to-
paycheck.
The work force has also negotiated a tentative collective
bargaining agreement under the new framework, allowing for
negotiation on an expanded set of topics. These work force
initiatives are already having a remarkable impact as TSA
attrition rates have dropped nearly in half. Higher retention
will improve security as TSA develops a highly-skilled,
experienced work force while also saving millions of dollars on
hiring and training efforts.
Going forward, we must provide TSA with the funding to
continue these critical work force initiatives without needing
to reduce staffing levels. Last May, Ranking Member Thompson
introduced the Fund the TSA Act, which would raise passenger
security fee by a modest $2 per trip to provide TSA with the
resources it desperately needs. This bill would allow TSA to
invest in its work force, screen increasing number of
travellers, purchase additional advanced technology and fund
critical airport law enforcement and canine programs. It is
long past time for this committee to consider legislation to
address TSA's funding challenges, and I hope the Chairman will
join me in pushing for a solution.
Thank you again for being here. I look forward to your
testimony and I yield back, Mr. Chair.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thanedar follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Shri Thanedar
March 12, 2024
The Transportation Security Administration was established in the
aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, making it one
of the Federal Government's youngest agencies. Over the past two
decades, TSA has experienced numerous changes in leadership and
restructurings as it has matured into an efficient and effective
agency.
Most recently, in 2018, Congress passed the TSA Modernization Act,
which provided high-level direction for TSA's organizational structure,
set a 5-year term for the position of the TSA administrator, and
required TSA to conduct an efficiency review to streamline its
operations. In addition, TSA Administrator David Pekoske directed a
realignment of agency functions concurrent to the development and
passage of the TSA Modernization Act.
Under this restructuring, TSA aligned functions under four
``pillars,'' which are represented by the witnesses present today.
Though there is always room for improvement, I believe this structure
is serving TSA well. I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses
about how Congress can best support TSA as it continues to mature.
Conducting oversight of TSA's long-term priorities and growth as an
agency is important, but as we sit here today, TSA faces dire short-
term problems. Yet again, we find ourselves on the verge of an
unnecessary Government shutdown due to Republicans' failure to govern.
A lapse in appropriations would be devastating for TSA workers, almost
all of whom would be required to work without pay during a shutdown.
However, even a funding solution that continues at 2023 levels for the
rest of 2024 would be hugely problematic for TSA, as the agency faces a
major funding shortfall.
In 2022, Democrats in Congress provided significant resources in
the omnibus funding bill to increase pay and collective bargaining
rights for TSA workers, finally putting them on equal footing with
other Federal employees. It is imperative that Congress dedicate
additional funding to this effort. Pay increases began last July, with
workers seeing 30 percent raises on average--a difference that is truly
life-changing for workers who were previously living paycheck-to-
paycheck.
The workforce has also negotiated a tentative collective bargaining
agreement under a new framework allowing for negotiation on an expanded
set of topics. These workforce initiatives are already having a
remarkable impact, as TSA's attrition rates have dropped nearly in
half. Higher retention will improve security as TSA develops a highly-
skilled, experienced workforce, while also saving millions of dollars
on hiring and training efforts.
Going forward, we must provide TSA with the funding to continue
these critical workforce initiatives without needing to reduce staffing
levels. Last May, Ranking Member Thompson introduced the Fund the TSA
Act, which would raise passenger security fees by a modest $2 per trip
to provide TSA with the resources it desperately needs. This bill would
allow TSA to invest in its workforce, screen increasing numbers of
travelers, purchase additional advanced technology, and fund critical
airport law enforcement and canine programs.
It is long past time for this committee to consider legislation to
address TSA's funding challenges, and I hope the Chairman will join me
in pushing for a solution. I look forward to discussing these issues
further, and I yield back.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, to Ranking Member. Other
Members of the committee are reminded that opening statements
may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
March 12, 2024
The Transportation Security Administration has matured
significantly as an agency in the years since its establishment in the
aftermath of the September 11 attacks. When Congress created TSA, it
granted the TSA administrator broad authorities to determine the
structure of the agency, impose security requirements across the
transportation industry, and develop a unique personnel system separate
from the rest of the Federal Government.
Creating an agency from the ground up was a heavy lift. In my view,
TSA would have been better served by sticking to existing models within
the Federal Government--especially the tried-and-true personnel system
used by most Federal agencies, as delineated by title 5 of the U.S.
Code. For many years, TSA struggled to find its footing--especially
when it came to managing a large workforce that was afforded few labor
rights and underpaid compared to its Federal counterparts.
Over the years, the disparities between TSA workers and other
Federal employees grew and grew, as TSA workers did not receive regular
salary increases provided to their peers. TSA suffered from low morale,
high attrition, and a series of unfortunate headlines.
In 2018, Congress enacted the TSA Modernization Act, the first and
still only reauthorization of the agency since its inception. The Act
provided high-level direction on the organization of the agency,
required TSA to carry out an efficiency review of its operations, and
set a 5-year term for the administrator position to provide leadership
stability.
In 2020, under Democratic control, the House passed my bill, the
Rights for Transportation Security Officers Act of 2020, representing
the first-ever passage of a bill in either chamber to place TSA
workers' pay and labor rights on equal footing with the rest of the
Federal Government. Though we have not yet been able to get the bill
through the Senate, I am grateful that we found eager partners in
President Biden, Secretary Mayorkas, and Administrator Pekoske. They
have all prioritized using existing authorities to address pay
disparities and labor rights limitations for the TSA workforce.
In December 2022, Democrats in Congress dedicated approximately
$400 million to TSA workforce initiatives in an omnibus spending bill--
historic funding which has set TSA on a better path. Last July, 30
percent pay increases hit TSA employee paychecks. Almost immediately,
TSA's attrition rate dropped by 40 to 50 percent.
Higher pay will enable TSA to keep up with growing passenger loads;
save money on recruiting, hiring, and training new personnel; and
increase security by keeping officers with seniority and expertise
within the agency. We cannot allow this progress to falter. The funding
for these workforce initiatives only covered the final quarter of
fiscal year 2023, and TSA is now struggling to make ends meet as we
progress through 2024 still using 2023 funding levels.
We must provide TSA the funding it needs to fully annualize
improvements for the workforce while remaining fully staffed and
continuing to invest in technology upgrades, cybersecurity efforts, and
other security programs across the transportation sector. Congress must
consider all possible solutions to this funding challenge, including
increasing passenger security fees that have remained stagnant for many
years, despite inflation and increases in airline ticket prices.
That is why I have introduced the Fund the TSA Act, which would
provide TSA with the resources it needs to invest in its workforce and
the next generation of screening technologies by enacting a modest
increase to passenger fees and indexing future fee amounts to
inflation. I hope my Republican colleagues will work with me to develop
a solution to TSA's pressing needs.

Chairman Gimenez. Again, I am pleased to have a
distinguished panel of witnesses before us today on this
critical topic. I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise
their right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Gimenez. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative. Thank you, and please be
seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses.
Stacey Fitzmaurice, who serves as the executive assistant
administrator for operations support. Julie Scanlon, who serves
as the executive assistant administrator for enterprise
support. Brian Becker, who serves as the executive assistant
administrator for law enforcement, Federal Air Marshal
Services. Steve Lorincz, who serves as the deputy executive
assistant administrator for security operations.
I thank each of our distinguished witnesses for being here
today, and I recognize Executive Assistant Administrator Stacey
Fitzmaurice for 5 minutes to summarize her opening statements.

STATEMENT OF STACEY FITZMAURICE, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, OPERATIONS SUPPORT, TSA

Ms. Fitzmaurice. Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking
Member Thanedar, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for inviting me and my TSA colleagues to testify on
the organization, effectiveness, and success of TSA's
organizational structure in carrying out the agency's critical
transportation security mission. We are very proud of the work
we have accomplished together as an agency and with our
partners.
In 2023, TSA screened over 858 million passengers, 484
million checked bags, and 1.9 billion carry-on items, and
prevented passengers from bringing 6,737 firearms into the
secure area of the airport and on-board an aircraft. In 2018,
TSA completed an organizational review, taking into account
Congressional and industry feedback, as well as TSA's strategic
priorities and goals. The results of this review resulted in a
realignment of TSA's organizational structure. TSA is composed
of the Office of the Administrator and four distinct
organizational pillars: operations support, security
operations, enterprise support, and law enforcement Federal Air
Marshal Service. Each pillar is led by a career senior
executive who reports directly to the Office of the
Administrator.
Since the 2018 realignment, TSA is more effectively able to
manage risk, identify requirements, deploy resources, and
assess operational outcomes. We are organized in a manner that
allows us to remain agile and resilient. We prioritize and
invest in our most valuable asset, our people. We have strong
partnerships with our industry and international partners to
raise the global transportation security standards, and we are
continuously driving innovation to remain ahead of
transportation security threats. I'd like to provide some
examples of TSA's collaborative achievements.
The first, is TSA's new compensation system. Attrition
among the TSA front-line work force reached a peak of nearly 20
percent per year in 2019, due in large part to a compensation
plan that paid TSA employees far less than their Federal
counterparts. As a result of a lot of hard work and engagement
with our Congressional partners in the Omnibus Appropriations
Act of 2023, Congress provided the initial funding to place all
non-executive TSA employees on a compensation system
commensurate with their Federal Government counterparts. To
successfully implement this new compensation system, we worked
internally to establish policy, provide training, and process
thousands of associated personnel actions. With the
implementation of the new compensation system, we have seen
improvements in retention, recruiting, and hiring, and a
reduction in attrition to 11 percent. We have not only been
able to be more selective in our hiring, but we have been able
to meet the increased mission demands during record-breaking
air travel volumes as a result of this investment in our
employees.
Seven of the top 10 busiest days of all time were in 2023,
and this year we expect to see over 3 million passengers on a
single point at some point. Our success was a direct result of
our planning and hiring efforts, coupled with innovative
procedures and technologies and close coordination with our
industry partners to meet the increased mission demands.
Cybersecurity threats in the transportation sector from
nation-states, cyber criminals, terrorist groups, and
hacktivists are on the rise and have necessitated an increased
focus on the cybersecurity of the transportation systems.
Following extensive collaboration with Federal partners,
engagement with industry, and feedback from stakeholders, TSA
has issued cybersecurity requirements for airports and
airlines, pipelines, and railroad carriers. TSA has increased
the number of employees dedicated to cybersecurity in units
responsible for intelligence, risk analysis, policy
development, and compliance. Our collective efforts have
directly contributed to increasing cybersecurity resilience of
U.S. critical infrastructure.
Since our urgent creation, TSA has emerged as an agile
security agency that works with our interagency, State and
local, international, and industry partners to outmatch the
dynamic threats to our transportation system. We are proud of
the agency's evolution and our work force who has made this
progress possible.
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of
the subcommittee, my colleagues and I thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today, and we appreciate the
subcommittee's on-going interest and support of TSA's critical
security mission. We look forward to your questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Ms. Fitzmaurice, Ms.
Scanlon, Mr. Belcher, and Mr. Lorincz follows:]
Joint Prepared Statement of Stacey Fitzmaurice, Julie Scanlon, Brian
Belcher, and Steve Lorincz
March 12, 2024
introduction
Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me
and my Transportation Security Administration (TSA) colleagues to
testify on the effectiveness of TSA's current organizational structure
in supporting the agency's critical security mission.
TSA was created in just 69 days in the wake of the September 11,
2001, terrorist attacks on the United States. With the signing of the
Aviation and Transportation Security Act of 2001 on November 19, 2001,
TSA was statutorily authorized to secure the Nation's transportation
sector and systems to ensure freedom of movement for people and
commerce. We are very proud of our workforce and our mission.
Currently led by Administrator David Pekoske, who is serving his
second 5-year term as TSA administrator, the agency is continually
adapting its responses, technologies, and policies to address known and
potential threats to the Nation's transportation system. TSA
accomplishes its mission by remaining flexible and resilient, investing
in our front-line workforce, maintaining and strengthening our
partnerships with transportation stakeholders and international
governments to raise global transportation security standards, and
continuing to drive innovation to remain ahead of emerging threats.
tsa modernization act of 2018
The TSA Modernization Act of 2018 (TSA Modernization Act), enacted
in October 2018, served as the first and only reauthorization
legislation since the agency's creation. Among other things, Section
1905 of the TSA Modernization Act addressed operational leadership and
organizational issues and Section 1906 directed TSA to conduct an
agency-wide review to identify and effectuate spending reductions and
administrative savings that could be achieved by streamlining and
restructuring TSA divisions.
In accordance with Sections 1905 and 1906 of the TSA Modernization
Act, Administrator Pekoske and TSA senior leadership conducted a
required organizational review, taking into account Congressional and
industry feedback, and TSA's strategic priorities and goals. On
December 21, 2018, Administrator Pekoske approved realignment of
numerous functions within TSA to enhance security effectiveness and
efficiency of the agency by uniting like functions, reducing
stovepipes, and promoting unity of effort throughout the organization.
For example, the realignment:

Established four distinct organizational pillars within TSA:
Operations Support (OS), Security Operations (SO), Enterprise
Support (ES), and Law Enforcement/Federal Air Marshal Service
(LE/FAMS). Each pillar is led by an Executive Assistant
Administrator (EAA), who reports directly to the Office of the
Administrator.

Established the Office of the Administrator, which includes
the Deputy Administrator and Chief of Staff, along with the
offices of Chief Counsel; Chief Finance Office; Civil Rights &
Liberties/Office of Traveler Engagement; Diversity, Equity,
Inclusion and Accessibility; Inspections; Investigations;
Legislative Affairs; Strategic Communications and Public
Affairs; and Strategy, Policy Coordination, and Innovation.

Organized all domestic aviation security, international
security, and surface security operations under Security
Operations.

Created the Policy, Plans, and Engagement (PPE) office under
Operations Support, responsible for all domestic and
international security policy development and industry/
stakeholder outreach and engagement.

Established the Enrollment Services and Vetting Programs
(ESVP) office under Operations Support to streamline and create
efficiency in credentialing and vetting processes.

Organized multiple operational risk analysis and innovation
functions in the Requirements and Capabilities Analysis (RCA)
office under Operations Support.

Consolidated individual Business Management Offices into
streamlined Resource Management Offices (RMO) within each
pillar.
These changes better aligned TSA's various functional areas into
lines of business, minimized duplication of effort, and allowed for
delegation of authority to the optimum level of decision making. In
addition, our revised structure created enhanced career paths for
employees, streamlined processes and procedures, reduced costs by
consolidating functions and eliminating redundancies, enabled more
strategic resource allocation, and increased innovation and
collaboration agency-wide. As a result, TSA is able to more effectively
manage risk, identify requirements, deploy resources, and assess
operational outcomes.
tsa's strategic priorities and goals
TSA's vision is to remain an agile, world-class security agency
embodied by a professional workforce that engages transportation
security partners and the traveling public to outmatch dynamic threats.
To accomplish this, TSA implemented a comprehensive governance
framework that establishes a clear decision-making structure and
enables TSA to address current and future threats. TSA sets agency
goals via an end-to-end risk-based, strategic planning process. TSA
collaborated with stakeholders across the transportation system to
develop the 2018-2026 TSA Strategy, an 8-year plan highlighting key
priorities necessary to fulfill TSA's mission.
To support the TSA Strategy and emphasize and reinforce
accountability, TSA issued subsequent execution plans called the
Administrator's Intent. The Administrator's Intent describes short- and
medium-term objectives to advance TSA toward our strategic priorities.
The Administrator's Intent, now in its third edition, focuses on 20
critical issues involving people, partnerships, and technology, and
builds on TSA successes. Through 2026, TSA's priorities are: investing
in our front-line workforce; maintaining and strengthening partnerships
with transportation stakeholders and international partners to raise
transportation security standards; and continuing technological
innovation to remain ahead of emerging threats.
TSA develops Roadmaps, aligned with the Administrator's Intent, on
specific cross-cutting and emerging topics. Roadmaps articulate the
agency's vision for approaching these critical areas and enable us to
work together more effectively with our employees and external partners
to achieve shared goals and objectives. Currently, TSA has Roadmaps for
Cybersecurity, LE/FAMS, Insider Threat, Open Architecture, Air Cargo
Security, Checked Baggage, Identity Management, and Biometrics.
Additionally, these comprehensive strategic planning activities
inform TSA's multi-year budget planning process and Capital Investment
Plan. TSA publishes its Capital Investment Plan annually and it serves
as our guide for determining and prioritizing future investments
critical to mission success. The Capital Investment Plan reflects TSA's
commitment to continuous and sustained investment in transportation
security equipment, technology, and other capital investments necessary
to achieve TSA's strategic priorities within the context of its
operational environment and threat landscape.
Finally, the TSA Strategy and its supporting Administrator's
Intent, Roadmaps, and annual Capital Investment Plan, align with
Departmental and national strategies and plans, such as the National
Security Strategy, National Strategy for Transportation Security,
National Strategy for Aviation Security, and the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) Strategic Plan. This strategic alignment ensures TSA's
plans are cohesive and drive activities to execute our mission.
tsa's four organizational pillars
Operations Support
Operations Support (OS) is led by Executive Assistant Administrator
(EAA) Stacey Fitzmaurice and provides innovative solutions and
processes to protect U.S. transportation systems and the traveling
public. OS has over 1,200 Federal employees spanning 4 program offices.
The majority of our OS workforce is located in the National Capital
Region to include TSA Headquarters, the Freedom Center in Virginia, and
the Annapolis Junction Operations Center in Maryland. Additionally, OS
employees support TSA's mission from around the world, including
employees based at the TSA Operations Center in Colorado, Field
Intelligence Officers located Nation-wide, and International Industry
Representatives stationed overseas.
OS encompasses the program offices of Intelligence and Analysis;
Requirements and Capabilities Analysis; Policy, Plans, and Engagement;
and Enrollment Services & Vetting Programs. Their responsibilities
include:

Intelligence and Analysis (I&A) identifies and mitigates
threats to the transportation system by leading intelligence
activities and conducting 24/7 vetting operations to inform and
support U.S. transportation security stakeholders.

Requirements and Capabilities Analysis (RCA) strengthens
TSA's operational capabilities by analyzing the domestic and
international risk landscape, assessing capability gaps to
develop user requirements, driving optimal performance through
innovation, and testing emerging transportation security
technologies.

Policy, Plans, and Engagement (PPE) develops and coordinates
domestic and international multimodal transportation security
programs, directives, strategies and initiatives, while
overseeing engagement with industry stakeholders and
multilateral organizations.

Enrollment Services & Vetting Programs (ESVP) manages TSA's
enrollment, vetting, and credentialing programs; ensures end-
to-end program management and oversight of technology,
operations, and resources supporting TSA's security threat
assessment programs; and aligns TSA's enrollment and vetting
initiatives with the larger DHS enterprise.
TSA's operations are intelligence-driven and risk-informed. As a
result, work performed by OS is integral to all TSA activities and is
extremely collaborative in nature. For example, I&A and RCA provide
threat intelligence and risk assessments that inform security policies
and procedures developed by PPE and ESVP. These policies and procedures
are then operationalized by Enterprise Support (ES), to develop TSA's
training programs, and Security Operations and Law Enforcement/Federal
Air Marshal Service to implement them.
In addition, RCA establishes detection standards and equipment
requirements that directly inform actions of Enterprise Support to
acquire, deploy, and maintain our transportation security equipment and
technology. RCA also coordinates with our International Operations team
in Security Operations to harmonize detection standards and testing
methodologies to expand TSA's efforts to strengthen transportation
security around the globe.
Additionally, ESVP ensures a robust network of enrollment locations
across the United States for individuals to apply for TSA PreCheck, a
Transportation Worker Identification Credential (TWIC), and a Hazardous
Materials Endorsement (HME). ESVP also leads efforts to successfully
implement strengthened identity management requirements in the REAL ID
Act, working closely with Domestic Aviation Operations in Security
Operations to ensure travelers are REAL ID ready. Finally, every day,
results of I&A's vetting of passengers helps inform Security
Operation's domestic screening activities and LE/FAMS coverage.
Security Operations
Security Operations (SO) is led by EAA Melanie Harvey and is the
agency's most visible, operational arm. SO is responsible for security
screening at nearly 440 domestic airports, regulatory compliance in all
modes of transportation, and ensuring security of flights inbound to
the United States from over 300 international airports. More than
51,000 TSA front-line employees serve in SO, working 24/7/365, across
the globe, to protect people and secure transportation.
The SO workforce is comprised of Transportation Security Officers
(TSOs), Lead TSOs, Supervisory TSOs, Explosive Detection Canine
Handlers, Transportation Security Specialists in Explosives,
Transportation Security Managers, Transportation Security Inspectors,
TSA Representatives (TSARs), and support staff.
In 2023, SO conducted the physical screening of more than 858
million passengers (averaging over 2.2 million per day), 484 million
checked bags, and 1.9 billion carry-on items. Security Operations
prevented individuals from bringing 6,737 firearms into the secure
areas of the airport and onboard aircraft, of which 93 percent were
loaded. Internationally, 27 TSARs, 5 regional operations centers, and
over 50 Transportation Security Specialists work with our foreign
partners to strengthen international transportation security.
There are 5 offices under Security Operations: Domestic Aviation
Operations, International Operations, Operations Management, Surface
Operations, and Compliance. Their responsibilities include:

Domestic Aviation Operations manages TSA's security
operations at approximately 440 domestic airports, including
the security screening checkpoint, checked baggage screening,
and air cargo screening.

International Operations manages TSA's work with our foreign
partners to raise the international aviation security baseline
by analyzing potential vulnerabilities and threats to drive
action to mitigate potential attacks.

Operations Management oversees Security Operation's budget,
the Screening Partnership Program, and the National Deployment
Force. Additionally, it provides support services to all
Security Operations employees, which includes human resources,
logistical support, staffing allocation, emergency
preparedness, and standards and directives for the front-line
workforce.

Surface Operations leads TSA's work on surface
transportation security including pipeline, highway and motor
carrier, mass transit, passenger rail, and freight rail
transportation systems. They accomplish this through planning,
developing, and implementing strategic, risk-based security
programs and activities intended to enhance preparedness and
minimize vulnerabilities to reduce the risk of a terrorist
attack on a surface transportation asset.

Compliance, comprised of Transportation Security Inspectors
and Transportation Security Specialists, ensures that domestic
and international transportation industry entities carry out a
broad range of statutory, regulatory, and program security
requirements.
SO works collaboratively with every TSA pillar. For example, SO
works closely with Operations Support on the creation of policy,
testing of emerging technology, monitoring, and reporting current
intelligence threats, and conducting vetting operations of passengers
prior to arrival at security screening checkpoints or as they
transition from an international port of arrival. SO works closely with
Enterprise Support to develop training for our front-line workforce,
Human Capital policies, and deployment and support of Transportation
Security Equipment. SO also collaborates with LE/FAMS at both
headquarters and in the field and assists the FAMS with mitigation of
insider threats and screening of high-risk passengers.
Enterprise Support
Enterprise Support (ES) is led by EAA Julie Scanlon and is
responsible for delivering a wide array of critical support services
and capabilities necessary for TSA to meet its mission. With a focus on
making TSA an employer of choice, ES fully supports TSA's mission
through unparalleled training, thoughtful human capital programs and
practices, and cutting-edge technology. ES also ensures TSA is
continuously improving employee morale through accountability, employee
empowerment, transparent communication, and fostering an inclusive and
collaborative environment where diversity of experience and thought are
embraced.
ES has over 1,700 employees and is comprised of the offices of
Acquisition Program Management, Contracting and Procurement, Human
Capital, Information Technology, Operations Management, Security and
Administrative Services, and Training and Development. Their
responsibilities include:

Acquisition Program Management builds TSA's capabilities by
managing the acquisition, testing, deployment, and sustainment
of security technology and other acquisition programs.

Contracting & Procurement acquires and maintains TSA's
required services, supplies, and technologies by negotiating
and awarding procurements and other contractual agreements
necessary to support the transportation security mission.

Human Capital provides strategic, sustainable, and
comprehensive programs and services that attract, build, and
inspire a talented workforce through positive customer
engagements.

Information Technology provides transformative technology
solutions through information technology, information
assurance, and information management to secure and safeguard
the Nation's transportation systems.

Operations Management provides strategic and tactical
leadership, direction, management, and support services to ES
employees and programs in the areas of budgetary and financial
management, human resource management, and business operations.

Security and Administrative Services (SAS) delivers agile
and effective security and safety services, and strategic,
streamlined property and real estate services and solutions.

Training and Development creates, delivers, and oversees
training for all TSA employees including Transportation
Security Officers; Federal Air Marshals; management,
administrative and professional employees; canine teams;
instructors; inspectors; and other specialists.
Collaboration is critical for ES to understand customer needs and
successfully develop, deliver, and maintain solutions. For example, ES
collaborates with Operations Support to transition requirements into
solutions. This occurs through a partnership between Acquisition
Program Management and RCA to manage TSA's acquisition life-cycle
framework, allowing for faster deployment of solutions to the field,
fostering capability growth in technology innovation, and maintaining
equipment performance in the field. ES also collaborates extensively
with Security Operations and LE/FAMS, on recruitment and hiring,
training, and various administrative services to ensure our front-line
workforce is equipped to perform its mission.
Law Enforcement/Federal Air Marshal Service
LE/FAMS is led by EAA Brian Belcher and is responsible for
conducting protection, response, detection, and assessment activities
in the transportation system. In furtherance of their core mission and
based on risk analysis and intelligence, Federal Air Marshals deploy on
security missions on-board U.S. commercial aircraft world-wide and can
deploy in response to emergent law enforcement requirements. Federal
Air Marshals are trained to take decisive action surrounding incidents
in the transportation domain and are prepared to appropriately respond
to a variety of situations within aircraft cabin, airport, and surface
transportation environments.
In June 2023, TSA published the LE/FAMS Roadmap, which was
developed with stakeholder input. The LE/FAMS Roadmap lays out the
mission, vision, and priorities of LE/FAMS in its role as the principal
Federal law enforcement organization with the Nation's transportation
system. It contains a strategic vision for LE/FAMS focusing on
strengthening transportation security by providing greater
organizational flexibility, improving operational capabilities, and
enabling a more proactive response to future transportation and
national security events. The Roadmap outlines LE/FAMS' priorities of
fostering leadership, innovation, technology, and training to
strengthen detection, assessment, and response capacities around its
core mission of in-flight security.
LE/FAMS is composed of three divisions: Field Operations, Flight
Operations, and Operations Management. Responsibilities include:

The Field Operations Division provides direction,
leadership, and supervision to 20 Federal Air Marshal Service
Field Offices established across the country, ensuring policy
and procedures are carried out as intended. Additionally, it is
responsible for developing, fostering, and administering
programs to include the Visible Intermodal Prevention and
Response (VIPR) program, which deploys uniformed Federal Air
Marshals throughout the transportation domain in collaboration
with local stakeholders.

The Flight Operations Division is responsible for deployment
of Federal Air Marshals on aircraft; daily operational incident
management; domain awareness through management of the
Transportation Security Operations Center; and management of
Federal Air Marshals assigned to multiple Federal law
enforcement task forces. Additionally, it manages various
flight programs which oversee armed security officer training,
builds agency expertise for mitigating risk from unmanned
aircraft systems, provides training and subject-matter
expertise for vulnerability and risk assessments within the
transportation sector, and hosts the TSA Insider Threat
Program.

The Operations Management Division is responsible for
providing leadership, management, and support services to LE/
FAMS headquarters, field programs, and employees in the areas
of budget and finance, human resources, logistics, staffing,
policy coordination, and organizational performance measures.
Furthermore, LE/FAMS manages the Federal Flight Deck Officer
Program and Crew Member Self-Defense Training Program. Under the
Federal Flight Deck Officer Program, TSA deputizes qualified volunteer
pilots and flight crewmembers of passenger and cargo aircraft as law
enforcement officers to defend the flight deck of aircraft against acts
of criminal violence or air piracy. The Crew Member Self-Defense
Training Program provides training to airline crew members that
consists of the same self-defense principles taught to Federal Air
Marshals and Federal Flight Deck Officers. Techniques learned in the
Crew Member Self-Defense Training Program aid crew members in defending
themselves should they encounter an in-flight situation.
As an integral part of TSA's layered security, LE/FAMS works
collaboratively with other TSA pillars on a daily basis to successfully
carry out its mission. For example, LE/FAMS relies upon Intelligence &
Analysis to inform its risk-based scheduling methodology, prioritizing
deployments of Federal Air Marshals on flights with the highest-risk
passengers; works in collaboration with Security Operations to enhance
security throughout airports and surface environments and address
field-based emergent and evolving national security priorities; and
works in partnership with Enterprise Support on various ways to develop
and support the LE/FAMS workforce to meet TSA's mission.
tsa's collaborative success and achievements
By driving integration across the organization, TSA's 2018
realignment and evolution promotes cohesion, collaboration, innovation,
and flexibility, enabling the agency to better achieve its
transportation security mission and strategic priorities. While TSA is
made up of different offices, programs, and responsibilities, we work
closely together to achieve our collective mission. Three examples of
TSA's collaborative success include implementation of TSA's new pay
plan, cybersecurity, and our response to rising passenger volumes.
Increased Pay for the TSA Workforce
Attrition among TSA's front-line workforce reached a peak of nearly
20 percent per year in 2018 and 2019, due in large part to a
compensation plan that resulted in employees receiving an average of 30
percent less than other Federal employees. Recognizing that no agency
can function efficiently with such high turnover, TSA's top priority
became increasing employee pay to ensure pay is commensurate with
Federal Government counterparts. Appropriately compensating all TSA
employees is essential to improving recruitment, retention, morale, and
the employee experience and is fundamental to ensuring transportation
security. Thanks to the support of Congress, the Consolidated
Appropriations Act of 2023 provided initial funding to place all non-
executive TSA employees on a compensation system commensurate with
their Federal Government counterparts.
To successfully implement TSA's new compensation system, Enterprise
Support took the lead working with all pillars to establish policy,
provide training, and process thousands of associated personnel
actions. ES equipped each program office and airport to issue over
62,000 forecast letters to TSA employees with their new salary upon the
onset of the plan. Leveraging chief financial officer and resource
management offices across the agency, these critical letters were
created based on the team's development of a TSA employee master pay
file, which included current pay, projected new pay, and the next
scheduled pay increase. Local Human Resource specialists around the
country went line-by-line reviewing every letter to ensure accuracy.
The letters were delivered in April 2023, to the entire TSA
workforce, with an accuracy rate of over 99 percent (fewer than 100
employees needed adjustments). Success was directly due to team
collaboration and tireless work verifying the accuracy of each case.
TSA's new compensation system has a direct impact on TSA's ability
to accomplish our mission. We have seen a rise in retention,
recruiting, and hiring. TSA's attrition dropped from nearly 20 percent
to about 11 percent. With improved employee retention, TSA is able to
be more selective in hiring, moving from needing to hire over 11,000
TSOs in 2018 to only needing to hire 9,000 TSOs in 2023 to keep up with
attrition and increased passenger volumes. Furthermore, as reflected in
TSA's 2023 Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey (FEVS) scores,
implementation of TSA's new compensation plan improved the agency's
morale and overall employee satisfaction.
Cybersecurity
The transportation sector is facing a growing prevalence of cyber
threats from nation-states, cyber criminals, terrorist groups, and
hacktivists. These adversaries aim to exploit cyber vulnerabilities
within the transportation sector to cause economic harm and/or to
disrupt, destroy, or interfere with delivery of essential goods and
services. A rise in criminal and nation-state cyber threats
necessitated an increased focus on the cybersecurity of transportation
systems and TSA's organizational pillars collaborate closely to respond
to these cyber threats.
In 2018, TSA published its Cybersecurity Roadmap, which aims to
guide our collective efforts to prioritize cybersecurity measures
within TSA and the transportation system. The Cybersecurity Roadmap
defines clear pathways to integrate and improve TSA's cybersecurity
posture, safeguard the Nation's transportation systems, and build TSA's
capacity to meet the ever-changing cybersecurity environment through
smart investments and collaborative partnerships.
Following extensive collaboration with Federal partners, engagement
with industry, and feedback from stakeholders, TSA issued cybersecurity
requirements for airport and aircraft operators, pipelines, and
railroad carriers as part of DHS's efforts to increase cybersecurity
resilience of U.S. critical infrastructure. These require TSA-regulated
entities to develop and take measures to improve their cybersecurity
resilience and prevent disruption and degradation to infrastructure.
Regulations are performance-based and variable according to the risk
profile and capability of the entity.
Through various policy initiatives and in consultation with
industry partners, Operations Support led the development of these
requirements. Security Operations established the Security Operations
Cybersecurity Inspection Teams to assist regulated parties in
developing and implementing plans responsive to new cybersecurity
requirements. Enterprise Support drove significant hiring and training
initiatives required to form and support teams working with industry
partners. By working across organizational pillars, TSA increased the
number of employees dedicated to cybersecurity in units responsible for
intelligence, risk analysis, policy development, and compliance. TSA is
actively collaborating with the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency to execute both voluntary and regulatory initiatives to
enhance cybersecurity resilience of transportation systems. TSA
continues to issue non-regulatory guidance and training assistance for
all modes of transportation to enhance preparedness and reduce risks
associated with cyber attacks.
Increased Passenger Volume
Impacts of TSA's realignment, improved organizational
effectiveness, and constant collaboration is evident as TSA responds to
changes in passenger volume. Over the last 4 years, TSA experienced
significant fluctuations in passenger volumes--from record lows
observed during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, to record highs
last year. Throughout this period, TSA worked collaboratively to
rapidly respond to changing passenger volume by adjusting our staffing,
procedures, and transportation security equipment and technology,
leveraging TSA's new organizational structure to great effect.
Nowhere is the effectiveness and agility of this structure more
apparent than in our response to passenger volume changes during COVID-
19 and their subsequent post-COVID-19 rise in passenger volumes.
Increased risk to TSA's front-line workforce during COVID-19 required
TSA to re-evaluate our capabilities and training, while ensuring the
front-line workforce was able to safely provide effective security.
With Operations Support's help, subject-matter experts in risk, policy,
and traveler vetting, Security Operations rapidly evaluated the
changing risk environment and responded with agility.
While COVID-19 significantly reduced passenger volume across the
country, it also imposed new barriers to customer communication and
experience, impacted staffing, and created urgent procurement and
acquisition requirements. Working in close partnership with Enterprise
Support, Security Operations accelerated delivery of newly-designed
training to counter pandemic risks to TSA's front-line workforce and
deployed Plexiglas screens, signage, and personal protective equipment.
All these efforts protected the traveling public, TSA's front-line
workforce, and our industry partners.
Today TSA is faced with unprecedented passenger volumes in the
opposite direction. Seven of our top 10 busiest days of all time were
in 2023 and we expect to see over 3 million passengers on a single day
at some point this year. Security Operations continues to work together
with TSA's other pillars to plan, design, develop, procure, test,
validate, and execute a whole host of innovative solutions in response
to rising passenger volumes. Despite the numbers, TSA's ability to
reliably count on experts from purpose-built organizational pillars,
continues to provide effective security and resilience across the
Nation's transportation system.
conclusion
More than 20 years after TSA's urgent creation in the wake of the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States, TSA has
emerged as an agile security agency that works with our interagency,
State and local, international, and industry partners to outmatch
dynamic threats to the transportation system. This evolving threat
environment emphasizes the importance of intelligence sharing and
domain awareness to facilitate rapid threat warning, timely deployment
of protection measures, coordination of security resources, and
activation of responders.
While it is impossible to predict every threat TSA will face in the
future, our organization is prepared to address emerging threats with
agility, high domain awareness, and decisive action. TSA is proud of
our evolution and our workforce who made this progress possible while
serving our country every day with integrity, commitment, and respect.
We appreciate this subcommittee's on-going interest in and support
of TSA's critical national security mission. We look forward to
continuing to work with you to help ensure TSA remains an effective and
agile force in the face of emerging threats to our transportation
system. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today.
My colleagues and I look forward to your questions.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Ms. Fitzmaurice. I now
recognize Executive Assistant Administrator Julie Scanlon for 5
minutes to summarize her opening statements.

STATEMENT OF JULIE SCANLON, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR,
ENTERPRISE SUPPORT, TSA

Ms. Scanlon. Thank you. I appreciate the opportunity to
speak today. I have the privilege of leading TSA's enterprise
support, which lays the foundation for the entirety of TSA's
work force of nearly 64,000 employees, both domestically and
internationally. My pillar ensures that staffing remains
healthy and employees are trained. Additionally, I oversee the
acquisition programs, contract and procurement, TSA real estate
across the United States, as well as developing, securing, and
sustaining information technology capabilities. Thanks to the
expertise and hard work and dedication of my work force, I know
that TSA is ready with the capabilities needed to operate and
secure the Nation's transportation system. I thank you for
having us today and look forward to your questions.
Chairman Gimenez. That was brief. Thank you, Ms. Scanlon. I
now recognize Executive Assistant Administrator Brian Belcher
for 5 minutes to summarize his opening statements. You don't
have to take 5 minutes, just like Ms. Scanlon did.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN C. BELCHER, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, DIRECTOR FOR THE LAW ENFORCEMENT/FEDERAL AIR
MARSHAL SERVICE, TSA

Mr. Belcher. Good morning. Thank you, and I will not be
taking 5 minutes. Thank you for having me here today. I
appreciate the opportunity to come and talk to you about TSA
and the Federal Air Marshal Service.
As you said, I am the executive assistant administrator for
law enforcement, Federal Air Marshal Service at TSA. I'm
responsible for the deployment of our Federal Air Marshals
across the country and around the world, ensuring safety on the
aircraft. I also am responsible for our Transportation Security
Operations Center and the intake of all the information
regarding transportation issues around the world. I oversee the
Federal Flight Deck Officer program, the Crew Member Self-
Defense program, and TSA's Insider Threat program. I'm honored
to be here today, and I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Belcher. I now recognize
Deputy Executive Assistant Administrator Steve Lorincz for 5
minutes to summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF STEVE LORINCZ, DEPUTY EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, SECURITY OPERATIONS, TSA

Mr. Lorincz. Good morning and thank you very much for
having me here. It truly is an honor and a privilege, first of
all, to be in front of you today and represent, really, the
operational arm of TSA. As you see behind me, some of our
front-line officers within the portfolio of security
operations, I have the privilege to work with and walk next to
some amazing people. Within our portfolio, our largest
organization is our domestic aviation operations, which is our
front-line employees that you interact with on a regular basis.
I oversee international operations and oversee the last-point-
of-departures around the world. I oversee surface operations in
all aspects within that space. I oversee our compliance
department that interacts not only with aviation and our cargo
folks, and I have the privilege to oversee our operations
management group. We have two senior liaisons within our office
that also interacts with CISA and also interacts with State
Department.
It truly is an honor and privilege to be here. I appreciate
the invite. I look forward to answering your questions. Thank
you.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Lorincz. Members will be
recognized by order of seniority for their 5 minutes of
questioning. I recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
I don't know who can answer this question, but what is the
percentage of people that are on the ground actually doing the
work, screening, et cetera, et cetera, versus the people that
are at headquarters or work as a support for the organization?
So, in other words, who are the--there is always percentage,
and I look at that as an indicator whether somebody is too top-
heavy or not. So what is that percentage of people on the
ground, people, and then the people supporting?
Ms. Scanlon. I'll take that question, sir. We have 95
percent of our work force is front-line. So that includes the
screening personnel that you see at the airports, the canine
handlers, the compliance inspectors, our intel staff, our
vetting staff, ensuring that the traveling--people traveling
are who they are and that they are vetted appropriately. We
have 5 percent, is what we believe, is our headquarters or what
you can refer to as overhead to support that field operation.
Chairman Gimenez. OK. That is a good number, actually. For
bureaucracies, that is actually not a bad number. In terms of
payroll to benefits, the percentage of benefits on top of the
salaries, what percentage is that? Your benefits on top of your
salaries?
Ms. Scanlon. Out of our total budget, 76 percent of it goes
toward salary and benefits. Of that, 33 percent of our salary
includes the benefit. So----
Chairman Gimenez. Thirty-three percent?
Ms. Scanlon [continuing]. Thirty-three percent.
Chairman Gimenez. OK, fair enough. On the air marshals, Mr.
Belcher, you control the air marshals?
Mr. Belcher. Yes, sir, I do.
Chairman Gimenez. Do you have enough air marshals?
Mr. Belcher. We are able to meet our needs with the air
marshals we have. With more air marshals we would do more,
obviously, but we are at a point where we are meeting our
critical needs.
Chairman Gimenez. OK, that is pretty evasive. Do you have
an air marshal on every flight?
Mr. Belcher. No, sir, we do not.
Chairman Gimenez. So you must have a process to pick it
when the air marshals do their thing. Have you ever thought
about utilizing law enforcement, other law enforcement
agencies, to do that?
Mr. Belcher. Specifically thought--I'm in favor of having
other law enforcement officers on planes, and I think there's
never a reason not to have that. I think if we were to try and
utilize them specifically to perform air marshal-like
functions, there should be some sort of at least
familiarization or some level--I don't think it would be
significant----
Chairman Gimenez. No, I agree with that.
Mr. Belcher [continuing]. Level of training, so they could
understand the environment they're operating in.
Chairman Gimenez. I agree with that. One of the things that
we have talked about is the diversion of the passenger security
fee and the slow pace of implementing some of the new
technologies. The pace right now says that you are going to be
implementing some new technologies by the 2040's. By the
2040's, that new technology isn't new technology anymore. How
agile is your organization in implementing new technologies,
and how can we help you implement these new technologies
faster? I know money is an issue. OK. But are there other ways
that we can help you implementing, researching new technology
that is going to come? How you can put that new technology on-
line as quickly as possible. Are there any things that we can
do in Congress to help you out?
Ms. Scanlon. Thank you, sir, for that question.
So, as you stated, at our current funding level through our
appropriations, our checkpoint funding is approximately $80
million. So, that will take us through 2049 to get our computed
tomography, CT, machines out there in 2042 to get our
credential authentication technology out to the airports that
we need them to be in. Currently, we have vendors ready to
excel the delivery of that system. We have the mechanisms in
place and, if we had the appropriate funding, we could get all
of our equipment deployed between now and 2029.
The new technology, we work very closely with Stacey's
shop. They are continually looking at new technologies, working
with our science and technology branch, as well as working with
vendors to look at those emerging threats and to try and
develop algorithms and technology to make sure that we are
equipped.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Ms. Scanlon. My time is up.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Thanedar.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez.
Now, Congress must ensure that TSA receives sufficient
funding to maintain increased pay, collective bargaining
rights, as well as necessary staffing levels and technology
investment. So we understand the attrition rate is, what,
around 20 percent?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. It was around 20 percent.
Mr. Thanedar. Now it is 11.
Ms. Fitzmaurice. It's been reduced to 11, yes, sir.
Mr. Thanedar. Now it is 11, which is great. Which is great.
Certainly, pay increases is a big issue there. Having those
collective bargaining rights is a big issue. What other issues
there might be? So is there a process where you conduct exit
interviews when staff leaves and have you tabulated, compiled
any information to understand what are the nonpay,
noncompensation issues that may be affecting the turnover?
Ms. Scanlon. So, we do ask our employees to take an exit
interview, exit survey as they leave. Pay was the No. 1 in 2022
and early 2023. It has dropped to, like, the No. 3 reason, I
believe, on the exit surveys on why employees leave. The first
would be a different career field, career choice. The second
would be probably the environment.
I haven't specifically looked at those survey results, but
with an 11 percent attrition, we're well within normal
attrition for other Federal agencies. Last pay period, our
attrition was down to 10.4 percent for our screening work force
specifically.
So, we believe that the pay compensation system that
Congress granted to us last year at the fourth quarter, we so
appreciate it. We have seen an increase in morale with
employees. We have seen a more stable work force. We have seen
a more focused work force. They don't have to worry about
getting to that second and third job.
So, those are some of the tangible benefits that we've seen
with that pay increase. So thank you so much for giving us that
last year.
Mr. Thanedar. Now, we also have seen in some other Federal
agencies, Federal employees, especially Federal employees that
have a very stressful environment, that there are, you know,
stress issues, mental health issues. Have you seen any of that
in either the exit interviews or just feedback that you get
from your TSA employees in terms of stress, mental illness? Is
that something that we have seen more or less since COVID? What
do you know about that?
Ms. Scanlon. So, I would say that there have always been
stressful times at the checkpoint for our front-line personnel.
I would say now that we have the pay compensation plan, some of
those external stresses have alleviated, but we are very
concerned about the mental health of our employees. We are
concerned about the suicides that are happening, it seems, in
every occupation a little more frequently. So, we do have a
gatekeeper program that we have instituted and we have also
trained approximately 3,000 of our employees across TSA and we
will continue to do that.
We also have a program with the Federal air marshals if you
want to expound upon that, Brian. But working together, we
believe that we're getting the tools and resources to our
employees that they need.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. My time is running out, so I am
going to be quick here. But Politico recently reported that
Senator Ted Cruz is requiring TSA to provide some special
treatment for Members of Congress and Federal judges and all
kinds of staff. I am not for it. I think a system should be
developed that should be good enough for the people as well as
Members of Congress and I don't think Members of Congress needs
any special treatment at TSA points. But if such a system were
to be implemented, what would be the cost and burden on TSA?
Mr. Lorincz. I can take that question, sir. So, first of
all, I think it's important to understand that this would be a
mission change for TSA. I think it's also important to
understand that at this point, our transportation security
officers are not law enforcement individuals. There's safety
issues that we need to kind-of work through to make sure that
we understand that.
One thing that we have done some rough analysis. So, we
will provide a get-back on this, but there would be significant
cost burdens associated with moving this forward.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you so much. My time is up. I yield
back.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you to the Ranking Member. I find
it funny because I usually get special treatment. I usually get
scanned twice.
Mr. Thanedar. Me, too.
Chairman Gimenez. Randomly, yes.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is important that we get this right because the American
people are touched by air travel on a regular basis. So, I am
going to use some round numbers and I am hopeful that either
the panel as a whole or individually, you can respond and
clarify. Does TSA handle about 850 million passengers a year?
Is that roughly accurate?
Mr. Lorincz. Yes, sir. In 2023, we processed over 850
million passengers. Thank you.
Mr. Higgins. OK. So, again, I am using round numbers, sir.
Because air travel is increasing, it picked back up from COVID,
getting back to pre-COVID levels and beyond. People are excited
to be able to travel again. So there are 850 million people
buying passenger tickets, buying tickets. When we buy a ticket,
we pay a security fee. It is $5.60 for a one-way trip, so we
don't even notice it. We look on-line, we find a least
expensive ticket, you know, with the best seat on whatever
airline we prefer. We choose from 2 or 3, according to airports
we can use. We are just trying to get to where we are going.
Trust me, there is no Americans out there making a decision on
buying a ticket based upon a $5.60 security fee. But as an
American, call us crazy, we would think that a security fee
might be used for security. Just putting that out there as a
wild thought.
So, you got 850 million people paying a minimum of $5.60
because it is $11.20 for a round-trip ticket. So let's just use
minimal numbers. That is $4.7 billion. Is that about accurate?
You are collecting somewhere between $4- and $5 billion in the
TSA security fee from individual airline tickets with 850
million travelers? Is that roughly correct?
I am not trying to put anybody on the spot. We are trying
to get to the reality here that TSA should almost be self-
funded, and Americans would think that that would be the case.
But this money is being diverted. At some point in this town, a
decision was made, let's just take that money from its intended
purpose and move it over here. The Americans, like, didn't
notice that this had happened.
But you have got to be able to hire and retain quality
people in TSA. You can't have people paid below the standard
levels of a similar job performance at another Federal agency
and think they are going to stay, because they are not. They
are going to get some experience, some time on a job, they are
going to roll to the next job because they have their own
families they are trying to support.
So, ladies and gentlemen, may I submit to you that there
are men and women on this committee on both sides of the aisle,
and my colleague, Mr. LaLota here, kind-of cracked open this
case earlier last year and said, we have to fix this. We stand
together to try to take that entire security fee and return it
to the agency that is supposed to be using it, to return it to
the purpose that Americans believe we are paying for when we
pay the $5.60, when we buy a one-way ticket.
So, the entire annual budget for TSA is about $11 billion.
You should essentially be self-funding roughly half of your
entire annual budget. We are going to fight to make that
happen.
My goodness, I am going to have to learn to speak as fast
as my New York colleagues.
Mr. Belcher, it is good to see you again. As you know, I
have requested, quite officially and professionally, some
documentation from the Federal Air Marshal Services, and I have
been waiting on that for about 2 months. I am prayerful that
you will bring some sense of urgency back to your staff that I
would like to get the documentation that I have requested. Can
I count on you to at least address that with your officer?
Mr. Belcher. Yes, sir, you can. It is good to see you as
well. But I have been, I know we're running time, you should
have the answer in about a week is what I've been told just
this morning.
Mr. Higgins. I appreciate your attention to that matter.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentleman yields back. Security fee
for security, what a concept.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My good friend from Louisiana, where do they use that?
Where is it diverted? Do you----
Mr. Higgins. A lot of it goes to the General Treasury. So,
the TSA is getting a piece of it, I think $250 million or
something like that. But it is not nearly enough to operate, so
they need technology and they need the money that the Americans
believe when we purchase a ticket, that is the purpose it is
going for, sir.
Mr. Payne. Very so.
Mr. Higgins. I yield.
Mr. Payne. I would be willing to work with you on that to
make sure that happens.
I have been a true proponent since my arrival here on the
committee about this whole issue around compensation for TSA's
front-line workers. It was abominable. It was terrible. It was
horrific when I arrived here in 2012. So I am glad that we are
finally seeing some parity brought back to TSA.
It makes no sense for the job that the front line is asked
to do, that they are undercompensated. It makes no sense. We
ask them to do a job, a job that is stressful, a job that is
important, a job that you need the highest quality people to be
involved in. Yet, and still, they have a job that they can't
feed their families on one salary. It doesn't make sense, but
it looks like we are rectifying that. So I am very proud to
have had a little part in doing that.
You know, knock on wood, since 9/11, the same group of
individuals have kept us safe in the air. So for that, I want
to say thank you once again.
You know, Newark Liberty International Airport, which is in
my district, I live 5 minutes from there, is a critical hub for
air travel, serving thousands of passengers every day. Just
last year, the TSA screened over 21.9 million passengers at
that airport. That is a 14 percent increase in the passenger
volumes from the year prior, which is above the national
average. This year, passenger volumes are already 3.8 percent
higher than 2023 and demand is likely to keep growing in the
coming years. The 1,449 hardworking TSA officers at the airport
serve as a backbone for security operations.
Ms. Scanlon, thank you for highlighting how pay raises have
improved employee retention and morale, allowing the TSA to be
more selective in their hiring processes. I would like to dive
deeper into the benefits of improved retention. What kind of
impact does it have on security operations when you have a more
experienced, well-trained, and are able to retain your work
force for longer periods?
Mr. Lorincz. Thank you for that question.
Mr. Payne. I am sorry, I shouldn't have asked Ms. Scanlon?
Whoever.
Mr. Lorincz. I could take a quick stab at that, sir.
So, first of all, thank you. It has a tremendous impact to
have a well-trained work force, making sure that we process,
you know, a lot of passengers that are coming at us. Yesterday
is a good example, sir. We had an average day at TSA. We
processed 2.5 million passengers. We detected 17 firearms, most
of those are loaded. So, the security value, the work that our
employees do, the TSA's compensation package has a tremendous
impact.
The experience of the work force to make sure that they
understand technology, they understand processes, there's a
learning curve associated when you hire, when you on-board
people within the organization. So, to your question, I
appreciate the support from each and every one of you as far as
the compensation package. I appreciate the work that's being
done by this committee to take care of our people, but also
invest in security to keep our country safe.
Mr. Payne. Thank you. I will yield back, sir.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentleman yields.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. So, it is not always fun to go last at a
hearing like this, but my colleagues have done me a favor in
teeing up a couple of the issues about which I wanted to speak.
The two main issues are the underfunding of staff at the
TSA and the difficulties that result from it in recruiting and
retaining employees, and the passenger security fee. I
appreciate each of my colleagues from both sides of the aisle,
be it Democrats from New Jersey or Michigan, or Republicans
from Florida or Louisiana, or myself from New York. We
understand this issue and we are tackling it from a bipartisan
perspective.
Me, myself, I am a New Yorker. I represent the eastern part
of Long Island, and 9/11 is in our hearts and minds, I would
like to say a little more than most of the Nation on a given
day, though I appreciate the support of the entire country for
post-9/11 efforts in my home State. The passenger security fee
is also called the
9/11 security fee, which is why it offends me even more when
funds get diverted from the passenger security fee for things
having nothing to do whatsoever with passenger security. It
goes to the general fund and pays down the debt, which is in
and of itself a good thing, but we shouldn't use a false name
and lure people into paying $11.20 a round trip in the name of
passenger security and certainly in the name of 9/11 when about
a third of the funds don't go there.
On 9/11, we made a commitment and we said that we would
never forget and we would never forget to ensure that Americans
were safe in their homes, in their workplaces, and on air
travel. We said that we would fight countries, terrorist
groups, and make our own air travel more safe. So how do we,
two decades later, fulfill that promise?
While there are broader issues with respect to the DOD
keeping our adversaries at bay and our intelligence communities
listening and anticipating what our adversaries are doing and
thinking, there is a matter of physical security at our own
airports, which is a key component of the post-9/11, how do we
keep America safe? To that point, I am increasingly concerned
that we are failing to meet the moment.
The TSA administrator was in the seats that you are in
right now not too long ago, and told this committee that based
on past, present, and current and projected funding, it won't
be until 25 years from now, in the year 2049, that TSA will
meet its full operational capability for credential
authentication technology, CAT machines, and 18 years from now,
in 2042, that we will meet the standard for checkpoint property
screening systems, including computing tomography. To put those
delays in perspective, a baby born today will be old enough to
vote and/or rent a car before these standards are met. Mr.
Lorincz, is that acceptable to you, sir?
Mr. Lorincz. Speaking to--first of all, thank you for the
question. Speaking for our employees and the employees that are
working a front line, from a security effectiveness, we need
the best technology out there to make sure that we stay ahead
of the threat. It's challenging when you have different
technologies, that's a certain airport, not only from a
passenger experience, from a security effectiveness piece, but
also from a training piece. So your support, continued support
from this committee is greatly appreciated.
Mr. LaLota. While those anticipated meeting of those
requirements are decades on the horizon, does that problem get
exacerbated as technology becomes more prevalent, as technology
advances become better? Does that 18- and 25-year delay become
worse as technology get better?
Ms. Scanlon. If you don't mind, I will answer that. Yes, of
course it does. We are continually researching, with Stacey's
requirements and capabilities group, the new and emerging
threats and the technology and the algorithms that will meet
that threat, and that we won't be able to deploy that
technology is of a concern.
Mr. LaLota. Great. I only have about a half-a-minute left,
and I would like for each of you, hopefully yes or no, but if
you have to go into it shortly, just to answer this question.
Is it a good idea for Congress to examine the passenger
security fee and rightfully put those funds where we are
telling Americans they should go, to bona fide passenger
security? Yes or no? Should Congress endeavor to amend that
mistake and to focus those fees where they are intended? We'll
start with Ms.----
Ms. Scanlon. Yes.
Ms. Fitzmaurice. Yes, I believe it's important. Thank you.
Mr. Belcher. I agree. Yes, it's important.
Mr. Lorincz. Absolutely.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With four yeses, I
yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. If you have a couple of questions, I will
extend your time if you want to do that.
Mr. LaLota. That was the grand finale, Chairman.
Chairman Gimenez. Excuse me?
Mr. LaLota. That was the grand finale.
Chairman Gimenez. Very good. OK. Thank you.
I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony
and the Members for their questions. The Members of the
subcommittee may have some additional questions for the
witnesses, and we would ask the witnesses to respond to these
in writing. Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing
record will be held open for 10 days. Without objection, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:52 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Question From Honorable Carlos Gimenez for the Department of Homeland
Security
Question. Ms. Fitzmaurice, Section 103 of the TSA Modernization Act
directs TSA to appoint an individual responsible for the development
and oversight of a unified effort regarding risk-based security
policies. This individual reports directly to you. We have heard some
concerns from industry that the agency has moved away from risk-based
security policy and is now promulgating new requirements based on
theoretical future risk. Does TSA still use risk as the determining
factor for issuance of new security requirements and how are these
risks conveyed to industry?
Here is the relevant excerpt from the TSA Modernization Act, Sec.
103(w)(2)(C): ``Security policy and industry engagement and planning,
including the development, interpretation, promotion, and oversight of
a unified effort regarding risk-based, risk-reducing security policies
and plans (including strategic planning for future contingencies and
security challenges) between government and transportation
stakeholders, including airports, domestic and international airlines,
general aviation, air cargo, mass transit and passenger rail, freight
rail, pipeline, highway and motor carriers, and maritime.''
Answer. Yes, the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) bases
its security policy and strategic planning on both current risk and
anticipated future risk, as required by the TSA Modernization Act. In
response to Section 103(w)(2)(C), Administrator Pekoske incorporated an
objective under his Administrator's Intent 1.0 requiring security
policies to be risk-based. The Administrator's Intent 2.0 added an
objective requiring security policies to be outcome-focused. This
strengthens the need for TSA to collaborate with internal and external
stakeholders throughout the development process. Most recently, the
Administrator's Intent 3.0 added an objective of collaboration with
stakeholders to assess the effectiveness of security policy and
compliance activities, including the examination of security data, to
proactively identify opportunities for security improvement as part of
``Risk-based, Outcome-focused Security.'' Throughout the security
policy development process there are collaborative engagement
activities with industry to ensure the requirements will be effective
and sustainable.
TSA generally obtains input through the Aviation Security Advisory
Committee, a statutorily-created committee exempt from the requirements
of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA), and through its
regulatory notice and comment process. Additionally, TSA obtains input
from individual stakeholders, consistent with FACA requirements,
through policy discussions with the Airport Security Review group and
with the Policy and Plans Working Group (PPWG).\1\ TSA notes that it
has an extensive body of policies covering all modes of transportation,
and TSA's long-standing regulatory requirements for aviation
stakeholders generally are outcome-focused. As the executive assistant
administrator for operations support, I report directly to
Administrator Pekoske and have been designated by him as the Senior
Executive Service (SES) member responsible for carrying out the
requirements of Section 103(w)(2)(C). I lead the 3 TSA offices that
together formulate and issue risk-based security policies and also
engage with industry during and after the development of such policies.
These offices are led by SES member assistant administrators. First,
the Policy, Plans, and Engagement office is responsible for drafting
proposed risk-based security policies, coordinating such policies with
other TSA offices, engaging with industry, and issuing the risk-based
security policy to regulated parties.\2\ Second, the Requirements and
Capabilities Analysis office is responsible for conducting strategic
and operational risk analysis activities. These analyses help inform
future planning and resource allocation; seek to avoid a ``failure of
imagination'' as referenced by the 9/11 Commission; and provide a risk
review of proposed security policies. The third office, Intelligence
and Analysis is responsible for reviewing any threat-based intelligence
information to be considered as part of TSA's risk analysis when
formulating security policies. Intelligence and Analysis also routinely
meets with industry to disseminate information on threats to
transportation security at the un-Classified and, when feasible,
Classified level.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Airport Security Review, formerly referred to as the
Quarterly Airport Security Review, is comprised of multiple TSA
offices, 6 to 8 Federalized airports, and both the American Association
of Airport Executives and the Airports Council International--North
America. The PPWG is primarily comprised of Airlines for America and
member airlines and multiple TSA offices. Both working groups are non-
decision-making bodies and may only share industry perspectives.
\2\ Domestic aircraft operators under 49 Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) part 1544; Foreign air carriers under 49 CFR part
1546; Airport operators under 49 CFR part 1542; Freight rail owner/
operators under 49 CFR part 1580; Mass transit and passenger rail
operations under 49 CFR part 1582; and Over-the-road bus companies
under 49 CFR part 1584.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Together, these three offices conduct a robust review of all
available information when formulating options for risk-based security
policies to be reviewed by TSA senior leadership. Our collaboration is
not limited to these 3 offices. The Office of Chief Counsel also
reviews security policies for enforceability and legal sufficiency.
Additionally, the Office of Security Operations reviews security
policies to ensure they are enforceable by the team of inspectors under
her leadership, and also seeks to identify vulnerabilities in current
security.

[all]
