- CENSORSHIP LAUNDERING PART II: PREVENTING THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY'S SILENCING OF DISSENT

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CENSORSHIP LAUNDERING PART II: PREVENTING THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY'S SILENCING OF DISSENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT, INVESTIGATIONS,
AND ACCOUNTABILITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

DECEMBER 13, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-46
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-910 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT, INVESTIGATIONS, AND ACCOUNTABILITY

Dan Bishop, North Carolina, Chairman
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Glenn Ivey, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Ezell, Mississippi                  Member
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Elijah Crane, Arizona                Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Yvette D. Clarke, New York
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Sang Yi, Subcommittee Staff Director
Lisa Canini, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS

The Honorable Dan Bishop, a Representative in Congress From the
State of North Carolina, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Oversight, Investigations, and Accountability:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Glenn Ivey, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Maryland, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Oversight, Investigations, and Accountability..................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................    12

WITNESSES
Panel I

Mr. Michael Shellenberger, Founder, Public, A Substack
Publication:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Mr. Mark Chenoweth, President and General Counsel, New Civil
Liberties Alliance:
Oral Statement.................................................    88
Prepared Statement.............................................    90
Mr. Alex Abdo, Litigation Director, Knight First Amendment
Institute, Columbia University:
Oral Statement.................................................    98
Prepared Statement.............................................   100
Mr. Gary M. Lawkowski, Senior Fellow, The Council to Modernize
Governance:
Oral Statement.................................................   101
Prepared Statement.............................................   103

Panel II

Mr. Iranga Kahangama, Assistant Secretary, Cyber, Infrastructure,
Risk, and Resilience, Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans,
U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................   138
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................   140
Ms. Mona Harrington, Assistant Director, National Risk Management
Center, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, U.S.
Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................   142
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................   140

FOR THE RECORD

The Honorable Glenn Ivey, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Maryland, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Oversight, Investigations, and Accountability:
Article, The Washington Post, November 16, 2023................     8
Statement of Yoel Roth, PhD, Former Head of Trust & Safety,
Twitter, Inc.................................................   113
Statement of Dr. Kate Starbird, Associate Professor and
Director of the Center for an Informed Public, University of
Washington...................................................   116
Statement of Marc Rogers, Co-founder, Cyber Threat Intelligence
League.......................................................   119
The Honorable Yvette D. Clarke, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York:
Article, November 10, 2021, The Hill...........................   133

CENSORSHIP LAUNDERING PART II: PREVENTING THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY'S SILENCING OF DISSENT

----------

Wednesday, December 13, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Oversight, Investigations,
and Accountability,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 p.m., at
Room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Dan Bishop
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bishop, Greene, Ezell, Strong,
Crane, Thanedar, Ivey, Ramirez, and Clarke.
Also present: Representative Thompson.
Chairman Bishop. The Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Oversight, Investigations, and Accountability
will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to understand the scope and
scale of the Department of Homeland securities and CISA's
counter-
mis-, dis-, and mal-information efforts and why Government
censorship continues to present a threat to the free discourse
essential to a constitutional republic.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Good afternoon, and welcome to this hearing of the
subcommittee titled ``Censorship Laundering, Part Two:
Preventing the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's Silencing
of Dissent.'' In May this subcommittee held our first hearing
to examine the Department of Homeland Security's role as the
nerve center for the Federal Government's scheme to censor the
on-line voices of millions of Americans. What we learned during
that hearing was deeply concerning. As Americans, we are
committed to the idea that freedom of speech and open debate
are essential features of a free society. Make no mistake, the
efforts to censor public discourse under the guise of so-called
mis-, dis- and mal-information--MDM--threatened this essential
freedom and the very core of our republic.
Now, through our own investigation and the incredible work
of a small group of individuals dedicated to protecting
Americans' fundamental rights to discourse and debate,
including our witnesses today, we have a far more complete
picture of the censorship-laundering complex and how it
operates. While we recognize the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency's mission of protecting our
institutions from legitimate cybersecurity threats, we cannot
allow a component of the Department of Homeland Security to
anchor a censorship-laundering enterprise. Silencing the voices
of the American people is never acceptable by Government and we
must return the agency to its core mission.
Two major developments have been enormously helpful to our
investigations into the true extent of DHS and CISA's role in
Government censorship efforts. First, several lawsuits, most
notably Missouri v. Biden--although the assistant attorney
general for the Division of Civil Rights doesn't know about
that litigation, I hope she will take note of it--that lawsuit
has made public vital evidence, uncovering the scope and scale
of Government efforts to censor on-line speech. Second, Elon
Musk released the second edition of the Twitter files, exposing
the breadth of the Government's efforts to censor American
speech on-line. In addition, we have learned that despite the
Federal Government's continued denials of having any role in
the creation of the so-called election integrity project, EIP,
that DHS and CISA were involved from the beginning.
Look at the words of Graham Brookie, senior director of the
Atlantic Council's digital Forensic Research Lab, DFR Lab, one
of the four founding EIP partners who wrote this to his
colleagues on July 21, 2020, ``We just set up an election
integrity partnership at the request of DHS/CISA and are in
weekly comms to debrief about disinformation, disinfo, IO, et
cetera''. As an active participant with EIP partners, CISA was,
``switchboarding'', which is the term CISA used to describe
flagging what they called misinformation and notifying social
media platforms who could, ``independently'' decide whether to
remove or modify the content. CISA director Jen Easterly
claimed earlier this year during a DHS appropriations
subcommittee hearing that ``we don't flag anything to social
media organizations'', but that is exactly what CISA was doing.
Moreover, while EIP and its stakeholders claimed that EIP
was just conducting research--that is the terminology,
conducting research--the words of a senior EIP official during
a transcribed interview with our committee say otherwise.
``Flagging content for social media companies was part and
parcel with the EIP's creation''. There is, unfortunately, far
more evidence than I have time to describe.
After CISA's hands were caught in the censorship cookie jar
some of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have come
to the defense of its censorship-laundering enterprise, its
censorship by proxy. They claim that there were no funding
links between CISA and these outside organizations, no
censorship. At the same time, they take pains to reaffirm their
commitment to fighting ``misinformation''. Just last week, the
Ranking Member of the full committee issued a press release
denying that CISA created, funded, or directed the work of the
election integrity partnership. Now, you can believe the press
release, or you can believe the individuals in the private
sector who were most intimately involved with this work who
talk about how the Government gave them the ability to stomp
out misinformation. Listen, for example, to Alex Stamos.
[Video played.]
Chairman Bishop. As a reminder, the impact of this
censorship effort was massive, 859 million tweets collected for
``misinformation analysis'', 22 million tweets and retweets
categorized as misinformation subject to censorship, 21 Twitter
users, Americans, identified and stigmatized as ``the most
prominent repeat spreaders of disinformation''. Every one of
whom were on the political right. It was not just for
elections. The same network used the same tools to censor
dozens of purportedly false COVID-19 narratives, of which some
were later proved true, but all of which were within the sphere
of free speech that the Constitution protects from Government
interference.
Let's turn to where things might be headed. We know that
DHS and CISA have continued to explore ways to build on their
counter-MDM efforts. Some of their publicly-acknowledged or
directed efforts have been pretty Orwellian, like DHS's ill-
conceived effort to establish a disinformation governance board
last year, or CISA director Jen Easterly's bizarre comment
about controlling citizens' thoughts through regulating
``cognitive infrastructure'' as critical infrastructure reposed
to CISA's care. Other evidence is more bureaucratic but no less
alarming. Look, for example, at CISA's cybersecurity advisory
committee's MDM subcommittee, which continues to exist and to
recommend that CISA should expand efforts into new areas, such
as the courts, financial systems, and public health. The MDM
subcommittee also recommended CISA view its counter-MDM work
across a much wider range of media. Other DHS documents suggest
CISA wants also to broaden the target issues of public concern
to include racial justice, immigration, the U.S. withdrawal
from Afghanistan, and support to Ukraine.
What is stopping DHS from overreaching its jurisdiction
beyond elections to censor more Americans, to ``protect''
whatever Government-deployed orthodox notions it deems critical
infrastructure? Right now, the answer is nothing. While CISA
has made a public pretense of pulling back from some of its
more aggressive censorship efforts, that change was driven by
public scrutiny and not from all that appears to a fundamental
change of heart. This is unacceptable and dangerous. Every
American, even those serving in the vast Federal bureaucracy,
should be committed to upholding Americans' fundamental rights.
At this point, it appears the courts may provide part of
the solution. Indeed, the District of Louisiana and the Fifth
Circuit in particular ruled in an affirmative this October that
CISA probably violated the First Amendment through its
censorship activities. This is to be now decided by the U.S.
Supreme Court. But the issue of DHS and CISA's censorship
efforts goes beyond a ruling on the precise contours of the
First Amendment. The Government's power to censor speech,
including on-line speech, must be strictly limited to content
that is not Constitutionally-protected, such as inciting
imminent lawless action. At DHS censorship became ordinary and
banal, an everyday activity carried out by anonymous and
unaccountable bureaucrats using censorship by proxy to
accomplish indirectly and in secret what it would not have the
power to do openly.
Congress cannot wait or hope for a court decision to stop
DHS and CISA's overreach. Congress has a duty to rein in out of
control agencies and protect the rights of the American people.
To that end, this subcommittee will be drafting legislation
that stops DHS and CISA's censorious MDM efforts and prevent
DHS and CISA from working with social media platforms to
suppress free speech on-line. The Government cannot simply
sidestep the Constitution by outsourcing censorship under the
guise of protecting critical infrastructure.
Thank you all for joining. I look forward to hearing
testimony from our witnesses.
[The statement of Chairman Bishop follows:]
Statement of Chairman Dan Bishop
December 13, 2023
Good afternoon, and welcome to this hearing of the Subcommittee on
Oversight, Investigations, and Accountability titled, ``Censorship
Laundering Part II: Preventing the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security's Silencing of Dissent.''
In May, this subcommittee held our first hearing to examine the
Department of Homeland Security's role as the nerve center for the
Federal Government's scheme to censor the on-line voices of millions of
Americans. What we learned during that hearing was deeply concerning.
As Americans, we are committed to the idea that freedom of speech and
open debate are essential features of a free society. Make no mistake:
the efforts to censor public discourse under the guise of so-called
mis-,
dis-, and mal-information (MDM) threaten this essential freedom and the
very core of our republic.
Now, through our own investigation and the incredible work of a
small group of individuals dedicated to protecting Americans'
fundamental rights to discourse and debate--including several of our
witnesses today--we have a far more complete picture of the censorship
laundering complex and how it operates.
While we recognize the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency's mission of protecting our institutions from legitimate
cybersecurity threats, we cannot allow a component of the Department of
Homeland Security to anchor a censorship laundering enterprise.
Silencing the voices of the American people is never acceptable, and we
must return the agency to its original mission.
uncovering and validating the scope and scale of censorship efforts

Two major developments have been enormously helpful to our
investigations into the true extent of DHS and CISA's role in
Government censorship efforts.

First, several lawsuits, most notably Missouri v. Biden,
have made public vital evidence uncovering the scope and
scale of Government efforts to censor on-line speech.

Second, Elon Musk released the second edition of the Twitter
files, exposing the breadth of the Government's efforts to
censor Americans' speech on-line.

In addition, we have learned that despite the Federal
Government's continued denials of having any role in the
creation of the Election Integrity Project (EIP),\1\ that DHS
and CISA were involved from the beginning.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For example of denials, see: https://www.cip.uw.edu/2023/03/16/
uw-cip-election-integrity-partnership-research-claims/.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Look at the words of Graham Brookie, senior director of the
Atlantic Council's Digital Forensic Research Lab (DFRLab)--one
of the four founding EIP partners--who wrote this to his
colleagues on July 21, 2020--``We just set up an election
integrity partnership at the request of DHS/CISA and are in
weekly comms to debrief about disinfo, IO, etc.''.

As an active participant with EIP partners, CISA was
``switchboarding'', which is the term CISA used to describing
flagging what they called misinformation and notifying social
media platforms who could ``independently'' decide whether to
remove or modify the content. CISA director Jen Easterly
claimed earlier this year during a DHS Appropriations
subcommittee hearing that ``We don't flag anything to social
media organizations,''\2\ but that is exactly what CISA was
doing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See https://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2023/jun/27/
cybersecurity-and-infrastructure-security-agency-a/.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Moreover, while EIP and its stakeholders claim the EIP was
just conducting research, the words of a senior EIP official
during a transcribed interview with our committee, say
otherwise. ``Flagging content for social media companies was
part and parcel with the EIP's creation''.

There is unfortunately far more evidence than I have time to
describe.

After CISA's hands were caught in the censorship cookie jar,
some of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have come
to the defense of its censorship laundering enterprise. They
claim that there were no funding links between CISA and these
outside organizations, no censorship. At the same time, they
take pains to reaffirm their commitment to fighting
``misinformation.''

Just last week, the Ranking Member of the full committee
issued a press release denying that CISA created, funded, or
directed the work of the Election Integrity Partnership. Now
you can believe the press release, or you can believe the
individuals in the private sector who were most intimately
involved with this work, who talk about how the Government gave
them the ability to stomp out ``misinformation.''

As a reminder, the impact of this censorship effort was
massive:

859 million tweets collected for ``misinformation''
analysis;

22 million tweets and retweets categorized as
``misinformation'' subject to censorship;

21 Twitter users--Americans--identified and stigmatized as
``the most prominent repeat spreaders [of disinformation]''
every one of whom were on the political right.

And it was not just for elections. The same network used the
same tools to censor dozens of purportedly false COVID-19
narratives, of which some were later proven true, but all of
which were within the sphere of free speech that the
Constitution protects from Government interference.
the continuing risk of government censorship

Let's turn to where things might be headed.

We know that DHS and CISA have continued to explore ways to
build on their counter-MDM efforts.

Some of their publicly-acknowledged or directed efforts have
been pretty Orwellian, like DHS's ill-conceived effort to
establish a Disinformation Governance Board last year or CISA
Director Jen Easterly's bizarre comments on controlling
citizens' thoughts through regulating ``cognitive
infrastructure'' as critical infrastructure.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Other evidence is more bureaucratic but no less alarming.
Look for example at CISA's Cybersecurity Advisory Committee's
MDM Subcommittee which continues to exist and recommended that
CISA should expand efforts into new areas such as the courts,
financial systems, and public health. The MDM Subcommittee also
recommended CISA view its counter-MDM work across a much wider
range of media.

Other DHS documents suggest CISA wants also to broaden the
target issues of public concern, to include racial justice,
immigration, the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan, and support
to Ukraine.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See https://theintercept.com/2022/10/31/social-media-
disinformation-dhs/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

What is stopping DHS from overreaching its jurisdiction
beyond elections to censor more Americans to ``protect''
whatever Government-deployed orthodox notions it deems
``critical infrastructure?''

Right now, the answer is nothing. While CISA has made a
public pretense of pulling from some of its more aggressive
censorship efforts, that change was driven by public scrutiny
and not, from all that appears, to a fundamental change of
heart. This is shameful and dangerous. Every American--even
those serving in the vast Federal bureaucracy--should be
committed to upholding Americans' fundamental rights.

At this point, it appears the courts may provide part of the
solution. Indeed, the Fifth Circuit ruled this October that
CISA probably violated the First Amendment through its
censorship activities. Ultimately, this will be decided by the
Supreme Court.

But the issue of DHS and CISA's censorship efforts goes
beyond a ruling on the precise contours of the First Amendment.
The Government's power to censor speech, including on-line
speech, must be strictly limited to content that is not
Constitutionally-protected, such as inciting imminent lawless
action.

At DHS, censorship became ordinary and banal--an everyday
activity carried out by anonymous and unaccountable bureaucrats
using censorship by proxy to accomplish indirectly and in
secret what it would not have the power to do openly.

Congress cannot wait or hope for a court decision to stop
DHS and CISA's overreach. Congress has a duty to rein in out-
of-control agencies and protect the rights of the American
people. To that end, this subcommittee will be drafting
legislation that stops DHS and CISA's censorious MDM efforts
and prevent DHS and CISA from working with social media
platforms to suppress free speech on-line. The Government
cannot simply sidestep the Constitution by outsourcing
censorship under the guise of protecting critical
infrastructure.
Thank you all for joining, and I look forward to hearing testimony
from our witnesses.

Chairman Bishop. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Ivey, for his opening statement.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have to say I have a slightly different take on this than
my friend from North Carolina in a variety of ways. I think
that the claims about CISA being a giant censorship entity
completely misses the mark, based on the transcripts that I
have seen of testimony that has been given by this committee
and to this committee and other committees here in the House.
For example, this is a statement from Brandon Wales, he is the
CISA executive director: CISA does not and has never censored
speech or facilitated censorship. Any such claims are patently
false. We can go through a few of these others, and we will,
including the testimony that I had mentioned a moment ago.
For example, Mr. Masterson. Now Masterson was an
interesting individual who came up through the Republican Party
in the Ohio State election boards. He now works for Microsoft.
But he made a couple of statements with respect to this issue.
One, they were never compelled, they never compelled the
platforms to take positions or take down information. In other
words, they never forced censorship to happen of any kind. No,
I don't recall that happening in my experience, no.
There are a couple other quotes from him that I would like
to share on this front, too. At any point in your experience
working at CISA, were you advised that you had the authority to
compel a social media company to take any particular action
related to any particular content on social media? No, I don't
recall that happening in my experience, no. Did you ever try to
exercise that authority? No, I don't recall ever perceiving
that I had that authority.
Mr. Stamos, who was just mentioned a moment ago, also has
testified here in the House. To be clear, at no time did the
EIP censor speech or have access to back-end platform systems
or data outside of public content. The EIP did not take down
posts or apply labels and had no power to do so. The EIP did
not create targeting lists or blacklists of accounts, and the
list of accounts included in our reports as the top spreaders
of false information were generated by our own analysis, which
importantly occurred after the election. Mr. Stamos was the
person who was--the tape was played a moment ago by the
Chairman.
We have got more of those, but I need to move forward
because I think on a couple of fronts here, we have to address
the reality of what is going on I think behind some of this.
There are a lot of conspiracy theories that persist that are,
in my view, dangerously weakening America's ability to defend
itself against foreign attacks from Russia, China, and Iran.
Some of these attacks focus on America's election and our
election apparatus, especially since we haven't fully responded
in the wake of the 2016 and 2020 attacks with respect to those
elections.
In 2017, the Trump administration's national security
strategy included a section on information statecraft, naming
Russia and China among the adversaries seeking to ``weaponize
information'' for strategic gain and control. Adversaries of
the United States leverage influence operations and
disinformation campaigns to degrade confidence in key
institutions, sow civil discord, and undermine U.S. pillars of
power. For example, Russian interference in the 2016
Presidential election, I think, is a powerful example. I know
there has been a lot of political debate about collusion and
other issues, but the Senate Intelligence Committee found that
Putin ordered the Russian effort to hack Democratic Party
networks and accounts to leak information damaging to Hillary
Clinton. There is also information with respect to Iranians
trying to do the same thing on the opposite side, posing as
Proud Boys to intimidate voters in the 2020 election. That is
based on an indictment. The Department of Justice is
prosecuting individuals involved in that case. But that is on
the other side of this. From my perspective, this isn't a
partisan issue. That was an attempt, apparently, in their view,
help the Biden campaign.
But I also think we have to focus on this because we face
internal dangers that can come from the internet and some of
the information that is being abused on that front. The January
6 attack against the Capitol was aimed at preventing the lawful
and peaceful transfer of power. The internet was used, the
social media platforms were used essentially as the principal
means of communications from any of those activities. Also some
of the, in my view, false conspiracy theories that have grown
out of that, like the ghost buses issue that was raised here in
this committee a few weeks ago, I think is disinformation that
we need to address. The recent Osama bin Laden letter, which
got viral on the internet and ended up--I think it had over 2
million views--but essentially was espousing bin Laden's view
that the United States was an evil country, that 9/11 was an
appropriate attack on the United States. I am concerned about
the impact it could have, for example, on lone-wolf individuals
in the United States. There are other kinds of efforts like
that that are aimed at reaching out directly to people in the
United States to encourage them to engage in terrorist
activities.
This is an article from the Washington Post, ``How Osama
bin Laden's Letter to America Reached Millions Online.'' Video
citing the document had been viewed far less than many TikTok
posts. Then a journalist made a compilation and posted it on X,
causing attention to the manifesto to explode. That was dated
November 16, 2023, and I offer it for the record.
Chairman Bishop. Ordered to be submitted.
[The information follows:]

How Osama Bin Laden's ``Letter To America'' Reached Millions Online
By Drew Harwell and Victoria Bisset, Updated November 16, 2023 at 5:32
p.m. EST/Published November 16, 2023 at 12:23 p.m. EST, The
Washington Post.
Videos citing the document had been viewed far less than many TikTok
posts. Then a journalist made a compilation and posted it to X,
causing attention to the manifesto to explode.
On Monday, a TikTok user with 371 followers, using the screen name
``_monix2,'' posted a video where she read parts of Osama bin Laden's
``Letter to America,'' in which the late terrorist leader said his
killings of nearly 3,000 Americans in the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks had
been justified by the United States' support of Israel's ``occupation''
of the Palestinian territories.
By Wednesday night, the letter had become a point of discussion
among left-wing creators on the video app, with some saying its
critiques of American foreign policy had opened their eyes to a history
they'd never learned.
But the letter didn't rank among TikTok's top trends. Videos with
the #lettertoamerica hashtag had been seen about 2 million times--a
relatively low count on a wildly popular app with 150 million accounts
in the United States alone.
Then that evening, the journalist Yashar Ali shared a compilation
he'd made of the TikTok videos in a post on X, formerly Twitter. That
post has been viewed more than 38 million times. By Thursday afternoon,
when TikTok announced it had banned the hashtag and dozens of similar
variations, TikTok videos tagged #lettertoamerica had gained more than
15 million views.
The letter's spread sparked a deluge of commentary, with some
worrying that TikTok's users were being radicalized by a terrorist
manifesto, and TikTok's critics arguing it was evidence that the app,
owned by the Chinese tech giant ByteDance, had been secretly boosting
propaganda to a captive audience of American youth.
But the letter's spread also reflected the bedeviling realities of
modern social media, where young people--many of whom were born after
9/11--share and receive information on fast-paced smartphone apps
designed to make videos go viral, regardless of their content.
It also showed how efforts to suppress such information can
backfire. Many of the videos on TikTok were posted after the British
newspaper the Guardian, which had hosted a copy of bin Laden's letter,
removed it. Some TikTokers said the removal was proof of the letter's
wisdom and importance, leading them to further amplify it as a result.
``Don't turn the long-public ravings of a terrorist into forbidden
knowledge, something people feel excited to go rediscover,'' Renee
DiResta, a research manager at the Stanford Internet Observatory who
has advised Congress on online disinformation, wrote Thursday in a post
on Threads. ``Let people read the murderer's demands--this is the man
some TikTok fools chose to glorify. Add more context.''
TikTok spokesman Alex Haurek said Thursday that the company was
``proactively and aggressively'' removing videos promoting the letter
for violating the company's rules on ``supporting any form of
terrorism'' and said it was ``investigating'' how the videos got onto
its platform.
Haurek said that the #lettertoamerica hashtag had been attached to
274 videos that had garnered 1.8 million views on Tuesday and
Wednesday, before ``the tweets and media coverage drove people to the
hashtag.'' Other hashtags, for comparison, dwarfed discussion of the
letter on the platform: During a recent 24-hour period, #travel videos
had 137 million views, #skincare videos had 252 million views and
#anime videos had 611 million views, Haurek said.
Ali said he made the compilation video Wednesday after seeing
``thousands'' of the videos and intentionally left out the ``most
incendiary examples'' because he didn't want the compilation to be
removed from Instagram, where he also posted it.
He agreed the hashtag had never trended on TikTok but disputed the
idea that the number of videos posted there had been ``small,'' saying,
``Sure, in the context of a global platform. But not small enough to be
minuscule or not important.''
Most of the videos have since been removed by TikTok, making it
difficult to get a full tally. But a search for the letter Thursday
morning by a Washington Post reporter revealed around 700 TikTok
videos, only a few of which got more than 1 million views.
Such high view counts are common on TikTok, where videos are served
up in rapid fashion and the average U.S. user watches for more than an
hour a day. One viral video last month, in which a young woman
discussed the pain of a 9-to-5 job, has more than 3 million views and
280,000 likes.
The videos featured many people saying they'd known little about
bin Laden and were questioning what they'd been taught about American
involvement around the world. Some said they were ``trying to go back
to life as normal'' after reading it; in one video, a user scrolled
through the full letter and said, ``We've been lied to our entire
lives.''
But while many pointed to bin Laden's comments on the Palestinian
issue, few highlighted the letter's more extreme criticism of Western
``immorality and debauchery,'' including ``acts of fornication,
homosexuality, intoxicants, gambling and trading with interest.''
Many commenters also criticized giving the letter attention or
worked to remind people that bin Laden had preached an antisemitic,
sexist ideology that led to thousands of deaths. On the ``_monix2''
video, one commenter said, ``You guys Bin Laden wrote this. Do y'all
know what he did. What is wrong with y'all [oh my God. I guess] we're
supporting terrorism these days.'' (Attempts to reach the @_monix2
account were unsuccessful.)
Charlie Winter, a specialist in Islamist militant affairs and
director of research at the intelligence platform ExTrac, said in an
interview Thursday that he was ``frankly really quite surprised at the
response'' to the letter, which he described as ``a kind of core
doctrinal text'' for both al-Qaeda and the Islamic State terrorist
group.
In addition to long-standing grievances, the letter contains
``blatant language that is clearly calling for acts of genocide . . .
[and] for killing noncombatants in any nation that is democratic and is
fighting against a Muslim-majority state,'' he said.
``It's not the letter that is going viral. It's a selective reading
of parts of the letter that's going viral,'' he said. ``And I don't
know whether it's because people aren't actually reading it or, when
they're reading it, they're reading the bits that they want to see.''
The letter's spread online was celebrated Thursday by users on al-
Qaeda forums, according to SITE Intelligence Group, which tracks online
extremism. One user Thursday wrote that Islamist militants should
capitalize on the opportunity, saying, ``I hope you all are seeing
ongoing storm on Social Media . . . We should post more and more
content.''
Some of the TikTok creators who shared the letter posted follow-up
videos saying they did not support terrorism or violence. One of the
first TikTok creators to share it, and who spoke to The Post on the
condition that her name not be included in the story, said she had
encouraged people to read it for ``educational purposes.''
She said she did not ``condone nor justify'' bin Laden's actions
and was ``distancing [herself] from this entire situation.'' ``It's a
sad world if we cannot even read a public document, simply to educate
ourselves, without being smeared online,'' she said.
TikTok has faced criticism and calls for a nationwide ban due to
the popularity of pro-Palestinian videos on the app compared with pro-
Israel content, even though Facebook and Instagram show a similar gap.
In a video call organized by TikTok on Wednesday, first reported by the
New York Times, some Hollywood actors and TikTok creators pushed
company executives to do more to crack down on antisemitic content.
But the idea that the ``Letter to America'' discussion solely began
on TikTok is challenged by Google data, which show that search interest
in the ``bin Laden letter'' began gathering last week, days before it
became a topic of TikTok conversation.
And TikTok is far from the only place where the letter has been
discussed. Though instagram blocked searches for some hashtags, some
videos related to the letter--including those critical of it--remained
publicly viewable Thursday on the Meta-owned app.
On Thursday afternoon, searches for ``letter to America'' on
Instagram were still being given a ``Popular'' tag. One post, a series
of screenshots of the letter, had more than 10,000 likes as of Thursday
afternoon.
On Thursday, the letter and bin Laden's name were also ``trending
topics'' on X, the social network owned by Elon Musk. One tweet there
from Wednesday--in which the writer said reading the letter was like
feeling a ``glass wall shatter,'' and asks, ``Is this what ex cult
members feel like when they become self aware''--remained online
Thursday, with nearly 3 million views.
The letter--a nearly 4,000-word translation of the al-Qaeda
leader's comments--had been originally posted in Arabic on a Saudi
Arabian website used to disseminate al-Qaeda messages. The Guardian
originally published an English translation in 2002 alongside a news
article that offered more detail on how it had begun circulating among
``British Islamic extremists.''
Though the Guardian removed the letter on Wednesday, its
replacement, a page called ``Removed: document,'' had by Thursday
become one of the most-viewed stories on the newspaper's website. Some
TikTokers voiced anger at the newspaper for, in the words of one,
``actively censoring'' information.
A spokesperson for the Guardian said in a statement that the letter
had been removed after it was ``widely shared on social media without
the full context.''
The editors of the Guardian faced a ``no-win scenario'' once
interest in bin Laden's letter began to grow, Marco Bastos, a senior
lecturer in media and communication at City University of London, said
in a phone interview.
``If they don't take down the content, the content will be
leveraged and it will be discussed, potentially shared and is going to
go viral--if not out of context, then certainly outside of the scope of
the original piece,'' Bastos said. ``If they take it down, they're
going to be accused, as they are right now, of censorship.''
At the time of publication, the editors ``expected that this letter
would be read critically, you know, adversarially . . . that you would
process this within the view--or the bias, if you prefer--of the
Western side of the events,'' Bastos added. ``And now it's being
consumed, distributed and shared to push an agenda that's precisely the
opposite of the one that it was originally intended for.''
Winter, the Islamist militant affairs specialist, said he found it
``kind of ironic'' that the letter was being shared uncritically around
the web.
``People who consider themselves to be critical consumers of
mainstream media are consuming this very uncritically and not thinking
about the context around it,'' he said. ``Not thinking about everything
that happened just over a year before it was published as well, in any
meaningful way.''
Bisset reported from London.

Mr. Ivey. I think it is important for CISA to continue to
not only exist, but continue to operate at full capacity. I
know there have been some efforts to reduce its capabilities,
but the 2018 and 2020 cycles, the censorship issues, CISA
connected election stakeholders to social media platforms in a
nonpartisan manner by forwarding election disinformation,
reporting from election officials to both parties to the
relevant platforms. I believe we have got an email here from
the RNC that was sent to CISA. This is, again, in an effort to
be bipartisan on this front, the RNC detected misinformation
that was being circulated in Philadelphia during that campaign
cycle, that election workers were going to be paid, and that
was incorrect. It worked its way up the chain. I didn't put all
of the emails on this board here, but at the end of it, they
sent it to CISA seeking help into taking down the information
so the disinformation wouldn't spread. I don't know if that
kind of funding is illegal in Pennsylvania, but I think the
main point is that the RNC, at least in that election cycle,
didn't view this as some sort of censorship effort, this was
just an effort to make sure that they got correct information
out to the public. That is true in other scenarios, too. One of
the issues that we have seen pop up, false information with
respect to elections. The election is going to happen on
Wednesday instead of Tuesday. The Government needs to be able
to correct that kind of misinformation.
Also, there is a point I wanted to make too, about this. I
think the argument seems to be that CISA was essentially
compelling people, these platforms, to remove or edit
information that was available on that platform. But all the
emails that we have seen had a disclaimer that was displayed on
the screen. This is attached and you can see down at the bottom
of it there basically it says ``CISA affirms that it neither
has nor seeks the ability to remove or edit what information is
made available on social media platforms. CISA makes no
recommendation about how the information that is sharing should
be handled or used by social media companies.'' Social media
platforms make their own decisions regarding the content on
their platforms, and each have their own rules regarding the
labeling and removal of mis- and disinformation. Of the posts
flagged by the EIP, platforms took action on 35 percent, 21
percent were labeled, 13 percent were removed, 1 percent were
soft-blocked. No action was taken on 65 percent of those. This
is not Government censorship or censorship by proxy. Social
media companies are privately-owned and make content decisions
based on their terms of service.
I also want to raise this issue with respect to the
elections that are coming up. State and local officials in
these elections are seeking the assistance of not only the
Federal Government, but of each other because a lot of these
challenges that arise have Nation-wide impact and affect their
different States, even if the misinformation or false
information arises somewhere else. So State and local officials
from 21 different States requested CISA's assistance leading up
to the 2020 election, including Republican officials, to
address foreign influence operations and disinformation.
Kentucky State officials flagged tweets that falsely indicated
Democratic votes were being under-counted in favor of
Republican votes during a contentious Senate race, a county in
Florida for the supervisor of elections shared threats emailed
to Democratic voters. The Donald Trump campaign and the RNC
flagged the misinformation about an RNC volunteer stipend
program. We showed that already. According to an April 2023
survey, 85 percent of local election officials responded that
it is beneficial ``for CISA to dispel false information about
elections by promoting accurate information on election
administration and technology''.
I will wind this up. I do want to get to the testimony of
both panels. But I did want to raise these points about the
Missouri v. Biden case. I think it is important to note that
the Fifth Circuit put a stay on the rulings that the District
Court had issued, particularly with respect to the limitations
on the Government from having interactions with social media
platforms. I guess the District Court had imposed essentially a
total restriction on it. The Fifth Circuit rolled that back. I
think it is fair. I have read some versions of this, and I have
read the opinion myself. That some of the opinions, the
District Court's opinions information is based on false
information or misinformation as well. So I am hoping that as
this case works its way through the courts--and I wouldn't be
shocked if the Supreme Court remanded it for additional
findings of fact--that a lot of this will be addressed.
But the main point I want to make before I wrap up is that
I am concerned that there has been a chilling effect with
respect to CISA, the social media platforms, people who are
doing research. They are concerned about if they raise their
head up they get in trouble, they get subpoenas, they get
doxed. We have got a couple of statements with respect to that.
But I think it is important for us to make sure that we want to
make sure there is no censorship going on. I think that my
colleagues on the other side have significantly overstated that
based on the transcripts I have seen. But importantly, I think
we have to keep in mind that not only do we have to worry about
making sure we have the apparatus in place, for example, to
deal with child sexual exploitation and terrorism on-line, but
also that we are able to address election issues, other types
of foreign attacks that might be encouraging people to engage
in terrorism or the like. We have to make sure that we have
that capability up and ready to go, that people feel that they
can do the work and reach their own conclusions. We might
disagree about those conclusions, whether a particular social
media platform takes information down or not. I don't know
there is going to be universal agreement on all of that, but I
think we need to make sure that people feel they can operate in
a safe environment, and that includes exercising their First
Amendment right.
So, Mr. Chairman, we may draw the line in different places,
clearly we do, but I think our ultimate goal is the same.
So with that, I yield back.
Chairman Bishop. Thank you, Ranking Member Ivey.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
December 13, 2023
Today, I am pleased to be here to set the record straight on a
dangerous and unfounded conspiracy theory that my Republican colleagues
continue to promote: the notion that the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) engaged in Government censorship.
In 2016, Russian information operations targeting our elections
caught the United States flatfooted and caused alarm across the
intelligence community and among State and local election officials.
During both the 2018 and 2020 election cycles, foreign adversaries
continued to disseminate false claims to undermine U.S. elections and
stoke division between political parties.
In response to requests for assistance from election officials,
then-President Trump's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA) forwarded messages from election officials--both Republicans and
Democrats--to alert social media platforms to election related mis- and
disinformation that was spreading widely on social media. During the
2020 election cycle, State and local election officials increasingly
began to flag posts that would mislead voters on where, when, or how to
vote, as well as threats to intimidate or interfere with voters.
CISA served as an intermediary between election officials and the
social media platforms, each of which had their own rules regarding the
labeling and removal of mis- and disinformation. To be clear, every
message CISA forwarded from election officials to social media
companies included a disclaimer at the end that read, in part:

``CISA affirms that it neither has nor seeks the ability to remove or
edit what information is made available on social media platforms. CISA
makes no recommendation about how the information it is sharing should
be handled or used by social media companies. Additionally, CISA will
not take any action, favorable or unfavorable, toward social media
companies based on decisions about how or whether to use this
information.''

A small number of posts flagged by election officials and forwarded
by CISA were removed by the platforms, and others were labeled as false
information. The vast majority, however, went unabated. Ultimately,
decisions regarding flagged content were made by private companies
unbeholden to CISA or any other Government entity. I cannot emphasize
enough that these efforts to protect America's elections, and CISA's
involvement, were hardly a secret. Representatives from CISA sat before
this very committee in 2019 and told Members in public hearings exactly
what CISA was doing.
At an October 2019 field hearing, CISA's then-Senior Cybersecurity
Advisor stated, ``We don't recommend any actions to take on the
activity, but we are able to pass it on and say, `Here is activity
that's been reported to us. Here is the contact for the State or local
election official reporting.' ''
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to submit the hearing
transcript from October 2019 into the record.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The document has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://www.congress.gov/event/116th-congress/house-event/
LC65098/text?s=5&r=90.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It was not until Donald Trump lost the 2020 election and refused to
uphold our country's tradition of peaceful transitions of power, that
Republican Members of Congress took issue with CISA's well-known
activities. As soon as CISA officials refused to go along with the
``Big Lie'', Republican Members of Congress began to slander the agency
and initiate baseless investigations.
Despite CISA's transparency about its activities, Republicans have
used a twisted version of the facts, promoted by a fringe alt-right
conspiracy theorist, to justify these allegations. This conspiracy uses
out-of-context quotes and blatant lies to promote the idea that CISA
engaged in censorship, or censorship by proxy, directed at conservative
posters. Yet, the countless pages of documents and witness testimony
provided to this committee over the last year do not show anything more
than what the agency told us back in 2019.
While CISA may have shared information with various social media
platforms, those companies were not working at the direction of any
Government agency. Any decisions made to remove social media posts were
made by the companies themselves, according to their terms of service.
My Republican colleagues, and the conspiracy theorists who feed them
this false narrative, have not once been able to show that CISA engaged
in censorship against Americans. But that has not stopped Members of
this committee from spreading disinformation about CISA's activities.
In the subcommittee's May hearing on this topic, Republicans
continued to spread this false narrative by inviting a witness who
claimed that the U.S. Government censored his posts on social media.
However, when pressed by a Member, the witness admitted that he had no
idea why the social media companies removed his posts, and had
absolutely no proof that the Federal Government, let alone CISA or DHS
in particular, was involved in any way. Meanwhile, as my Republican
colleagues waste time trying to prove something that didn't happen, the
threat that the rampant spread of mis- and disinformation poses
persists.
Following the devastating wildfires in Maui earlier this year,
researchers found what they believe to be a Chinese-directed campaign
to spread disinformation that the fire was caused by the U.S.
Government itself. These kinds of rumors make FEMA's job to assist
communities with resources following disasters more difficult.
In another example, Customs and Border Protection contends with the
results of lies spread by cartels and human smugglers everyday, as
migrants are fed false information to encourage them to cross the
Southwest Border.
And as we look ahead to the 2024 election, the Federal Government's
efforts to counter dangerous election-related disinformation will be
severely hobbled by Republicans spreading this dangerous conspiracy
theory about CISA. Already, these attacks have had a chilling effect on
those who were previously studying ways to combat mis- and
disinformation. Unchecked mis- and disinformation will affect all
American citizens, regardless of political party.
I hope that today, with the opportunity to hear from CISA and DHS
officials directly, we can finally put these baseless allegations to
rest once and for all.

Chairman Bishop. I am pleased to have a distinguished panel
of witnesses before us today on this very important topic. I
ask that our witnesses please rise and raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Bishop. Thank you. You may be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses have answered in
the affirmative.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses. Mr.
Michael Shellenberger is an investigative journalist and
founder of Public. Mr. Mark Chenoweth is the president and
general counsel of New Civil Liberties Alliance. Mr. Alex Abdo
is the litigation director of the Knight First Amendment
Institute at Columbia University. Mr. Gary Lawkowski is a
senior fellow at the Council to Modernize Governance. I thank
you all for being here today.
The Chair will now recognize each witness for oral
statements. Each oral statement will be limited to 5 minutes,
but submitted written statements by witnesses will appear in
the hearing record in their entirety.
I now recognize Mr. Shellenberger for 5 minutes for his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL SHELLENBERGER, FOUNDER, PUBLIC, A SUBSTACK
PUBLICATION

Mr. Shellenberger. Thank you, Chairman Bishop, Ranking
Member Ivey, and Members of the subcommittee for inviting my
testimony.
Researchers asked by the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security to flag election and COVID misinformation to social
media platforms in 2020 and 2021 say that they didn't break the
law. According to the leaders of the Stanford Internet
Observatory and the other groups involved, they simply alerted
social media platforms to potential violations of their terms
of service. What the platforms chose to do after that was up to
them. But during the 2 years the DHS-empowered researchers were
asking social media platforms to take down, throttle, or
otherwise censor social media posts, the President of the
United States was accusing big tech of killing people. His
then-press secretary said publicly that the administration was
``flagging violative posts for Facebook''. Members of Congress
threatened to strip social media platforms of their legal right
to operate because they said the platforms weren't censoring
enough. Many supposedly disinterested researchers were
aggressively demanding that the platforms change their terms of
service. It's true that the social media platforms are private
companies, technically free to censor content as they see fit
and are under no clearly stated obligation to obey demands by
the U.S. Government or its authorized researchers at Stanford
or elsewhere. But the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution
states clearly that the Government should take no action that
would limit free speech. The record shows that the U.S.
Government in general, and DHS in particular, did just that.
DHS supported, created, and participated in the 2020 Cyber
Threat Intelligence League, the 2020 Election Integrity
Partnership, or EIP, and the 2021 Virality Project, or VP. In
the case of the EIP and VP, four think tanks led by Stanford
Internet Observatory and reporting to CISA demanded and
achieved mass censorship of the American people in direct
violation of the First Amendment. A long-time U.S. Navy officer
and U.K. military contractor created this so-called anti-
disinformation wing of the CTIL, Cyber Threat Intelligence
League, in 2020. In doing so, they pioneered the misdescription
of censorship laundering as cybersecurity. They used CTIL as a
front group to demand censorship and demanded that cognitive
security be viewed as their responsibility in addition to
physical security and cybersecurity. DHS publicly blessed this
project and its staff helped create CTL's anti-disinformation
efforts and participated actively in its internal Slack
messaging program.
The explanations and justifications by the creators and
leaders of the EIP and VP have shifted over the last 9 months.
At first, an SIO executive, Renee DiResta, claimed in a video
for DHS that the idea for EIP came from SIO's interns, who
happened to be working at DHS at the time. More recently,
another SIO executive, Alex Stamos, claimed that the idea was
his. Then last month, this committee released documents
establishing that DHS authorized groups believed that the idea
had come from DHS. ``We just set up an election integrity
partnership at the request of DHS, CISA'' said Atlantic Council
senior executive Graham Brookie. After Matt Taibi and I
testified before Congress in March, a Stanford Observatory
spokesperson said, ``It did not censor or ask social media
platforms to remove any social media content regarding
coronavirus vaccine side effects.'' That turned out not to be
true, as internal messages from its operation released publicly
by the committee last month proved. Consider the language that
was used--Hi Facebook, Reddit, and Twitter, we recommend it be
removed from your platforms. We repeat our recommendation that
this account be suspended. We recommend labeling. We recommend
that you flag as false or remove the post below.
Under the guise of a research project, EIP was enmeshed
with the Federal Government leading up to the 2020 election.
Four students involved in EIP were even employed by CISA. One
Stanford student, for example, worked as a DHS intern inside
the EIP network. These internal emails show that CISA and its
nonprofit partners reported political speech to social media
platforms, including jokes, hyperbole, and the types of
viewpoints and nonspecific statements that CIS once claimed it
would not censor.
In 2020, Department of Homeland Security officials and
personnel from EIP were often on emails together and CISA's
personnel had access to EIP's tickets through an internal
messaging system known as Jira. Anyone who doubts that DHS
authorized organizations, SIO chief among them, need only look
at the internal workflow graphic in a VIP proposal obtained
earlier this week through a FOIA request by my colleague Matt
Taibbi. It shows how disinformation ``incidents are routed to
platform partners for takedowns''. Everybody understood exactly
what was going on. These were demands for censorship. I should
just add here that I absolutely support counterspeech. I agree
that if there's false information out there about elections,
the point is to respond publicly to it. That's not what was
happening here. They were demanding that information be
censored. It wasn't just around the date of the election or the
security of mail-in ballots, it was on a whole range of social
and political issues, which the Supreme Court has historically
protected more than any other form of speech.
I would just close by saying, if you set aside for a moment
the Orwellian aspects of CISA's efforts at mind control, what
do we think the consequences could be of CISA taking its eye
off the cybersecurity ball so it can crusade with Stanford
interns against wrongthink? Should we be able to sleep soundly
at night knowing that CISA is focused on the problem of people
being wrong on the internet, rather than on China, Russia,
Iran, and other malicious actors seeking to harm American
businesses, Government agencies, and our citizens? What's at
stake here is our fundamental freedom to express our views on
controversial social and political issues without fear of
Government censorship.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shellenberger follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael Shellenberger
December 13, 2023
Chairman Green, Chairman Bishop, Chairman Ivey, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for inviting my testimony.
Researchers asked by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
to flag election and Covid misinformation to social media platforms in
2020 and 2021 say that they didn't break the law. According to the
leaders of the Stanford Internet Observatory, and the other groups,
they simply alerted social media platforms to potential violations of
their Terms of Service. What the platforms chose to do after that was
up to them.
But during the 2 years that these DHS-empowered researchers were
asking social media platforms to take down, throttle, or otherwise
censor social media posts, the President of the United States was
accusing Big Tech of ``killing people,'' his then-press secretary said
publicly that the administration was ``flagging violative posts for
Facebook,'' Members of Congress threatened to strip social media
platforms of their legal right to operate because, they said, the
platforms weren't censoring enough, and many supposedly disinterested
researchers were aggressively demanding that the platforms change their
Terms of Service.
It's true that social media platforms are private companies
technically free to censor content as they see fit and are under no
clearly-stated obligation to obey demands by the U.S. Government or its
authorized ``researchers'' at Stanford or anywhere else.
But the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution states clearly
that the Government should take no action that would limit free speech,
and the record shows that the U.S. Government, in general, and the DHS
in particular, did just that.
DHS supported, created, and participated in the 2020 Cyber Threat
Intelligence League, or CTIL; the 2020 Election Integrity Partnership,
or EIP; and the 2021 Virality Project, or VP. In the case of the EIP
and VP, four think tanks led by Stanford Internet Observatory, or SIO,
and reporting to CISA, demanded and achieved mass censorship of the
American people in direct violation of the First Amendment and the
prohibition on Government agencies from interfering in an election.
A long-time U.S. Navy officer and a U.K. military contractor
created the so-called anti-disinformation wing of the CTIL in 2020. In
so doing, they pioneered the misdescription of censorship laundering as
``cybersecurity.'' They used CTIL as a front group to demand censorship
and demanded that ``cognitive security'' be viewed as their
responsibility, in addition to physical security and cybersecurity.
CTIL created a handbook full of tactics, including demanding social
media platforms change their terms of service. Another explains that
while such activities overseas are ``typically'' done by ``the CIA and
NSA and the Department of Defense,'' censorship efforts ``against
Americans'' have to be done using private partners because the
Government doesn't have the ``legal authority.''
DHS publicly blessed this project, and its staff helped create
CTIL's ``anti-disinformation'' efforts.
The CTI League aimed to implement something called ``AMITT,'' which
stood for ``Adversarial Misinformation and Influence Tactics and
Techniques.'' AMITT was a disinformation framework that included many
offensive actions, including working to influence government policy,
discrediting alternative media, using bots and sock puppets, pre-
bunking, and pushing counter-messaging. The specific ``counters'' to
``disinformation'' in AMITT and its successor framework, DISARM,
included the following:

``Create policy that makes social media police
disinformation''

``Strong dialog between the Federal Government and private
sector to encourage better reporting''

``Marginalize and discredit extremists''

``Name and shame influencers''

``Simulate misinformation and disinformation campaigns, and
responses to them, before campaigns happen''

``Use banking to cutoff access''

``Inoculate populations through media literacy training''.
The explanations and justifications by the creators and leaders of
the EIP and VP have shifted over the last 9 months. At first, an SIO
executive claimed in a video for DHS that the idea for EIP came from
SIO's interns, who happened to be working at DHS. More recently,
another SIO executive claimed that the idea was his.
Then, last month, this committee released documents establishing
that the DHS-authorized groups believed the idea had come from DHS.
``We just set up an election integrity partnership at the request of
DHS/CISA,'' said an Atlantic Council senior executive, Graham Brookie,
in an email sent on July 21, 2020.
After Matt Taibbi and I testified before Congress in March, an SIO
spokesperson says it ``did not censor or ask social media platforms to
remove any social media content regarding coronavirus vaccine side
effects.''
That turned out not to be true, as internal messages from its
operation, released publicly by this committee last month, proved.

Consider the language that these DHS-authorized individuals
used:

``Hi Facebook, Reddit, and Twitter . . . we recommend it be
removed from your platforms.''

``We repeat our recommendation that this account be
suspended . . . ''

``We recommend labeling . . . ''

``We recommend that you all flag as false, or remove the
posts below.''
Under the guise of a research project, EIP was enmeshed with the
Federal Government leading up to the 2020 election. Four students
involved with EIP were even employed by CISA. One Stanford student, for
example, worked as a DHS intern ``inside the EIP network.''
It is clear from the emails released by this committee that the
supposedly independent Election Integrity Partnership (EIP) and CISA
were working together and interacted. One email from a Colorado
official was addressed to ``EI-ISAC, CISA, and Stanford partners,''
directly referring to EIP. The CISA-funded non-profit, Center for
Internet Security (CIS), also sent alleged misinformation to social
media companies.
CIS had previously claimed that its definition of election mis- and
disinformation did not include ``content that is polarizing, biased,
partisan or contains viewpoints expressed about elections or
politics,'' ``inaccurate statements about an elected or appointed
official, candidate, or political party,'' or ``broad, non-specific
statements about the integrity of elections or civic processes that do
not reference a specific current election administration activity.''
But the DHS emails reveal that CISA and CIS did, in fact, consider
such content to be subject to censorship. The emails show that CISA and
its non-profit partners reported political speech to social media
companies, including jokes, hyperbole, and the types of ``viewpoints''
and ``non-specific statements'' that CIS once claimed it would not
censor. Using the pretext of ``election security,'' DHS sought to
censor politically-inconvenient speech about election legitimacy.
Messages 1 year later also showed VP researchers urging censorship
of ``general anti-vaccination'' posts, of the CDC's own data, of
accurate claims of natural immunity, of accurate information from the
journal Lancet, of anti-lockdown protests, and even of someone's entire
Google Drive.
In 2020, Department of Homeland officials and personnel from EIP
were often on emails together, and CISA's personnel had access to EIP's
tickets through an internal messaging system, Jira, which EIP used to
flag and report social media posts to Twitter, Facebook, and other
platforms. And CISA included a threatening disclaimer in its email. It
stated that ``information may also be shared with law enforcement or
intelligence agencies.''
CISA was not supposed to have involvement in EIP's flagging
activities, but, notes the House Judiciary, numerous Jira tickets
mention CISA, and CISA referenced EIP Jira codes when switchboarding.
Stanford's legal counsel insisted that EIP and SIO ``did not provide
any Government agency . . . access to the Jira database,'' but in one
November 2020 email, SIO Director Alex Stamos told a Reddit employee,
``It would be great if we could get somebody from Reddit on JIRA, just
like Facebook, Google, Twitter, TikTok, Instagram, CISA, EI-ISAC . . .
'' Stamos's statement indicated that CISA had access to EIP's Jira
system.
In communications with social media platforms, the House report
states, Stamos made it clear ``that the EIP's true purpose was to act
as a censorship conduit for the Federal Government.'' In an email to
Nextdoor, Stamos wrote that EIP would ``provide a one-stop shop for
local election officials, DHS, and voter protection organizations to
report potential disinformation for us to investigate and to refer to
the appropriate platforms if necessary.''
Anyone who doubts that the DHS-authorized organizations, SIO chief
among them, need only look at the ``Internal Workflow'' graphic in a VP
proposal obtained earlier this week through a FOIA request by Taibbi.
It shows how disinformation ``Incidents are routed to platform partners
. . . for . . . takedowns.''
``Psychological and influence operations have long been used to
secure military objectives,'' noted my colleague. ``We now have clear
evidence that, with the creation of CTIL and its partnership with CISA,
[the censorship leaders] pioneered the use of psychological strategies
to combat populism at home by censoring information and narratives
associated with populist discontent.'' Today, the Defense Department
and its contractors openly discuss the importance of ``cognitive
warfare,'' not just ``security,'' aimed at the American people.
While I believe all of the above is transparently unconstitutional,
there is the possibility that The Supreme Court will not rule against
it after it hears the Missouri v Biden censorship lawsuit next year.
Some justices may conclude that somehow the First Amendment does not
cover the internet, or that governments outsourcing censorship to
third-party ``cut-outs'' or front groups is justified even though the
Supreme Court has called it ``axiomatic'' that the Government cannot
facilitate private parties violating the Constitution on its behalf.
Still other justices may claim that the First Amendment requires a very
high bar for Government coercion of private actors, even though the
First Amendment prohibits Government limitations on freedom of speech
broadly, not just through coercion.
As such, the importance of this DHS oversight committee in
protecting our freedom of speech is essential.
Setting aside the clear and present threat that DHS poses to our
first and most fundamental freedom, there is another problem related to
DHS's censorship activities, and that's the ways in which it distracts
from and thus undermines our Nation's cybersecurity.
As this committee knows well, the internet is more essential than
any other piece of America's infrastructure because every major aspect
of civilization depends upon it, including our electrical grids, our
transportation networks, and our policing and security systems. If
cyber attacks take down or undermine the internet, the consequences
could be catastrophic.
Given that, does this committee believe it makes sense for the head
of the DHS's so-called ``Cybersecurity and Information Security
Agency,'' CISA, to be involved in policing what people say, hear, and
think?
Set aside for a moment the Orwellian aspects of CISA's efforts at
mind control. What do we think the consequences could be of CISA taking
its eye off the cybersecurity ball so that it can crusade with Stanford
interns against wrongthink? Should we be able to sleep soundly at night
knowing that CISA is focused on the problem of people being wrong on
the internet rather than on China, Russia, Iran, and other malicious
actors seeking to harm American businesses, Government agencies, and
our citizens?
Over the last 100 years, the Supreme Court created a tiny number of
exceptions to the radical commitment to freedom of speech enshrined in
our Constitution. Nobody questions the need for governments to fight
fraud, child exploitation, and the immediate incitement of violence.
What's at stake here is our fundamental freedom to express our
views on controversial social and political issues without fear of
Government censorship. CISA drifted so far from its mission that it
slid down the slipperiest slope in American political life.
I believe this dramatic situation requires the abolition of CISA.
If it is doing good cybersecurity work, then it should be placed under
the supervision of different leadership at a different agency free from
the awful and unlawful behaviors of the last 3 years.
However, I am also a realist and recognize that guardrails may be
all that can be imposed. If that is the direction in which this
committee chooses to go, then I would encourage very bright lines
between cybersecurity and ``cognitive security.'' While censorship
advocates have tried to blur that line, it is, in reality, quite clear
to everyone what constitutes security and what constitutes censorship.
Nonetheless, something must be done to make clear, in DHS-CISA's
mandate, that the agency recognizes the distinction and will never
again transgress its mandate in violation of our Constitution.
The turning against the American people of counterterrorism tactics
once reserved for foreign enemies should terrify all of us and inspire
a clear statement that never again shall our military, intelligence,
and law enforcement guardians engage in such a recklessly ideological
and partisan ``warfare'' against civilians.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Shellenberger.
I now recognize Mr. Chenoweth for his 5 minutes for his
opening statements.

STATEMENT OF MARK CHENOWETH, PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNSEL, NEW
CIVIL LIBERTIES ALLIANCE

Mr. Chenoweth. Good afternoon, Chairman Bishop, Ranking
Member Ivey, Members, and guests.
My name is Mark Chenoweth, and I'm the president of the New
Civil Liberties Alliance, a nonpartisan, nonprofit civil rights
group founded by Professor Philip Hamburger of Columbia Law
School to fight unlawful administrative power. NCLA fills the
void left by legacy civil liberties groups that no longer care
about Government-directed censorship. NCLA's motto is, let
judges judge, let legislators legislate, and don't let
bureaucrats do either. We champion the people's right to be
governed by representatives they pick, and Congress' job to
write the laws.
Congress never authorized the administrative state
censorship we are discussing today. My written testimony
explains NCLA's public interest litigation combating social
media censorship on behalf of four individuals in the Murthy v.
Missouri Supreme Court case. But I'm here today to sound the
alarm on four legal principles Congress must uphold to stop the
rampant censorship by DHS, CISA, and multiple other Federal
agencies.
First, the Government is not the arbiter of truth. As
Justice Robert Jackson observed, the very purpose of the First
Amendment is to foreclose public authority from assuming a
guardianship of the public mind. Every person must be his own
watchman for truth, because the forefathers did not trust any
government to separate true from the false. During the COVID-19
pandemic, the Government proved unable to uphold truth. It
peddled falsehoods that natural immunity does not exist to
COVID-19, that vaccine immunity is superior to natural
immunity, and that vaccines would stop the transmission of the
virus. The Government then suppressed dissenting voices on
Twitter, Facebook, and elsewhere who dared to express rational,
scientifically accurate views on COVID-19 and the vaccines.
Second, the First Amendment protects even false speech.
Much of the suppressed COVID speech was true, but in U.S. v.
Alvarez the Supreme Court held: False statements as a general
rule are not beyond Constitutional protection. Were the court
to hold that the interest in truthful discourse alone is
sufficient to sustain a ban on speech, it would give Government
a broad sensorial power unprecedented in this court's cases or
in our Constitutional tradition. This means labeling disfavored
speech as misinformation, disinformation, or malformation does
not strip it of First Amendment protection.
Third, the Government may not do indirectly what the First
Amendment forbids it from doing directly. It is axiomatic,
according to the Supreme Court, Norwood v. Harrison, 1973, that
the Government may not induce, encourage, or promote private
persons to accomplish what it is Constitutionally forbidden to
accomplish. The bully pulpit does not include the power to
harangue social media platforms to remove the lawful speech of
third parties. When the Government coerces or pressures a
company with threats, and the company responds by censoring
private individuals, that is unlawful state action. But if the
Government writes and tests software to effectively monitor and
shut down disfavored speech, and then turns that over to
private actors to run the software that censors the speech,
that is also forbidden state action. It doesn't matter that
it's indirect. The First Amendment bar is much lower.
Fourth, the First Amendment term abridging supplies the
test to determine when the Government has violated the right to
free speech. The only question for the courts is whether the
Government's conduct has led to the abridging, that is the
diminishing of speech. The test is not coercion, it is not
whether something was compelled, it's not pressure, it's not
entanglement, it's abridging. The First Amendment prohibits
Government from abridging speech, which contrasts with the
narrower term prohibiting in the free exercise clause, as my
written testimony, citing Professor Hamburger, explains.
I will close with three examples that illustrate the scope
of the problem with Government-led censorship through CISA
switchboarding, and other practices. First, the Virality
Project flagged Harvard Medical School epidemiologist Martin
Kulldorff's tweet, which stated ``thinking that everyone must
be vaccinated is as scientifically flawed as thinking that
nobody should. Covid vaccines are important for older, high-
risk people and their caretakers. Those with prior natural
infection do not need it, nor children.'' This tweet was
censored and his account flagged.
Second, the Virality Project wrote a report in which
another NCLA client, Bri Dressen, was identified as a purveyor
of misinformation for discussing the adverse, devastating
effects she personally suffered from the AstraZeneca vaccine
after she volunteered for a vaccine trial, even though NIH
itself had diagnosed her as vaccine-injured. In NCLA's Dressen
v. Flaherty case, we are suing the Government for shutting down
Bri's support groups for vaccine-injured individuals. These are
private on-line groups where vaccine-injured people can turn
for emotional support. When their support groups were deleted,
group members failed to get assistance they could have gotten
that would have led to better treatments for them. At least one
committed suicide. This is private speech we're talking about
among already-vaccinated people who want to converse with each
other and share their stories. They will not promote vaccine
hesitancy to the general public because the speech occurs in
private forums. And yet the Government is still suppressing
that speech as we sit here. This is insanity.
Third, White House pressure led the lab leak theory to be
censored on social media. When Meta head of global affairs,
Nick Clegg, asked a colleague why the story had been censored
on Facebook, the colleague replied, ``because we were under
pressure from the administration and others to do more'', and
that ``we shouldn't have done it''. Meta also acknowledged
changing its policies regarding content discussing adverse
vaccine events to avoid retaliation from this White House.
In some, these responses to dissenting COVID-19 views show
the dangers of Government censorship. The Government's conduct
violated censored Americans First Amendment rights, as well as
the rights of other Americans to listen and learn from those
perspectives and to draw their own conclusions about their
health, their vote, and the truth.
This committee must force the Executive branch to correct
course before it completely obliterates the First Amendment.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chenoweth follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mark Chenoweth
December 13, 2023
Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Ivey, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for inviting my testimony.
introduction
The New Civil Liberties Alliance is a nonpartisan, nonprofit civil
rights organization founded by prominent legal scholar Philip
Hamburger, the Maurice and Hilda Friedman Professor of Law at Columbia
Law School in New York City, to protect Constitutional freedoms from
violations by the administrative state. Professor Hamburger is among
the Nation's foremost First Amendment scholars, and his brilliant
scholarship informs the cases that NCLA pursues and the arguments that
NCLA makes in those cases on behalf of our clients. NCLA's public-
interest litigation and other pro bono advocacy strive to tame the
unlawful power of State and Federal agencies and to foster a new civil
liberties movement that will help restore Americans' fundamental
rights. NCLA views the administrative state as an especially serious
threat to Constitutional freedoms. No other development in contemporary
American law denies more rights to more Americans.
The ``civil liberties'' of the organization's name include rights
at least as old as the U.S. Constitution itself, such as freedom of
speech, jury trial, due process of law, the right to be tried in front
of an impartial and independent judge, and the right to live under laws
made by the Nation's elected lawmakers through Constitutionally-
prescribed channels. Yet these selfsame rights are also very
contemporary--and in dire need of renewed vindication--precisely
because Congress, Federal administrative agencies, and even sometimes
the courts have neglected them for so long. NCLA aims to defend civil
liberties--primarily by asserting Constitutional constraints on the
administrative state. Although Americans still enjoy the shell of their
Republic, there has developed within it a very different sort of
government--a type, in fact, that the Constitution was designed to
prevent. This un-Constitutional administrative state within the
Constitution's United States is the focus of NCLA's concern. NCLA urges
Americans to recognize the administrative threat and join our civil
liberties movement against it.
From the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the New Civil Liberties
Alliance has been dismayed at the widespread and brazen violation of
Americans' civil liberties by all levels of government in the United
States. It's as though officials think the U.S. Constitution does not
apply in times of emergency when, in fact, it is during such times of
crisis that the Constitution's protections for individual rights are of
paramount importance. NCLA's litigators have been at the forefront of
the battles against illegal lockdowns, the unlawful Nation-wide
eviction moratorium, and unconscionable vaccine mandates for university
employees and students, Federal employees, Federal contractors, and
others. Particularly with reference to vaccine mandates, NCLA adopted
the position that natural immunity to COVID-19 is a real phenomenon and
that vaccines are not necessarily appropriate--and certainly should not
be mandated--for individuals who have recovered from COVID-19 and have
antibodies against the virus, which can be measured through antibody
testing. NCLA has also argued that Federal law prohibits forcing anyone
outside the military (and then only when ordered by the Commander-in-
Chief) to take a vaccine that has only been approved under Emergency
Use Authorization. We have also argued that it is a fundamental
violation of personal liberty to be forced to accept an experimental
vaccine as a condition of maintaining employment, especially public
employment by a State or Federal agency or State university.
In contrast, the Federal Government peddled the falsehoods that
natural immunity does not exist to COVID-19, that vaccine immunity is
superior to natural immunity, that lockdowns were an effective
mitigation strategy, that everyone needs the vaccine, that the COVID-19
vaccines would stop transmission of the virus, that masks are effective
in preventing transmission of the virus, that people hospitalized with
COVID-19 need to be intubated, that EUA vaccines can be mandated for
Federal employees, that the Wuhan lab was not the origin of the COVID-
19 virus, and so forth. Eventually, the Federal Government came to its
collective senses and backed away from propagating most of these
falsehoods. It was forced to abandon some of them after courts ruled
against the Government. Some of them persist today. However, thanks in
part to NCLA's efforts, at least the Government now admits that natural
immunity to COVID-19 exists for some period of time among those who
have recovered from the virus.
To make matters worse, not only did the Federal Government peddle
falsehoods during the pandemic, but it also suppressed dissenting
voices in the public square on Twitter, Facebook, and elsewhere, who
dared to express rational and scientifically accurate views about the
COVID-19 virus and the vaccines authorized for emergency use in
response to it. And it did so in blatant violation of the First
Amendment. That is how NCLA first became aware of the vast and shocking
censorship problem infecting the Federal Government today: our clients
were censored for their views about COVID-19 and related issues.
We can come back to that, but first let's explore the legal
principles at stake here and the scope of the problem as it pertains to
the Department of Homeland Security.
legal principles
NCLA's most prominent role to date in fighting against unlawful
Federal censorship has been through our participation representing the
individual plaintiffs in the Missouri v. Biden case, now pending at the
U.S. Supreme Court under the name Murthy v. Missouri. The U.S. District
Court for the Western District of Louisiana, which had the opportunity
to look at all of the (admittedly still limited) discovery in this case
before ruling, pronounced on the Fourth of July this year that ``the
present case arguably involves the most massive attack against free
speech in United States' history.'' ``Although this case is still
relatively young, and at this stage the Court is only examining it in
terms of Plaintiffs' likelihood of success on the merits, the evidence
produced thus far depicts an almost dystopian scenario. During the
COVID-19 pandemic, a period perhaps best characterized by widespread
doubt and uncertainty, the U.S. Government seems to have assumed a role
similar to an Orwellian `Ministry of Truth.' ''
On expedited appeal of that decision, the U.S. Court of Appeals for
the Fifth Circuit, after noting that the U.S. Supreme Court has been
reluctant to expand state-action doctrine, said: ``[W]e do not take our
decision today lightly. But, the Supreme Court has rarely been faced
with a coordinated campaign of this magnitude orchestrated by Federal
officials that jeopardized a fundamental aspect of American life.
Therefore, the district court was correct in its assessment--
``unrelenting pressure'' from certain Government officials likely ``had
the intended result of suppressing millions of protected free speech
postings by American citizens.''
As a reminder to this body, the First Amendment says, that
``Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion,
or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of
speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to
assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.''
Under the First Amendment, ``government has no power to restrict
expression because of its message, its ideas, its subject matter, or
its content.'' Ashcroft v. ACLU, 535 U.S. 564, 573 (2002). This
``profound'' commitment to free speech is even more necessary when the
debate may include critical or sharp attacks on Government or its
policies. See NY Times v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254, 270 (1964). And, of
course, it is ``axiomatic'' that the Government may not ``induce,
encourage, or promote private persons to accomplish what it is
constitutionally forbidden to accomplish.'' Norwood v. Harrison, 431
U.S. 455, 465 (1973). So, just as the Fourth Amendment does not permit
a police officer to ask a landlord to conduct an unconstitutional
search on behalf of that officer, so too the First Amendment does not
permit Government officials to use third-party companies or platforms
to censor lawful free speech indirectly that the Government itself
would be prohibited from regulating directly. If anything, given the
`abridging' language, the First Amendment protects against such
machinations even more than the Fourth Amendment.
Again, the Government cannot do indirectly through third parties
what it cannot do directly. Congress must hold to that line. Otherwise,
free speech is a dead letter, because the Executive branch has
countless ways of influencing private parties to suppress their
speech--as we have seen in Missouri v. Biden. Indeed, this kind of soft
power exercised through third parties may be worse in the sense that it
is harder to fight, harder to prove, and easier for the Government to
get away with. Indeed, I daresay there are some in this room--on both
sides of the aisle--who brush away the monumental efforts of the Biden
administration to squelch speech on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and
other social media sites as merely the actions of private companies.
Not so. When the Government coerces or pressures a company with
inducements or threats and the company responds by crushing private
individuals, that is State action, and the First Amendment forbids it.
Or when the Government has entangled its practices with a private
company to where the company is relying on the Government to identify
individuals and accounts to be censored, the First Amendment forbids
that too. Or, if the Government writes and tests software to
effectively monitor and shut down speech that the Government does not
like and then turns that over to private operators to run the software
program and execute the censorship it identifies, that is still state
action.
Is every person who was ever canceled on social media a victim of
state action? Maybe not, but without discovery into the Government's
unprecedented practices, NCLA and our co-counsel would never have
uncovered how wide-spread this practice has been and how far up the
chain of command it goes. We know the background level of censorship
these companies engaged in before January 2021, especially Twitter
given the disclosures of the Twitter files. And we know what they did
in response to Government pressure in terms of ramping up the amount of
censorship they were doing. So, there is plenty of evidence here to
ascertain that this censorship was not conducted as independent,
private action.
But even the Fifth Circuit's test for Government action here is
flawed. We don't need and should not invent a judicial standard for
adjudging infringements on free speech. The Constitution already
provides the standard. The only question for the courts is whether the
Government's conduct has led to the ``abridging'' of speech. That is
what the First Amendment's text proscribes. Not coercion. Not pressure.
Not entanglement. Abridgment. And that is a very low bar. The First
Amendment prohibits Government from ``abridging'' freedom of speech
(contrasted with prohibited in the context of religion).
The Bill of Rights' evolution demonstrates that the Framers
purposefully decided to use the term ``abridging'' which is a different
term than ``prohibiting'' which is used in the Free Exercise Clause.
This was not a mere attempt to create linguistic variety. See
Hamburger, Courting Censorship,--COLUMBIA L. J at 39. An earlier draft
of what would become the First Amendment separated the guarantees to
free exercise of religion and free speech into two adjacent paragraphs,
using the term ``infringe'' to designate unlawful Government conduct in
both contexts. Id. (citing House Committee Report (July 28, 1789),
CREATING THE BILL OF RIGHTS: THE DOCUMENTARY RECORD FROM THE FIRST
FEDERAL CONGRESS, 30 ed., Helen E. Veit, Kenneth R. Bowling, and
Charlene Bangs Bickford (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press 1991)).
The two paragraphs were combined in a subsequent iteration, which used
``prohibit'' in the context of proscribed Government conduct with
respect to free exercise of religion, and ``abridge'' for speech. Id.
As Professor Hamburger writes: ``This contrast is revealing. An
action prohibiting is one that involves coercion--in the sense of
government force or at least the threat of it. So, when the First
Amendment distinguishes abridging and prohibiting, it tells us
something important. A law can abridge the freedom of speech, or the
press, without prohibiting or otherwise coercively assaulting it.'' See
Hamburger, Courting Censorship,--COLUMBIA L. J at 39. In other words,
the Framers' conscious choice to use the terms ``abridging'' in the
speech context and ``prohibiting'' in the religion context establishes
that they sought to prevent Government from diminishing free speech to
any extent. That means any action that the Government takes to impede
free speech violates the First Amendment. By contrast, when it comes to
religion, the Government's conduct must effectively ``forbid'' the free
exercise, a much more severe action and a higher bar to clear.
Finally, in terms of legal principles, recognize that the Supreme
Court has held that even ``false statements, as a general rule'' are
not ``beyond Constitutional protection.'' United States v. Alvarez, 567
U.S. 709, 718 (2012). Thus, merely labeling disfavored speech as
``disinformation,'' ``misinformation,'' or ``mal-information'' does not
strip it of First Amendment protection. Of course even under the
Government's own definitions, misinformation, disinformation, and
malinformation are not necessarily false speech--often just
inconvenient or unpleasant truthful speech.
But the court has explained that `` . . . some false statements are
inevitable if there is to be an open and vigorous expression of views
in public and private conversation, expression the First Amendment
seeks to guarantee.'' Id. (quoting United States v. Stevens, 559 U.S.
460, 470 (2010)). ``Were the Court to hold that the interest in
truthful discourse alone is sufficient to sustain a ban on speech . . .
it would give Government a broad censorial power unprecedented in this
Court's cases or in our Constitutional tradition. The mere potential
for the exercise of that power casts a chill, a chill the First
Amendment cannot permit if free speech, thought, and discourse are to
remain a foundation of our freedom.'' Id. at 723.
``The theory of our Constitution is `that the best test of truth is
the power of the thought to get itself accepted in the competition of
the market.' '' Id. at 728 (quoting Abrams v. United States, 250 U.S.
616, 630 (1919) (Holmes, J., dissenting)). ``The First Amendment itself
ensures the right to respond to speech we do not like, and for good
reason. Freedom of Speech and thought flows [sic] not from the
beneficence of the state but from the inalienable rights of the person.
And suppression of speech by the government can make exposure of
falsity more difficult, not less so. Society has the right and civic
duty to engage in open, dynamic, rational discourse. These ends are not
well served when the Government seeks to orchestrate public discussion
through content-based mandates.'' Id. at 728.
background on cisa and dhs
Founded in 2018, CISA, a component of DHS, was initially created to
protect ``critical infrastructure'' (information technology,
telecommunications, chemical, transportation systems, emergency
services, postal and shipping) from cybersecurity threats.\1\ It
rapidly expanded its mission to combat foreign ``disinformation.'' See,
e.g., CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE SEC. AGENCY, #PROTECT2020
STRATEGIC PLAN, at 20 (2020), https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/ESI_Strategic_Plan_FINAL_2-7-20_508.pdf. That soon morphed
into an attempt to control ``cognitive infrastructure'' in the context
of elections, a term coined by Jen Easterly, former CISA director. See
Maggie Miller, Cyber agency beefing up disinformation, misinformation
team, THE HILL (Nov. 10, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See https://judiciary.house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/republicans-
judiciary.house.gov/files/evo-media-document/cisa-staff-report6-26-
23.pdf at 5 (citing 6 U.S. Code  652).
42 U.S.C. 5195c(e): Defines ``critical infrastructure'' to mean
``systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so vital to the
United States that the incapacity or destruction of such systems and
assets would have a debilitating impact on security, national economic
security, national public health or safety, or any combination of those
matters.'' CISA https://www.cisa.gov/topics/critical-infrastructure-
security-and-resilience.
6 U.S.C.  650 Defines: ``cybersecurity risk'' to mean threats to
and vulnerabilities of information or information systems and any
related consequences caused by or resulting from unauthorized access,
use, disclosure, degradation, disruption, modification, or destruction
of such information or information systems, including such related
consequences caused by an act of terrorism;
And defines ``cybersecurity threat'' as ``an action, not protected
by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, on or
through an information system that may result in an unauthorized effort
to adversely impact the security, availability, confidentiality, or
integrity of an information system or information that is stored on,
processed by, or transiting an information system'' (emphasis added).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Easterly's ``cognitive infrastructure'' spin conflicts with the
definition of ``election infrastructure'' the then-DHS Secretary Jeh
Johnson adopted in January 2017 when he designated election
infrastructure as ``a critical infrastructure subsector:'' ``By
`election infrastructure,' we mean storage facilities, polling places,
and centralized vote tabulations locations used to support the election
process, and information and communications technology to include voter
registration databases, voting machines, and other systems to manage
the election process and report and display results on behalf of State
and local governments. https://toresays.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/
JohnsonStatement-ElectionInfrastructure.pdf.
So, originally the term meant policing ``misinformation'' on social
media, first about elections, but that soon crept into other areas too,
including Covid (Easterly said, quoted in Hill article above: ``One
could argue we're in the business of critical infrastructure, and the
most critical infrastructure is our cognitive infrastructure, so
building that resilience to misinformation and disinformation, I think,
is incredibly important[.]'').
In June 2021, DHS created the CISA Cybersecurity Advisory
Committee, which in turn established the ``MDM [misinformation/
disinformation/malinformation] subcommittee].''\2\ See, e.g., CISA
Cybersecurity Advisory Committee, Dec. 6, 2022 Meeting Summary Closed
Session at 3. This committee (since disbanded) brought together
government, big tech, and academic ``misinformation'' experts,
including Kate Starbird from the University of Washington and Renee
DiResta from Stanford. One of the committee's recommendations was that
``CISA should approach the [misinformation and disinformation] problem
with the entire information ecosystem in view. This includes social
media platforms of all sizes, mainstream media, cable news,
hyperpartisan media, talk radio, and other on-line resources.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Definitions: ``misinformation'' means false information that
the disseminator thinks is true; ``disinformation'' is false
information that the disseminator knows is false; and
``malinformation'' is true information that ``lacks context.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISA's mission expanded even further outside its original purview:
internal documents providing updates say, for example, that CISA is
``bringing on staff to address MDM related to the pandemic.''\3\ By
2022, the CISA apparently believed its mission was ``to strengthen the
security and resilience of the Nation's critical functions,'' or at
least CISA's CSAC (Cybersecurity Advisory Committee) claimed that was
CISA's mission.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See https://judiciary.house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/republicans-
judiciary.house.gov/files/evo-media-document/cisa-staff-report-6-26-
23.pdf at 16.
\4\ https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publications/
June%202022%20CSAC%20Recom-mendations%20%E2%80%93%20MDM_0.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And believing CISA had a mandate to ``strengthen the security and
resilience of the Nation's critical functions,'' CISA CSAC proposed
CISA focus on ``MD that risks undermining critical functions of
American society including: (i) MD that suppresses election
participation or falsely undermines confidence in election procedures
and outcomes; (ii) MD that undermines critical functions carried out by
other key democratic institutions, such as the courts, or by other
sectors such as the financial system, or public health measures; (iii)
MD that promotes or provokes violence against key infrastructure or the
public; and (iv) MD that undermines effective responses to mass
emergencies or disaster events.''\5\ Any attempt to limit CISA's
purview to foreign actors by now had evaporated--the agency was
explicit that it was involved in identifying domestic actors.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publications/
June%202022%20CSAC%20Recom- mendations%20%E2%80%93%20MDM_0.pdf.
\6\ See https://judiciary.house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/republicans-
judiciary.house.gov/files/evo-media-document/cisa-staff-report6-26-
23.pdf at 13.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
cisa's work with third parties \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Note: the Fifth Circuit reversed the district court's
injunction that covered these third parties. NCLA is asking the Supreme
Court to reverse the Fifth Circuit on this point.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISA worked with third parties on a frequent basis, laundering the
censorship through those third parties such as the Election Integrity
Partnership (EIP) and the Virality Project (VP). Federal officials at
CISA and GEC, and State officials through CISA funded EI-ISAC, work in
close collaboration with the Stanford Internet Observatory (DiResta's
organization) and other nonprofits.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See Proposed Findings of Fact at 285, Dkt. 212-3, Missouri v.
Biden, (No. 3:22-cv-1213) (W.D. La 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moreover, it has recently come to light that DHS/CISA set up the
EIP.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See Alex Gutentag and Michael Shellenberger, New Documents
Reveal US Department of Homeland Security Conspiracy to Violate First
Amendment and Interfere in Elections (Nov. 7, 2023), https://
public.substack.com/p/new-documents-reveal-us-department.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISA engaged in ``switchboarding'': CISA officials forwarded
content flagged by third parties, especially local election officials,
to the social media companies, either explicitly asking that such
material be removed, or implying that it should be.\10\ The Surgeon
General's Office and other Federal officials likewise collaborated
closely with the Stanford Internet Observatory's Virality Project. Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ See https://judiciary.house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/
republicans-judiciary.house.gov/files/evo-media-document/cisa-staff-
report6-26-23.pdf at 12.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Stanford Internet Observatory and others had portal systems,
through which they would report to social media companies posts that
they thought contained ``misinformation.'' The companies didn't always
remove posts that SIO and other third-party groups flagged, but there
was a high compliance rate. As an example, Virality Project flagged one
of NCLA client Martin Kulldorff's tweets (which stated: ``Thinking that
everyone must be vaccinated is as scientifically flawed as thinking
that nobody should. COVID vaccines are important for older high-risk
people, and their care-takers. Those with prior natural infection do
not need it. Nor children.''). This tweet was censored, and Kulldorff's
account was flagged as one that should be watched.
The Virality Project also wrote a report in which another NCLA
client, Brianne Dressen, was identified as a purveyor of
``misinformation'' for discussing the adverse effects she suffered from
the Astra Zeneca vaccine (following her participation in a vaccine
trial) even though the NIH itself had diagnosed her as vaccine injured.
the u.s. court of appeals for the fifth circuit's findings in missouri
v. biden with respect to cisa's involvement in social media censorship
\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Whether or not CISA appeared to have violated the First
Amendment was the main issue upon which we requested reconsideration in
the Fifth Circuit, and upon which the Fifth Circuit granted and
extended the injunction to CISA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Fifth Circuit held that the evidence showed ``CISA's role went
beyond mere information sharing. Like the CDC for Covid-related claims,
CISA told the platforms whether certain election-related claims were
true or false. CISA's actions apparently led to moderation policies
being altered and content being removed or demoted by the recipient
platforms.'' Missouri v. Biden, 83 F.4th 350, 365 (5th Cir. 2023)
(decision after reconsideration). ``CISA also likely violated the First
Amendment.'' Id. at 391. CISA was a ``primary facilitator'' of the
FBI's interactions with the social media platforms and worked in close
coordination with the FBI to push the platforms to change their
moderation policies to cover ``hack and leak'' content.
CISA's switchboarding operations were more than merely relaying
information--it used frequent interactions with social media platforms
to push them to adopt more restrictive policies on censoring election-
related speech. CISA told the platforms whether the content they had
switchboarded was true or false--the platforms' censorship decisions
``were made under policies that CISA has pressured them into adopting
and based on CISA's determination of the veracity of the flagged
information.''
ncla's clients
The questions presented in the Murthy v. Missouri case are:
(1) Whether respondents have Article III standing;
(2) Whether the Government's challenged conduct transformed private
social-media companies' content-moderation decisions into state
action and violated respondents' First Am. rights; and
(3) Whether the terms and breadth of the preliminary injunction are
proper.
NCLA's clients in the Missouri v. Biden litigation are Dr. Jay
Bhattacharya, Dr. Martin Kulldorff, Dr. Aaron Kheriaty, and Ms. Jill
Hines. Their speech has revolved around the extent to which the
Government's public health and public policy advice about COVID-19 is
sound. Drs. Bhattacharya and Kulldorff were co-authors and signatories
to the Great Barrington Declaration. They opposed lockdowns. Other
speech included efforts to say that natural immunity is real, efforts
to say that not every category of the populace needs the vaccine,
efforts to oppose forced vaccination, efforts to say that natural
immunity provides equal or greater protection than the vaccine.
Note that several examples of suppressed speech were neither
misinformation, disinformation, nor even malinformation. Indeed, the
Government now admits that natural immunity exists and is effective
against reinfection with COVID-19 for at least as long as the vaccine,
though the Government still wants those folks vaccinated, saying that
there is some marginal benefit to them. Note as well that several of
the Government's false narratives were allowed to propagate widely on
social media unrefuted. For example, the narrative against natural
immunity and the narrative refuting that the Wuhan Institute of
Virology was the source of the virus (via a leak from the lab)
persisted.
We have only been able to obtain limited discovery in the Murthy v.
Missouri case because we are still at the preliminary injunction phase
of litigation. The Supreme Court may or may not decide that we have
enough discovery to establish connections to the extent its precedents
will demand. That is in part because the Court might demand a coercion
or significant encouragement standard that is higher than the
``abridging'' standard set by the First Amendment itself. Such a
standard would not be consistent with either the text of the First
Amendment or jurisprudence in the area, and it would have disastrous,
broad implications for Americans' First Amendment speech rights.
If these plaintiffs are unable to succeed, it is hard to envision
how future litigants will do so. Consider first that in this case there
was a district court judge who was willing to order a modicum of pre-
injunction discovery. Second, we were able to turn up a fair bit of
good discovery and identify at least some of the correct Government
officials to seek information from--though the Government lied to us
about the scope and identity of relevant officials. Third, we
discovered this dishonesty because we also obtained third-party
discovery from Facebook, which turned over dozens more emails and
similar communications with Government officials that the Government's
initial response to discovery had omitted. Fourth, we also were able to
rely on the Twitter Files to some extent to find examples of
censorship. That material only became available because Elon Musk
bought Twitter and for no other reason. Fifth, we were able to rely on
the investigative journalism work of Michael Shellenberger, Matt
Taibbi, and others, who combed through the Twitter files and made some
relevant information public. Finally, Congress used its oversight
capacity to issue subpoenas that turned up some additional information.
This came rather late in the game, so it has not been as beneficial as
it would have been if it had come earlier, but it is still useful to
have.
To see how difficult these cases are to bring and win, consider
that NCLA already lost a very similar case at the circuit court level,
which we are still appealing. In the Sixth Circuit, we filed suit on
behalf of three clients--Mark Changizi, Michael Senger, and Daniel
Kotzin--whose messages were taken down from Twitter and in one instance
our client was kicked off Twitter entirely. But the panel ruled against
our clients on standing, saying that they could not trace their harm to
Government conduct. In other words, the complaint supposedly did not
state enough facts to meet the bare minimum necessary to allege
Government wrongdoing.
The district court in that case had denied us any discovery. The
Court of Appeals then limited itself to the facts in the complaint,
even though many more facts had come out by the time of the briefing on
appeal and the oral argument. The Sixth Circuit, without reaching the
merits of the First Amendment issues in the case, held that we had not
met the minimum pleading standards to even survive a motion to dismiss.
The court also said that our allegations against the Government
were--and I quote--``not phantasmagoric'' which is a funny thing to say
since all of our allegations were facts provable and proved from
discovery obtained (albeit later) in the Missouri v. Biden litigation.
Yet that was not enough for a panel in the Sixth circuit to even allow
our clients to survive a motion to dismiss. Under such circumstances,
where courts are willing to put blinders on to well-established facts,
it is hard to see how other plaintiffs will be able to make any headway
against Government censorship. Under this standard, most people being
censored would never be able to plead their allegations with the degree
of specificity apparently required to survive a motion to dismiss.
Several of the modes of censorship used against our clients are
surreptitious; that is, our clients did not even know they were being
censored in some cases or on some platforms for a long time. They
certainly were unaware of the Government's insidious involvement in
their censorship, which for the most part was conducted via backdoor
channels, behind closed doors. Thus, the Government has been able to
evade democratic accountability for Federal conduct that violates core
First Amendment-protected activity. You may wonder how extensive this
censorship has really been. If so, recognize that information taken
down has included: (1) known and open parody accounts; (2) information
posted by experts from the Nation's top medical schools and
universities; (3) In our Dressen v. Flaherty case, the Government
stooped so low as to shut down support groups for vaccine-injured
individuals. These are the equivalent of cancer support groups, private
on-line groups where people can go for emotional support. Some people
kicked off of these platforms have committed suicide and/or failed to
get assistance (or failed to learn of better medical protocols) that
could have led to better outcomes for them sooner. The Government wants
people's personal reports of their own symptoms and experience, the
most personal of truths, taken down. This is essentially private speech
among people who want to engage in consensual speech with each other
(i.e., conversation), and it is speech occurring among already-
vaccinated people who in reality had no chance of promoting vaccine
hesitancy to the general public because the speech occurred in private
forums. And yet even that was taken down. This is censorship to the nth
degree.
recommendations
In considering solutions to the Federal censorship conduct problems
at DHS, CISA, and across the Federal Government, Congress needs to
realize that there is very little recognition among the offending
officials that they are blatantly violating the First Amendment. About
the only recognition comes in those places where officials (mistakenly)
seem to think that orchestrating censorship through third parties
somehow insulates it from violating the First Amendment. Keeping that
in mind, Congress should demand better education of front-line
Executive branch officials about their Constitutional obligations and
responsibilities. These officials who requested the takedown of lawful
speech had an independent duty to uphold the First Amendment, which
they ignored.
(1) If this censorship were being done by State officials,
censorship victims could sue under Sec. 1983 for deprivation of
their civil rights. Congress could create a Federal cause of
action akin to Sec. 1983 for victims of censorship to sue
Federal officials who violate their First Amendment rights.
(2) Congress should outright forbid anyone in the Executive branch
or Legislative branch from ever requesting lawful speech to be
taken down.
(3) Where the Federal Government decides to request speech to be
taken down, because it is unlawful speech--and NOT just because
it violates a platform's internal policies--those requests
should only be made where they are transparent, immediately
public, and made by a named individual in the Federal
Government who can be held responsible for that decision by
Congress and the censored individual(s).
conclusion
The censorship discussed here involved many topics, including
election-related speech like the Hunter Biden laptop and climate
change-related speech. The last of these was not part of the
preliminary injunction as discovery was not taken at the preliminary
injunction stage to support the complaint's claims on that topic.
Still, the debate over nearly all things related to COVID-19 provides a
perfect case study for Americans to realize the danger that exists when
the Government pushes for the censorship of dissenting views. Without
the Government's participation, it is doubtful that the media would
have uniformly censored those stories, and the censorship gravely
injured Americans' ability to make important decisions regarding their
health and the health of their families. We have evidence, in the form
of email exchanges, that the social media companies were caving to
pressure from Government when they censored certain topics. For
instance, as the Facebook Files demonstrated, the lab leak theory was
censored on social media due to pressure from the White House. Meta
Head of Global Affairs, Nick Clegg, asked a colleague in charge of
content policy why the story had been censored, and the colleague
responded, ``Because we were under pressure from the [Biden]
administration and others to do more'' and that ``we shouldn't have
done it.'' Meta acknowledged changing its policies regarding content
discussing adverse events of the vaccine to avoid retaliation from the
White House.
This is conduct that violates the First Amendment rights of
censored Americans--as well as the rights of every other American to
listen to and learn from those censored perspectives to draw their own
conclusions about the truth. As Justice Robert Jackson famously said in
the West Virginia v. Barnette case: ``If there is any fixed star in our
Constitutional constellation, it is that no official, high or petty,
can prescribe what shall be orthodox in politics, nationalism,
religion, or other matters of opinion or force citizens to confess by
word or act their faith therein.'' West Virginia State Board of
Education v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624 (1943).
Less famously, as Justice Jackson noted 2 years later in Thomas v.
Collins, ``The very purpose of the First Amendment is to foreclose
public authority from assuming a guardianship of the public mind
through regulating the press, speech, and religion. In this field,
every person must be his own watchman for truth, because the
forefathers did not trust any government to separate the true from the
false for us.'' Today's Federal Government has strayed far from this
wise and Constitutionally-required path. I hope that this committee
will ensure that the Executive branch corrects course.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*[Note.--Due to length, the witnesses' supporting documents have
been retained in committee files.]

Chairman Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chenoweth. I now recognize
Mr. Abdo for his 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALEX ABDO, LITIGATION DIRECTOR, KNIGHT FIRST
AMENDMENT INSTITUTE, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY

Mr. Abdo. Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Ivey, and Members
of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify
today.
My name is Alex Abdo, and I'm the litigation director of
the Knight First Amendment Institute at Columbia University.
The topic that this subcommittee has been exploring on the
relationship between Government and social media platforms is
an important one, in large part because it implicates many
competing First Amendment interests. I'd like to offer several
observations to clarify the Constitutional principles that
should guide this subcommittee's work.
First, as the Supreme Court held 60 years ago in Bantam
Books v. Sullivan, the First Amendment forbids the Government
from coercing private actors into silencing disfavored speech.
That decision was correct because coercion, by definition,
overrides the ability of people to decide for themselves what
to say, what to listen to, and what communities to join. This
rule is important not only in protecting individuals, but also
in protecting the social media platforms, which now play a
vital role in hosting and curating the speech of millions of
people. The communities they create reflect their own
expressive decisions, as well as the expressive and
associational preferences of their users. Outside of very
narrow exceptions, it would be inconsistent with the principle
of self-government to allow officials to dictate the speech
individuals may create and consume in these on-line
communities, whether directly through official sanction or
indirectly through official coercion.
Second, while the First Amendment forbids the Government
from coercing private actors into suppressing speech, it does
not preclude the Government from trying to persuade private
actors to embrace its views. A democratically-elected
government must have the power to govern, and an indispensable
tool in governing is attempting to galvanize public opinion. As
the Supreme Court reaffirmed just a few years ago, governing
necessarily involves taking a particular viewpoint and
rejecting others. It is not easy to imagine, the court wrote,
how government could function if it could not express its
views. The public also has a strong interest in hearing what
its government has to say. Hearing the Government's views helps
ordinary citizens evaluate the Government's decisions and hold
Government officials accountable for them. In addition, private
actors often rely on the Government's expertise in making
decisions about their own speech.
In the years after 9/11, for example, news organizations
welcomed the input of the Government in deciding whether to
publish Classified information that had been leaked to them.
This is not to say, of course, that anyone should defer to the
Government's views, knowledge, or expertise. The Government
often gets things wrong. But a rule requiring the Government to
stand silent on matters of public policy would be paralyzing,
as the Supreme Court has said.
Third, and this is a point I really want to emphasize
today, the First Amendment protects the right of researchers to
study social media platforms and to share their findings with
the public, the platforms, and the Government. It should not
need to be said that when researchers study the social media
platforms, they are exercising rights protected by the First
Amendment. When they criticize the platform's content
moderation policies and practices, the First Amendment protects
them. When they press the platforms to take down speech, the
First Amendment protects them. Yes, even when you and I
disagree with their research findings and proposals, the First
Amendment protects them. For these reasons, I think it's
crucial for the subcommittee to tread carefully in this area.
It's legitimate to investigate the Executive branch to see
whether it has coerced or conspired with researchers to
suppress protected speech, but investigations of and lawsuits
against private researchers who acted independently of the
Government are not a defense of the First Amendment. They are a
grave threat to it.
Finally, let me conclude by acknowledging what I hope is a
common concern. The concentration of private power over public
discourse is a threat to free speech. The First Amendment does
not forbid the social media companies from assuming gatekeeper
control over public discourse, nor does it insulate them,
however, from careful regulation that would loosen that
control. Congress can and should pass legislation that would do
just that. It should require the platforms to design their
systems to be interoperable so that users can switch to
competing services without losing their social networks. It
should enact a privacy law that gives users greater control
over their personal data, making it easier for users to switch
between competing services and harder for platforms to obtain
and monopolize access to the data that drives their
profitability. Congress should enact transparency laws that
make it easier to study the platforms and the effects they're
having on public discourse. Carefully-drafted laws of this kind
would address some of the legitimate concerns with the
platforms consistently with the First Amendment.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Abdo follows:]
Prepared Statement of Alex Abdo
December 13, 2023
Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Ivey, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify today. My name is
Alex Abdo, and I am the litigation director of the Knight First
Amendment Institute at Columbia University.
The topic that this subcommittee has been exploring on the
relationship between the government and social media platforms is an
important one--in large part because it implicates many competing First
Amendment interests. I'd like to offer several observations to clarify
the Constitutional principles that should guide this subcommittee's
work.
First, as the Supreme Court held 60 years ago in Bantam Books v.
Sullivan, the First Amendment forbids the Government from coercing
private actors into silencing disfavored speech.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Bantam Books, Inc. v. Sullivan, 372 U.S. 58, 71 (1963).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
That decision was correct because coercion, by definition,
overrides the ability of people to decide for themselves what to say,
what to listen to, and what communities to join. This rule is important
not only in protecting individuals, but also in protecting the social
media platforms, which now play a vital role in hosting and curating
the speech of millions of people. The communities they create reflect
their own expressive decisions as well as the expressive and
associational preferences of their users. Outside of very narrow
exceptions, it would be inconsistent with the principle of self-
government to allow officials to dictate the speech individuals may
create and consume in these on-line communities, whether directly
through official sanction or indirectly through official coercion.
Second, while the First Amendment forbids the Government from
coercing private actors into suppressing speech, it does not preclude
the Government from trying to persuade private actors to embrace its
views.
A democratically-elected government must have the power to govern,
and an indispensable tool in governing is attempting to galvanize
public opinion. As the Supreme Court reaffirmed just a few years ago,
governing ``necessarily [involves] tak[ing] a particular viewpoint and
reject[ing] others.''\2\ ``[I]t is not easy to imagine,'' the Court
wrote, ``how government could function''\3\ if it could not express its
views.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Matal v. Tam, 582 U.S. 218, 234 (2017); see also Walker v. Tex.
Div., Sons of Confederate Veterans, Inc., 576 U.S. 200, 208 (2015)
(``But, as a general matter, when the government speaks it is entitled
to promote a program, to espouse a policy, or to take a position. In
doing so, it represents its citizens and it carries out its duties on
their behalf.'').
\3\ Matal, 582 U.S. at 234 (internal quotation marks omitted)
(quoting Pleasant Grove City, Utah v. Summum, 555 U.S. 460, 468
(2009)).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The public also has a strong interest in hearing what its
government has to say. Hearing the Government's views helps ordinary
citizens evaluate the Government's decisions and hold Government
officials accountable for them. In addition, private actors often rely
on the Government's expertise in making decisions about their own
speech. In the years after 9/11, for example, news organizations
welcomed the input of the Government in deciding whether to publish
classified information that had been leaked to them.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See, e.g., James Risen & Eric Lichtblau, Bush Lets U.S. Spy on
Callers Without Courts, N.Y. Times, Dec. 16, 2005, https://
www.nytimes.com/2005/12/16/politics/bush-lets-us-spy-on-callers-
without-courts.html (``After meeting with senior administration
officials to hear their concerns, the newspaper delayed publication for
a year to conduct additional reporting. Some information that
administration officials argued could be useful to terrorists has been
omitted.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
That's not to say, of course, that anyone should defer to the
Government's views, knowledge, or expertise. The government often gets
things wrong.\5\ But a rule requiring the Government to stand silent on
matters of public policy ``would be paralyzing,'' as the Supreme Court
has said.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See, e.g., `Group Think' Led to Iraq WMD Assessment, Fox News
(July 11, 2004), https://www.foxnews.com/story/group-think-led-to-iraq-
wmd-assessment; Zeynep Tufekci, Why Telling People They Don't Need
Masks Backfired, N.Y. Times (Mar. 17, 2020), https://www.nytimes.com/
2020/03/17/opinion/coronavirus-face-masks.html.
\6\ Matal, 582 U.S. at 234; see also Bantam Books, 372 U.S. at 72.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Third--and this is a point I really want to emphasize today--the
First Amendment protects the right of researchers to study social media
platforms, and to share their findings with the public, the platforms,
and the Government.
It should not need to be said that when researchers study the
social media platforms, they are exercising rights protected by the
First Amendment. When they criticize the platforms' content-moderation
policies and practices, the First Amendment protects them. When they
press the platforms to take down speech, the First Amendment protects
them. And yes, even when you and I disagree with their research
findings and proposals, the First Amendment protects them.
For these reasons, I think it's crucial for the subcommittee to
tread carefully in this area. It's legitimate to investigate the
Executive branch, to see whether it has coerced or conspired with
researchers to suppress protected speech. But investigations of and
lawsuits against private researchers who acted independently of the
Government are not a defense of the First Amendment; they are a grave
threat to it.
Finally, let me conclude by acknowledging what I hope is a common
concern--the concentration of private power over public discourse is a
threat to free speech.
The First Amendment does not forbid the social media companies from
assuming gatekeeper control over public discourse. Nor does it insulate
them from careful regulation that would loosen that control.
Congress can, and should, pass legislation that would do just that.
It should require the platforms to design their systems to be
``interoperable,'' so that users can switch to competing services
without losing their social networks. It should enact a privacy law
that gives users greater control over their personal data, making it
easier for users to switch between competing services and harder for
platforms to obtain and monopolize access to the data that drives their
profitability. And Congress should enact transparency laws that make it
easier to study the platforms and the effects they're having on public
discourse.
Carefully drafted laws of this kind would address some of the
legitimate concerns with the platforms, consistently with the First
Amendment.
Thank you, again, for the opportunity to testify today.

Chairman Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Abdo.
I now recognize Mr. Lawkowski for 5 minutes for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF GARY M. LAWKOWSKI, SENIOR FELLOW, THE COUNCIL TO
MODERNIZE GOVERNANCE

Mr. Lawkowski. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, Members of
the committee, thank you very much for this opportunity to
testify today.
My name is Gary Lawkowski. I'm a senior fellow with the
council to modernize governance. I'd like to begin with a
little bit of a story. For about the last 2 years or so, I've
had the distinct pleasure of dating a lovely woman who lives up
in Baltimore, Maryland. Now, I live in Virginia. If you've ever
made that drive, that can be a bit of a challenge. Sometimes
you're going up and down the GW Parkway, back and forth between
Virginia and Baltimore. I've been doing that a lot over the
past 2 years, and I have got to tell you, when I'm driving down
that road, there are all these crazy people going down there.
If it's not someone zipping past me on the right, it's someone
plodding along in the left, blocking up traffic. It drives me
crazy. There are all these other maniacs out there on the road.
Someone really should do something about that. But the problem
is, to me, regulating disinformation is a lot like regulating
driving. I suspect if you took those other people, sat them in
this chair, stood them up, have them raise their right hand,
and make the same oath who swear to tell the truth, they would
also say, hey, it's that crazy guy with those Virginia tags out
there. He's the one who doesn't know how to drive, not me. In
the words of the sage of our time, Taylor Swift, sometimes,
maybe, though, it's me. Hi, I'm the problem. It's me. We all
think we're good drivers, but it turns out we may well be the
maniac. That's why we need to approach these issues with a fair
degree of humility and recognize that we may not be the ones
who know what's true, we may be the one who's wrong. That's why
regulating disinformation, misinformation, these other things,
is so dangerous, because it sort-of presumes this position that
we're always right and that we can always get the answer right.
That's particularly dangerous when it's coming from Government.
So we've heard some talk already about what are the limits
from the First Amendment and kind-of how far can we go with
that, as though the First Amendment itself is kind-of the end-
all, be-all of this. While the First Amendment is incredibly
important, I think it's even more important to look kind-of
behind that and why we have a first amendment. Why do we care
about this, why is this something that's in our Constitution?
Why do we prioritize free expression at all?
So, first and foremost, free expression, including, and
perhaps especially the expression of ideas that most people
think are wrong, people may think that person's a maniac,
they're important, and they're necessary in the search for
truth. Pursuing truth requires correcting errors, and that
means standing up against prevailing narratives and standing up
against what seemed to be consensus. Otherwise, we'd be locked
into antiquated ideas. To take this kind-of one example, I grew
up, I was a child in the 1990's. We had this food pyramid from
the Department of Agriculture. That was the end-all, be-all of
healthy eating. If you follow this, you'll stay healthy, you'll
be in good shape. So I took that as the settled science. Well,
it turns out since that time, it's been updated at least twice
by the Department of Agriculture. It's also been called into
question by numerous public health schools, such as the Harvard
Public Health School. What we thought was true may have been
wrong, even about something as elemental as eating, something
that people have to do, have been doing as long as there have
been people. We may still get that information wrong. This is
one reason we need to tread very carefully around the free
expression, because it allows us to correct these consensus,
purportedly settled ideas when it turns out they may be wrong.
A second thing, free expression sort-of lowers the
temperature and the stakes for political contests. It's one
thing if I'm wrong and you're right and I lose, then I can
litigate that in the next election, I can litigate that at
another opportunity. If I think I'm right and you think you're
right, and whoever wins gets to shut the other person up,
that's a big problem. That really raises the stakes in our
political contests, because now it's no longer about coming
back in the next election, now it's about this is the thing
that settles this issue for all time. That's a huge problem,
particularly at a time where there's already concern about
political polarization.
Third, free expression provides a window into what people
believe. Just because we tell people they can't say something
doesn't mean they stop believing that. They still do, they just
become much more careful or much more discerning about who
they're going to express those views to. Thus, bad ideas don't
really go away just because you censor them, they just go
underground, and that's not healthy for our society.
Then fourth, and perhaps most fundamentally, one of the
problems with regulating this sort of mis- and disinformation
gets back to that driving question. It's who decides? I would
say the Government is the last person you want making those
decisions because it's the 800-pound gorilla in the room. Even
if they don't say do this or else, there's always that implicit
or else in what Government's doing.
So what do we do about this? How do we go beyond just the
four corners of the First Amendment to protect our rights going
forward? First, we have to return to first principles. The
Federal Government, particularly the Executive branch, should
not be the arbiter of truth.
Second of all, there should be bright lines protecting and
preventing the Federal Government from interfering with
Constitutionally-protected speech. In very limited
circumstances that have been recognized by the court there may
be a place to step in like child pornography, imminent threats.
In other places, though, the Government really shouldn't be
stepping in to try to tell people what they can and can't say
on-line.
Third, domestic-facing agencies, particularly the
Department of Homeland Security, really should not be involved
in this. This is not to absolve other agencies of
responsibility, but it is to say that these agencies' goal and
their main target audience is American citizens, and American
citizens should not be restricted by their Government on what
they can and can't say.
Fourth, there's a slippery slope in the definitional
changes that we've seen, and I believe that will be talked
about a little more, about this idea that we've gone from
critical infrastructure as physical things to cognitive
infrastructure and the idea that we have to regulate ideas.
That should not happen without, at very least, of a robust
public debate. That has not happened.
Fifth, the Government should cut Federal funding for anti-
disinformation programs to seek, deflect, and censor First
Amendment projects. It's one thing to say these are private
institutions, but it's another thing when they're being funded
with our tax dollars.
Finally, there must be avenues for personal accountability
for people who do this.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lawkowski follows:]
Prepared Statement of Gary M. Lawkowski
December 13, 2023
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, and Members of the committee,
thank you for this opportunity to testify today.
i. introduction \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Portions of this testimony are adopted from the Council to
Modernize Governance report, Restoring Online Free Speech and Shutting
Down the Censorship Industrial Complex, which is attached hereto. See
Curtis Schube & Gary Lawkowski, Restoring Online Free Speech and
Shutting Down the Censorship Industrial Complex, The Council to
Modernize Governance (Dec. 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For about the past 2 years, I have had the distinct pleasure of
dating a lovely woman. But there is a catch: I live in the great
Commonwealth of Virginia, while she lives across the river and up the
road in Baltimore, Maryland. This means I have spent a lot of time over
the past 2 years going up and down the Baltimore-Washington Parkway, I-
295, and I-395.
I started driving in high school. I have been doing it for a while.
I think I have become pretty good at it. But something seems to happen
as soon as I cross the river on the highway. If you have had the
opportunity to make this trip a few times, you may have seen it as
well. There are all these maniacs on the road. If they are not zipping
past me at unsafe speeds on the right, they are plodding along blocking
traffic on the left.
But here is the amazing thing: I suspect if you tracked down those
other drivers, sat them in this chair, and swore them to tell the
truth, they would tell you that they are not the problem. It is
everyone else, maybe even me, that guy with the Virginia tags.
I apologize if you have heard this one before,\2\ but to me,
``disinformation'' is a lot like driving. We all think we are good at
identifying what is true, that the problem is everyone else, and that
things would be so much better if we could just make them see that.
But, in the words of Time Magazine's illustrious person of the year, it
may be that ``it's me, hi, I'm the problem, it's me''\3\--we all may
well be the maniac on the road.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See Testimony of Mr. Gary M. Lawkowski, Senior Fellow, the
Institute for Free Speech to the U.S. House of Representatives
Committee on House Administration, Subcommittee on Elections (June 22,
2022), https://docs.house.gov/meetings/HA/HA08/20220622/114910/HHRG-
117-HA08-WState-LawkowskiG-20220622.pdf.
\3\ Taylor Swift & Jack Antonoff, Anti-Hero, Republic (Oct. 21,
2022), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b1kbLwvqugk..
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The result is that it is imperative to approach questions of truth
with a healthy dose of humility. Whether it is done directly or
indirectly, censorship or seeking to suppress perceived ``dis-,''
``mis-,'' or ``malinformation'' takes the opposite approach.
Unfortunately, over the past few years, Government officials have
assumed increasingly assertive roles in attempting to police truth and
falsity in public discourse, particularly on-line. The search for truth
and the basic imperatives of self-government require breathing space in
a free and open marketplace of ideas.\4\ This is completely
incompatible with constant ``content moderation'' to strangle purported
``misinformation.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See generally New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254,
271-72 (1964) (Recognizing ``[t]hat erroneous statement is inevitable
in free debate, and that it must be protected if the freedoms of
expression are to have the `breathing space' that they `need . . . to
survive.' '' (quoting N.A.A.C.P. v. Button, 371 U. S. 415, 433 (1963)).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Preserving and protecting this marketplace of ideas requires going
beyond just the four corners of the First Amendment and restoring
institutional respect for the values it protects. This involves actions
in the courts, but it also requires administrative and legislative
action to ensure Government--including domestic-facing agencies like
the Department of Homeland Security and Federal Bureau of
Investigation--respect proper limits on their actions.
ii. why free expression
``Disinformation'' and ``misinformation'' are real. There are bad
actors who want to intentionally spread false information to serve
their own ends. There are also people who honestly believe things that
just are not true. Moreover, whether intentional or not, this false
information can have real, negative consequences: from luring speakers
into minor faux paus to potentially starting wars.
In light of these threats, why do we value and prioritize the free
expression of ideas--especially ideas that seem like they are wrong?
First and foremost, free expression--including and perhaps
especially the expression of ideas that many people believe are wrong--
is necessary in the search for truth. Knowledge is not static. People
and institutions constantly learn new information or make mistakes in
how they analyze old information. Pursuing truth requires correcting
errors in prevailing narratives, which in turn means people must be
free to challenge prevailing orthodoxy and beliefs.
I grew up and went to school in the 1990's. When I was in school,
we were taught about the food pyramid, the paragon of guidance for
healthy eating. Considering the primacy placed on the food pyramid as
``settled science''--at least for us elementary schoolers--it came as
quite a surprise for me to learn that the U.S. Department of
Agriculture has changed its recommended guidance graphic at least twice
since the early 1990's, each time altering its guidance for healthy
eating.\5\ Even after these changes, the current recommendations are
still contentious and hotly debated. For example, the Harvard T.H. Chan
School of Public Health almost immediately launched its own ``Healthy
Eating Plate'' as an alternative to the Department of Agriculture's
revised recommendations.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See William Neuman, Nutrition Plate Unveiled, Replacing Food
Pyramid, N.Y. Times (June 2, 2011), https://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/03/
business/03plate.html.
\6\ See Harvard researchers launch Healthy Eating Plate, Harvard
T.H. Chan School of Public Health (Sept. 14, 2011), https://
www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/press-releases/healthy-eating-plate/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Eating food is one of the basic building blocks of life. Humans
have been doing it since they first appeared on the Earth. Yet, we
still do not fully understand or agree on what type of diet is best and
how to describe it. Even in a field so basic and longstanding, the
``science'' is not so ``settled'' as to be beyond debate. There is
every reason to believe that questions that have arisen much more
recently and that are much less elemental to the human experience can
also benefit from a continued airing of debate and contrasting views.
Second, free expression lowers the stakes for political contests.
Our Constitution was drafted in 1787. The framers were well aware of
the recent history of approximately 200 years of European wars of
religion and, particularly, the history of the English Civil War, which
ended a little over a century before. While there were many factors
influencing each conflict, one recurring theme was the steadfast idea
that one side knew the truth and was right, while the other side did
not and was wrong.
The settlement, reflected in the ideals of the founders' age, was
to accept that one side could be wrong without needing to change their
mind at the point of a sword. This is a principle that is being
increasingly devalued in our political culture and it is one we
disregard at our own peril. Recognizing the right to be wrong lowers
the stakes of our political disputes. It allows the losing side in
today's political debate to accept defeat gracefully, rather than
viewing any setback as an existential threat.
Third, free expression provides a window into what people believe.
People do not necessarily stop believing the ``wrong'' things just
because they are not able to express them. They simply get more careful
about when and with whom they choose to express their true views. Thus,
``bad'' ideas do not go away; they go underground. This is not a
healthy state of affairs.
iii. the problem with regulating dis-, mis-, and malinformation--who
decides?
The problem with regulating purported ``mis-,'' ``dis-,'' or
``malinformation'' boils down to a simple question: who decides?
Regulating these categories of speech requires someone to first
determine what is and what is not true. This is an incredibly
consequential power.
In a free society, where Government derives its authority from the
consent of the governed, the answer to this question cannot be the
Government. Government--especially the Federal Government--is an 800-
pound gorilla. It wields vast power over individuals, companies, and
the economy more broadly. If my neighbor thinks I am wrong, I can
ignore his views. If the Government thinks I am wrong and has the
authority to impose its view of truth, I do not have the same luxury.
Moreover, government is ultimately a human institution. Even though
the majority of government employees are dedicated to their work and
want to do the right thing, they are still susceptible to the same
flaws, cognitive biases, and self-interested behavior as any other
people. Whether out of a well-meaning but misguided belief or self-
interested desires to hide inconvenient or embarrassing narratives,
government officials can be--and often are--wrong about things.
We have vividly seen these processes play out in many facets of
life over just the past few years. For example, ideas that were
initially suppressed in debates over COVID-19, such as concerns that
COVID-19 may have leaked from a lab, have gained traction and greater
acceptance.\7\ Similarly, the Hunter Biden laptop was initially
dismissed as ``disinformation'' before being generally accepted as
authentic.\8\ Likewise, in 2021, there was a lot of public controversy
around accusations that U.S. Border Patrol agents whipped migrants at
the Mexican border with the reins of their horses. Even the President
of the United States weighed in, claiming ``people [were] being
strapped'' and stating ``[i]t's outrageous. I promise you those people
will pay.''\9\ But it turned out not to be true. As Customs and Border
Protection found following an intensive investigation, ``[t]he
investigation found no evidence that agents struck any person with
horse reins.''\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See generally Christiano Lima, Facebook no longer treating
`man-made' Covid as a crackpot idea, Politico (May 26, 2021), https://
www.politico.com/news/2021/05/26/facebook-ban-covid-man-made-491053.
Michael R. Gordon & Warren P. Strobel, Lab Leak Most Likely Origin
of Covid-19 Pandemic, Energy Department Now Says, Wall St. J. (Feb. 26,
2023), https://www.wsj.com/articles/covid-origin-china-lab-leak-
807b7b0a.
\8\ See generally Craig Timberg, Matt Viser, and Tom Hamburger,
Here's How The Post Analyzed Hunter Biden's Laptop, Wash. Post (Mar.
30, 2022), https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/03/30/hunter-
biden-laptop-data-examined/.
\9\ Remarks by President Biden on the COVID-19 Response and the
Vaccination Program, The White House (Sept. 24, 2021), https://
www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-remarks/2021/09/24/remarks-
by-president-biden-on-the-covid-19-response-and-the-vaccination-
program-8/.
\10\ CBP Releases Findings of Investigation of Horse Patrol
Activity in Del Rio, Texas, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (Jul. 8,
2022), https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/national-media-release/cbp-
releases-findings-investigation-horse-patrol-activity-del-rio.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, the Federal Government--particularly the Executive branch,
acting alone--attempting to arbitrate truth in public discourse is
incompatible with self-government. The three most important words in
the U.S. Constitution are the first three: ``We the people.'' With this
simple introduction, the framers of our constitution set out a radical
approach to government, one where the American people ultimately set
the agenda for the Government and government is supposed to be
responsive to the American people. Involving the Federal Government in
regulating ``mis-,'' ``dis-,'' and ``malinformation'' undermines this
relationship. It allows the Government to effectively set its own
agenda, independent of the will of the American people. This is not and
cannot be correct.
iv. government efforts to regulate disinformation
Unfortunately, we have seen a creeping erosion of time-honored
lines protecting free expression from Government intrusion,
particularly on social media.
The internet is a tool and, like any tool, there is the potential
for it to be misused for illegal purposes. The Supreme Court has
recognized a ``few'' categories of speech ``long familiar to the bar''
where the Government can impose content-based restrictions, such as
incitement to imminent lawless action, speech integral to criminal
conduct, or child pornography.\11\ The Government can and does have a
role in protecting the American people from actual criminal conduct,
even when it occurs on-line. But this can be fulfilled clearly and
transparently through traditional law enforcement channels.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ United States v. Alvarez, 567 U.S. 709, 717 (2012).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
That is not analogous to what has occurred over the past few years.
What we have seen is a subtle but distinct shift from targeting
nefarious actions to targeting disfavored ideas. The shift from concern
about direct foreign attacks on election infrastructure, such as voting
machines and voter rolls, to concerns about ill-advised memes
illustrates this slippery slope.
In early 2017, Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson designated
election infrastructure as a ``critical infrastructure subsector,''
giving the Department of Homeland Security the duty to protect it.
Secretary Johnson clearly defined election infrastructure as physical
facilities and systems used for elections: ``By `election
infrastructure,' we mean storage facilities, polling places, and
centralized vote tabulation locations used to support the election
process, and information and communications technology to include voter
registration databases, voting machines, and other systems to manage
the election process and report and display results on behalf of State
and local governments.''\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Statement by Secretary Jeh Johnson on the Designation of
Election Infrastructure as a Critical Infrastructure Subsector,
Department of Homeland Security (Jan. 6, 2017), https://www.dhs.gov/
news/2017/01/06/statement-secretary-johnson-designation-election-
infrastructure-
eleccritical#:?:text=statement%20by%20Secretary%20Jeh%20Johnson,as%20a%2
0Critical-
%20Infrastructure%20Subsector&text=I%20have%20determined%20that%20electi
on,Govern- ment%20Facilities%20critical%20infrastructure%20'sector.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, by 2019, a subtle shift occurred. While the Department
still sought to protect ``election infrastructure,'' the perceived
threat morphed from physical facilities and systems to protecting
against ``foreign disinformation.''\13\ This shift put the Department
squarely in the business of monitoring and seeking to influence what
people think and say.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Homeland Security Advisory Council Interim Report of The
Countering Foreign Influence Subcommittee, Department of Homeland
Security (May 21, 2019), https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/ope/hsac/19_0521_final-interim-report-of-countering-
foreign-influence-subcommittee.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By July 2020, the Department was actively meeting with outside
groups seeking to suppress purported misinformation, including the
collection of groups known as the ``Election Integrity Project''
(``EIP'').\14\ By its own claim, EIP was formed ``in consultation with
[the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency] and other
stakeholders'' and identified the problem it was seeking to address as
``election disinformation that originates from within the United
States, which would likely be excluded from law enforcement action
under the First Amendment and not appropriate for study by intelligence
agencies restricted from operating inside the United States.''\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ See The Long Fuse: Misinformation and the 2020 Election at 21,
Election Integrity Project (June 15, 2021) https://stacks.stanford.edu/
file/druid:tr171zs0069/EIP-Final-Report.pdf (EIP Post-election Report).
\15\ Id. at 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Analysis of the EIP's 2021 post-election report and the ticketing
system that flagged various on-line speech offers the following data
points:

72 percent of ``tickets'' for flagged speech was
``categorized as delegitimization,'' which appears to apply
regardless of if the information was true or false;\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Id. at 31.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

49 percent of tickets involved an ``exaggerated issue;''\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Id. at 33.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

26 percent of tickets involved an electoral process issue
incorrectly framed as partisan;\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

18 percent of tickets featured content taken out of context
from other places or times to create false impressions of an
election issue;\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

17 percent of tickets involved unverifiable claims, such as
friend-of-friend narratives.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The claims presented in these ``tickets'' may have been true or
they may have been false. What they largely appear not to be, however,
is speech that would fall outside of traditional First Amendment
protections.
As a coda on the Election Integrity Project, following the 2020
election the same 4 institutions primarily responsible for the EIP did
not disband. Instead, they effectively rebranded with other partner
organizations as the Virality Project to continue their censorship of
on-line speech. This time they targeted narratives relating to COVID-19
vaccines instead of focusing on election delegitimization.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ ``Virality Project,'' accessed Dec. 11, 2023, https://
www.viralityproject.org/home.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The story of the Department of Homeland Security's descent into
domestic censorship illustrates several key features of what has been
called the ``censorship industrial complex,'' including:

The use of a foreign threat to justify expansion into
censorship;

The redefinition of terms, such as critical infrastructure,
with little or no public debate;

The shift from purely foreign threats to domestic concerns;

The use of partnerships with ostensibly nongovernmental
organizations--often funded in part through Government grants--
to act in places where First Amendment concerns would limit the
Government's ability to act indirectly; and

The evolving nature of the targets of domestic censorship
efforts, with efforts begun to address one discrete concern--
such as foreign election interference--being repurposed for
others.
v. finding solutions: six principles and proposals for reform
Working with my colleague Curtis Schube and the Council to
Modernize Governance, we have developed a set of six areas for
improvement that can help arrest the growth of the censorship
industrial complex. These ideas are listed and expanded upon further in
our report, Restoring Online Free Speech and Shutting Down the
Censorship Industrial Complex, which is attached to this testimony:*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The document is retained in committee files and can be found at
https://modernizegovernance.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/
Censorship.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, we recommend returning to first principles. The Federal
Government--particularly the Executive branch, acting on its own
accord, should not be the arbiter of truth. Where there is ``bad''
speech, the Government should respond by presenting its own views and
evidence--not seeking to suppress disfavored ideas.
Second, there should be bright lines preventing the Federal
Government from interfering with Constitutionally-protected speech. In
the limited circumstances where there is a legitimate legal basis to
suppress on-line speech--such as preventing the dissemination of child
pornography--the involvement of Federal officials in identifying,
flagging, or otherwise contributing to the removal should be clear,
should be performed only by law enforcement, and should be open to both
public and judicial scrutiny.
Third, domestic-facing agencies, such as the Department of Homeland
Security and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, should be prohibited
from engaging in activities to restrict ``mis-,'' ``dis-,'' and
``malinformation.'' This is not to absolve other ostensibly foreign-
facing agencies from scrutiny. Rather, it is a recognition that reform
needs to start somewhere, and domestic-facing entities are clearly
inappropriate vehicles for activities with significant implications for
domestic free expression, particularly when the raison d'etre is to
counter foreign disinformation.
Fourth, the slippery slope in definitional changes that has allowed
accepted missions, such as protecting ``critical infrastructure,'' to
be stretched beyond any common understanding must be reined in.
Significant changes to organizational missions must be presented to the
public and properly debated before being implemented.
Fifth, the Federal Government should cut Federal funding for anti-
disinformation programs that seek to flag and/or censor First
Amendment-protected speech. The field of mis- and disinformation does
not merely seek to correct inaccurate information through counter
speech. It seeks to suppress what it views as untrue information.
Accordingly, it functions as a high-tech inquisition that is
irreconcilable with basic principles of free expression. The least that
can be done is to close the spigot of taxpayer dollars being used to
censor the American people.
Sixth, there must be avenues for personal accountability for
Federal officials who misuse their positions to censor American speech.
The right to free speech is central to the proper functioning of a
democratic society. Systematic violations of this right by Government
officials wielding the power to regulate or shut down private actors
presents tremendous danger to the future of political discourse.
Whether it is conservative speech today or progressive speech tomorrow,
it is wholly inappropriate for Federal officials to abuse their
authority toward this end. However, as is clear in other areas, without
the opportunity for personal accountability, the likelihood of
preventing future abuse is low. Accordingly, there must be both
employment consequences and potential liability for the most egregious
cases, for repeated or blatant First Amendment violations.
None of these proposals leaves the Federal Government helpless in
the face of actual foreign disinformation campaigns. The solution to
``bad'' speech today is the same as it has always been: more ``good''
speech. The Government can still engage in the marketplace of ideas as
a participant--not a moderator--and seek to convince the American
people that it is correct based on the persuasive force of its evidence
and arguments.
vi. conclusion
President Reagan warned ``Freedom is a fragile thing and it's never
more than one generation away from extinction. It is not ours by way of
inheritance; it must be fought for and defended constantly by each
generation, for it comes only once to a people. And those in world
history who have known freedom and then lost it have never known it
again.''\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Ronald Reagan, Inaugural Address, Ronald Reagan Presidential
Library and Museum (Jan. 5, 1967), https://www.reaganlibrary.gov/
archives/speech/january-5-1967-inaugural-address-public-ceremony.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are, unfortunately, at an inflection point. Our core commitment
to free expression is being challenged and assailed from many
directions in new and unique ways. We must not be the generation that
allows free expression, unmoderated by Government, to pass away
quietly. We have the opportunity to preserve the free expression that
has served our Nation well for the past 247 years. We must take it and
resolve to approach questions of truth with proper humility,
recognizing that the settled narrative today may be proven wrong
tomorrow.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to discuss these issues. I
greatly appreciate your time and consideration.
additional resources
Curtis Schube & Gary Lawkowski, Restoring Online Free Speech and
Shutting Down the Censorship Industrial Complex, The Council to
Modernize Governance (Dec. 2023).

Chairman Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Lawkowski.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for 5
minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning may
be called after all Members have been recognized.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
I want to begin. I wonder if, Mr. Ivey, if you would pull
back up--your staff might pull back up the enlargement you had,
the first one, the statement by a DHS official from November
2023.
Mr. Ivey. Mr. Novak.
Chairman Bishop. I think that is right. If you have the
enlargement.
Let me say as I am beginning, or asking that to come up--
thank you. I will use in just a second if you hold it for me.
First of all, it is interesting how little separates the views
expressed on the panel and I think between me and the Ranking
Member of the subcommittee. I think therein lies something that
needs to be focused on. There are some red herrings or straw
men here that can be knocked down pretty quickly.
I agree. This is not about partisanship, by the way. I
mean, I think there is some evidence that the conservatives
were more frequently censored, but that is not at all the
point. The problem is that it can affect and will affect both
sides at the same time.
Here is what troubles me, though. OK. This is a November
2023 statement by Brandon Wales. He says CISA does not and has
never censored speech or facilitated censorship. Any such
claims are patently false. So it would be one thing if this
turned out to be an excess or a misjudgment or something that
grew up naturally out of the COVID pandemic or the election
concern that people say, look, we went too far, we have
curtailed that, we no longer do that. But that is not what is
being said here. It is a categorical declaration that there has
been no censorship. I have got to tell you, that deepens the
concern, because if the situation were, OK, the Disinformation
Governance Board has been abandoned because there was a huge
public outcry, we would realize at CISA or DHS, that was a
mistake. That is one thing. But for them to abandon it and for
the effort to go subterranean, underground, and be popping up,
but continue to be pursued, that is a very significant thing.
It certainly justifies the continued examination into this
topic.
I would say with my friend from Maryland, the Ranking
Member, this contention that the social media platforms were
never compelled, that is the thing that continues to be said,
and the Ranking Member has read the case, and so have I, from
the Fifth Circuit that make clear the tests that are applied is
not that you are lined up against the wall with a gun at your
head to say you must take this information down off your social
media platform, the question is the degree to which Government
may be perceived to have been intensively involved, and thereby
the censorship by the so-called private entity becomes
Government action. It is a little bit like the notion, the old
saying, you remember, nice little business you got there, it
would be a shame if something were to happen to it. That is a
threat, even though it isn't stated in threatening language.
Mr. Shellenberger, how about that? We have got CISA taking
down the video that had the fictional character Sharon urged to
report as misinformation what her uncle was stating on-line.
They have taken that down. They have done a number of things
like that to telegraph that this isn't something we are going
to do anymore. I took that to be the thrust of Jen Easterly's
testimony in the Appropriations Committee. Yet this is a
declaration we have never done it. There is not even an issue
about whether we have done it or something that needs to get
ironed out. What about that? Shouldn't we be concerned about
that phenomenon?
Mr. Shellenberger. Yes, I mean definitely. I mean if it
were up to me, I think if there's important cybersecurity
activities happening in CISA, that should continue, I think
they need to be under a different agency because this agency
actively not just participated, but led this creation of a
censorship apparatus. Now that's them saying, oh, we were just
doing research. It was a mass flagging and censorship operation
that was coordinated with a broader effort to pressure the
platforms to do more censorship. That was going on since 2016.
So, yes, I think it's disingenuous to suggest that they
were just doing research.
Chairman Bishop. Mr. Chenoweth, as the litigation like
Missouri v. Biden, you mentioned the Murthy case--I guess it is
Murthy in the Supreme Court, I guess, is the name of it there.
Courts have differed sometimes with themselves on what level of
government actions constitute interference with freedom of
speech. Why is that a challenge, and how should courts resolve
it?
Mr. Chenoweth. I think there's a concern that there may be
a category mistake here, Mr. Chairman, because a lot of the
precedents--because the Government hasn't done this kind of
censorship, by and large, going back 10, 20, 40, 50 years. So
the precedents that exist at the Supreme Court are largely
precedents where there have been private entities that have
been doing censorship and have been sued. Bantam Books is an
example of this. Then the question is, well, was that private
conduct turned into State action? So if you're suing a private
entity and you're trying to--because if it is a private entity,
it's truly private action, then the First Amendment doesn't
apply. So if you're suing a private entity and saying that they
engaged in state action, then there's precedents that suggest,
how do you know that there's state action there? The tests have
been things like coercion and so forth, also entanglement.
Also, the way that you described it, Mr. Chairman, is just how
involved are we here? But the reason for that is because we
want to be very careful about saying that a private entity has
become a public entity. We need to be very careful about that.
We need to draw that line carefully, because if that private
entity is treated as a public entity, then its liberties have
really been constricted, particularly by the First Amendment
then applying to it.
But that's not what we're talking about here. In Murthy v.
Missouri, we didn't sue any private entities. We're suing the
Government. The question is, what's the standard that affects
the Government when the Government is engaged in Government-led
censorship? The standard there shouldn't be coercion, it
shouldn't be the standard that applies when you're suing a
private entity. It needs to be the First Amendment standard.
The text of the First Amendment says abridge, and that means
diminish. You're telling me that nothing that CISA did
diminished free speech, that it didn't diminish speech? Of
course it did. The whole point of it was to diminish speech.
Chairman Bishop. Undoubtedly it did.
Thank you, Mr. Chenoweth.
My time is long since expired. I thank you for that.
But I now recognize Ranking Member Ivey for 5 minutes for
any questions he may have.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, I think we have some different views on this. I will
just tell you what my thinking is on some of this.
I guess we draw the line in different places as to what
role governments should play with respect to public speech or
comments. For example, we have talked about this in previous
hearings. I mean, tobacco, for example. When I was a young kid,
there was an argument back and forth about whether it caused
cancer or not, whether it was detrimental to health. I think we
certainly hit the point, the 1980's or 1990's or so, where it
became clear, I think scientifically, that it was causing a
problem. The Government decided, in addition to private support
from the medical community, that public service announcement
campaigns across the country to try and reduce the level of
smoking was in order. In fact, that was part of the settlement
with the tobacco companies. So those ads started running. I
think even you can find now people who dispute whether tobacco
causes cancer or not. But I think it is pretty clear that that
was the Government effort with respect to speech that took a
stand that was in favor of public safety. Seatbelts is another
one. We have got a number of these we could go through.
COVID, I know, is controversial, so I hate to walk into the
hornets nest, but some of those points, I appreciate the points
you made, Mr. Chenoweth. Some of them I kind-of was definitely
on the side of we need to do something like that, where like
injecting bleach will cure you of COVID was one of those. So I
take the point that, I guess that was Mr. Lawkowski on the trip
from Virginia to Baltimore, was talking about how sometimes the
Government is not right, sometimes it is. That is a fair point.
But I think what I am hearing from the table, at least for Mr.
Chenoweth and with Mr. Shellenberger, is Government should
never be taking positions on what is accurate or true or
correct, and that is not really my view.
But, Mr. Chenoweth, I wanted to give you a chance to--if
you give me a brief response, is there a line that you would
draw where you think it is OK for the Government to take public
statements, disagree with information that is out there? Then
here is the line, I think, for the censorship piece, reach out
to platforms and say, add content or flag it or whatever?
Mr. Chenoweth. I don't have a problem with the Government
taking a position on anything. I think that that's Government
speech and that's fine. I think the problem is when you have
the Government reaching out to platforms to shut down other
speech, that becomes censorship. In terms of when they can and
can't do that, if they're reaching out to a platform to shut
down unlawful speech, which I would suggest----
Mr. Ivey. Sure, that is fine.
Mr. Chenoweth [continuing]. The child----
Mr. Ivey. Yes, child porn. Sure. Terrorism.
Mr. Chenoweth [continuing]. Pornography example. No problem
with that at all.
Mr. Ivey. OK.
Mr. Chenoweth. But if you're reaching out to a platform to
shut down lawful speech, such as Dr. Kulldorff's tweet about
who should and shouldn't get vaccinated, that was lawful
speech.
Mr. Ivey. Well, let me ask you to draw the line on that,
when you say shut down. Remove would be I guess what you mean
by shut down. Is flagging it or adding comments to it, are you
OK with that?
Mr. Chenoweth. Well, I'm certainly not OK with the
Government flagging it or the Government adding comments.
Mr. Ivey. Well, Government asking the social--because
Government is not controlling the social media platforms, but
asking the social media, hey, can you flag? My view, too, is
that that is the decision that is made by the social media
platforms. I don't think it is the Sopranos coming to get them
otherwise, but go ahead.
Mr. Chenoweth. I think that's diminishing and therefore
abridging speech and therefore a direct violation of the First
Amendment.
Mr. Ivey. So the Government asking, I don't know, Twitter
or X, whatever they call it now, to flag statement X is an
abridgement and a First Amendment violation?
Mr. Chenoweth. Absolutely if that----
Mr. Ivey. Automatically?
Mr. Chenoweth [continuing]. Speech is lawful speech.
Mr. Ivey. OK.
Mr. Chenoweth. I think that's a very clear and easy line to
draw.
Mr. Ivey. OK. I define abridged a little differently than
you do, I think, in the first Amendment context, but that is
OK.
I did want to read this piece here, too, though. This is
from Yoel Roth. I think this is kind-of a fact issue. He is
formerly at Twitter and testified here from the Oversight
Committee on February 8. He is talking about threats that were
coming over the internet. In an effort to get ahead of these
kinds of threats, Twitter and other tech companies worked to
build closer information-sharing relationships with law
enforcement, such as the FBI. In the recent reporting known as
the Twitter files, there was an attempt to portray interactions
between Twitter and other social media platforms and the FBI's
politically-driven interference. My experience of these
interactions was different. Across the FBI, DHS, and other
agencies, the professionals responsible for combating malign
foreign interference in elections did so with integrity and the
utmost care and respect for the laws of this country, including
the First Amendment.
I would ask that we make this part of the record.
I see I am over my time.
Chairman Bishop. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
Statement of Yoel Roth, PhD, Former Head of Trust & Safety, Twitter,
Inc.
February 8, 2023
Hearing on ``Protecting Speech from Government Interference and Social
Media Bias, Part 1: Twitter's Role in Suppressing the Biden
Laptop Story''
Before the House of Representatives Committee on Oversight
and Accountability
Thank you, Chairman Comer, Ranking Member Raskin, and Members of
the Committee, for the opportunity to speak with you here today.
In nearly 8 years at Twitter, I worked in and led a division called
Trust & Safety. Trust & Safety's core duty is content moderation:
Labeling or removing Tweets that violate Twitter's terms of service,
and suspending or banning users who repeatedly break the rules. This
work is sometimes dismissed merely as censorship--but it represents a
key way that Twitter and other companies live up to their
responsibility to keep the users of their products safe.
Much of this work is uncontroversial and obviously good: For
example, taking down accounts that engage in child sexual exploitation
or promote terrorism. Although this content represents a tiny fraction
of the overall volume of conversation on social media, the dangers it
poses means platforms like Twitter have a responsibility to find it and
remove it promptly. The scale of this work is considerable: In the
second half of 2021, Twitter removed over 33,000 accounts for promoting
terrorism or violent extremism, more than 100,000 for promoting the
sale of illegal goods and services, and nearly 600,000 for engaging in
child sexual exploitation.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Rules Enforcement, July--December 2021,'' Twitter
Transparency Center, Twitter, last modified July 28, 2022, https://
transparency.twitter.com/en/reports/rules-enforcement.html#2021-jul-
dec.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If all trust and safety work was just about universally abhorrent
content, there would be no controversy. We would all agree that content
moderation is unambiguously good. The gray area of this work is when
trust and safety teams have to make decisions about so-called ``lawful
but awful'' material: Content that may be legal in many jurisdictions,
but isn't something most people would want to see or experience.\2\
Think of things like posting someone else's home address without their
permission; or sharing graphic videos of animal abuse; or bullying
someone for a disability or for how they look.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Daphne Keller, ``Lawful but Awful? Control over Legal Speech by
Platforms, Governments, and Internet Users,'' The University of Chicago
Law Review Online, June 28, 2022. https://lawreviewblog.uchicago.edu/
2022/06/28/keller-control-over-speech/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A free-speech absolutist might say, ``Yes, that kind of content is
unpleasant, but it's not against the law. What right do you have to
remove it?'' The answer is that, as businesses, social media platforms
must be appealing to their own users, if they hope to survive.\3\
Consistently, in its own research, Twitter found that users were
unhappy with the platform's approach to content moderation--and that
this dissatisfaction drove away both users and advertisers. In other
studies, we found that some portions of Twitter's user base stopped
using Twitter for the opposite reason: Because they felt Twitter was
too overbearing and censored too much. In short, the company had to
look for a middle-ground solution that would appeal to both sides of
this spectrum, while still addressing the very real harms that can come
from social media.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Yoel Roth, ``I Was the Head of Trust and Safety at Twitter.
This Is What Could Become of It,'' New York Times, November 18, 2022,
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/11/18/opinion/twitter-yoel-roth-elon-
musk.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A key harm we talked a lot about on the Trust & Safety team was
chilling effects: The idea that one person's unrestricted freedom of
speech could have the consequence of stifling someone else's--the
proverbial ``Heckler's Veto'' of First Amendment law. Again and again,
we saw the ``lawful but awful'' speech of a small number of abusive
users drive away countless others. Unrestricted free speech,
paradoxically, results in less speech, not more.\4\ Trust & Safety's
job is to try to find a balance between one person's free speech, and
the impacts of their free speech on the ability of others to
participate. Getting this right is difficult, but essential to the
success of a platform like Twitter.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Danielle Citron, Hate crimes in cyberspace (Harvard University
Press, 2014). Mary Anne Franks, ``Fearless speech,'' First Amendment
Law Review 17 (Symposium, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But the importance of trust and safety work goes far beyond whether
or not Twitter succeeds as a private business. There are broader
national security implications for this work, too. In 2016, we saw
significant interference in an American election by the Russian
government, through social media platforms such as Twitter.\5\ I led
the team at Twitter that uncovered that interference.\6\ I still
remember the rage I felt when I saw accounts with names like ``Pamela
Moore'' and ``Crystal Johnson''--accounts purporting to be real
Americans, from Wisconsin and New York, but with phone numbers tracing
back to St Petersburg, Russia.\7\ These accounts were operated by
agents of a foreign government, and their mission was to stoke culture
war issues on social media to try to further divide Americans.\8\ My
team and I exposed and banned hundreds of thousands of these accounts,
from Russia, but also from Iran, China, and beyond.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Kathleen Hall Jamieson, Cyberwar: How Russian hackers and
trolls helped elect a president: What we don't, can't, and do know
(Oxford University Press, 2018).
\6\ Twitter, ``Update on Twitter's review of the 2016 US
election,'' Twitter Blog, January 19, 2018, https://blog.twitter.com/
official/en_us/topics/company/2018/2016-election-update.html.
\7\ U.S. Department of Justice, Report on the Investigation Into
Russian Interference in the 2016 Presidential Election, Volume I of II,
March 2019, https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/5955240/Full-
Mueller-Report.pdf.
\8\ Ahmed Al-Rawi and Anis Rahman, ``Manufacturing rage: The
Russian Internet Research Agency's political astroturfing on social
media,'' First Monday 25, no. 9, http://dx.doi.org/10.5210/
fm.v25i9.10801.
\9\ ``Moderation Research,'' Twitter Transparency Center, Twitter,
accessed February 4, 2023, https://transparency.twitter.com/en/reports/
moderation-research.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And the kinds of attacks that we saw go far beyond fake Americans
with Russian phone numbers. The actors targeting American elections are
well-funded and increasingly sophisticated, and have continuously
gotten better at covering their tracks. In 2016, Russian military
intelligence carried out a sophisticated hack and leak campaign
targeting the U.S. elections; the details of it weren't declassified
until long after election day,\10\ after the damage had been done. As
Congress investigated what happened, a clear finding was that tech
platforms and law enforcement had failed to appropriately work together
to address these threats.\11\ Twitter, and other companies, were
widely--and I think rightfully--criticized for their inaction. We were
told in no uncertain terms, by the public and by Congress, that we had
a responsibility to do a better job protecting future elections.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ U.S. Intelligence Community, Assessing Russian Activities and
Intentions in Recent US Elections, January 6, 2017, https://
www.intelligence.senate.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
ICA_2017_01.pdf.
\11\ U.S. Congress, Senate, Select Committee on Intelligence,
Russian Active Measures and Interference In the 2016 U.S. Election,
116th Cong., 2d sess., S. Rep. 116-290, https://
www.intelligence.senate.gov/publications/report-select-committee-
intelligence-united-states-senate-russian-active-measures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In an effort to get ahead of these kinds of threats, Twitter and
other tech companies worked to build closer information-sharing
relationships with law enforcement such as the FBI.\12\ In the recent
reporting known as the Twitter Files, there was an attempt to portray
interactions between Twitter and other social media platforms and the
FBI as politically-driven interference.\13\ My experience of these
interactions was different. Across the FBI, DHS, and other agencies,
the professionals responsible for combating malign foreign interference
in elections did so with integrity, and the utmost care and respect for
the laws of this country--including the First Amendment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Salvador Rodriguez, ``The FBI visits Facebook to talk about
2020 election security, with Google, Microsoft and Twitter joining,''
CNBC, September 4, 2019, https://www.cnbc.com/2019/09/04/facebook-
twitter-google-are-meeting-with-us-officials-to-discuss-2020-election-
security.html.
\13\ Matt Taibbi, ``Capsule Summaries of all Twitter Files Threads
to Date, With Links and a Glossary,'' Racket, January 4, 2023, https://
www.racket.news/p/capsule-summaries-of-all-twitter.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Which brings us to Hunter Biden's laptop and the New York Post. In
2020, the Trust & Safety team noticed activity related to the laptop
popping up on Twitter, and that activity, at first glance, bore a lot
of similarities to the 2016 Russian hack and leak operation. Twitter
had to decide what to do. The only information we had to go on to make
this decision was what had been publicly reported. And in that moment,
with limited information, Twitter made a mistake: Under the
Distribution of Hacked Material Policy,\14\ the company decided to
require the New York Post to delete several Tweets linking to stories
about the laptop, and prevent links to those stories from being shared
across the service. This policy was not meant to be a tool to censor
news: It was written to prohibit hacking groups from using Twitter to
launder stolen documents--the same activity the Russian government had
engaged in in 2016. And in this instance, the company's initial
assessment was that the activity bore enough similarities to the 2016
hack and leak that it warranted enforcement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ ``Distribution of Hacked Material Policy,'' Help Center,
Twitter, archived version last modified March 2019, https://
web.archive.org/web/20190717143909/https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-
and-policies/hacked-materials.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I've been clear that, in my judgment at the time, Twitter should
not have taken action to block the New York Post's reporting. I
recommended to Twitter leadership that we take a milder step while we
tried to learn more: My recommendation was that we prevent the articles
from being actively recommended or amplified by Twitter's algorithms,
rather than blocking them altogether. However, in an effort to be
consistent with the specifics of the Hacked Materials Policy, which
didn't provide for the milder step I recommended, Twitter decided to
follow a strict interpretation of the policy, and removed the New York
Post's Tweets. Just 24 hours after doing so, the company acknowledged
its error,\15\ and ultimately changed its policies as a result.\16\ But
this isn't a case where I was right, and others were wrong: The
decisions here aren't straightforward, and hindsight is 20/20. It isn't
obvious what the right response is to a suspected, but not confirmed,
cyber attack by another government on a Presidential election. Twitter
erred in this case because we wanted to avoid repeating the mistakes of
2016.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Kate Conger and Mike Isaac, ``In Reversal, Twitter Is No
Longer Blocking New York Post Article,'' New York Times, October 16,
2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/16/technology/twitter-new-york-
post.html.
\16\ ``Distribution of Hacked Materials Policy,'' Help Center,
Twitter, last modified October 2020, https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-
and-policies/hacked-materials.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And so the basic job of trust and safety remains to try to strike
this balance: Between the harms of restricting too much speech, and the
dangers of doing too little. Some of the decisions we had to make, like
taking down images of animal abuse, were obvious; others, like how to
address various forms of misinformation about COVID, are less clear.
But someone has to make a call. Companies like Twitter--teams like
mine--have to exercise judgment about where to draw the line on this
content and implement that judgment consistently at the scale of
hundreds of millions of unique posts per day.
I'll be the first to admit that we didn't always get it right.
Individual content moderation decisions will always be contentious, and
reasonable minds can differ about whether a specific choice was right
or wrong. I'm sure we'll talk about some of those choices here today.
But what we tried to do at Twitter--across every decision--was to
create a rules-based system of governance that would make clear what's
allowed, or not, on Twitter, and why.
Transparency is at the heart of this work, and it's where I think
Twitter--and all of social media--can and must do better.
Trust is built on understanding--and right now, the vast majority
of people don't understand how or why content moderation decisions are
made. Much of the knowledge about how platforms like Twitter make
decisions is known only to the tiny number of people working at the
companies themselves. This is particularly problematic for key
decisions, like those impacting elections, where a company's actions
are of immense public concern to millions of voters.
During my tenure at Twitter, we started down a path of increased
transparency by beginning to pull back the curtains on these decisions.
In 2018, we took the unprecedented step of publishing comprehensive
archives of Russian election interference during and after the 2016
elections.\17\ We released similar data about dozens of other
campaigns, spanning hundreds of millions of Tweets and terabytes of
media, unearthing government-backed troll farms around the world.\18\
Through newer programs like the Twitter Moderation Research Consortium,
we aimed to expand this even further, sharing data about key policy
decisions in areas like misinformation with hundreds of
researchers.\19\ I'm concerned by recent reports that suggest this
program has been canceled, with no staff left at Twitter to oversee
it.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Vijaya Gadde and Yoel Roth, ``Enabling further research of
information operations on Twitter,'' Twitter Blog, October 17, 2018,
https://blog.twitter.com/en_us/topics/company/2018/enabling-further-
research-of-information-operations-on-twitter.
\18\ Twitter, ``Disclosing state-linked information operations
we've removed,'' Twitter Blog, December 2, 2021, https://
blog.twitter.com/en_us/topics/company/2021/disclosing-state-linked-
information-operations-we-ve-removed.
\19\ Yoel Roth, ``The Twitter Moderation Research Consortium is now
open to researchers,'' Twitter Blog, September 22, 2022, https://
blog.twitter.com/en_us/topics/company/2022/twitter-moderation-research-
consortium-open-researchers.
\20\ Sheila Dang, ``Twitter research group stall complicates
compliance with new EU law,'' Reuters, January 28, 2023, https://
www.reuters.com/technology/twitter-research-group-stall-complicates-
compliance-with-new-eu-law-2023-01-27/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Twitter's relationship with Government employees would benefit from
similar levels of transparency. While the Twitter Files show a lot of
discussions between Twitter employees and political staff on both sides
of the aisle, some key context is missing: We were careful to keep the
teams involved in those interactions cordoned off from the
implementation of our rules. Twitter's Government relations staff--the
people you see in the Twitter Files answering emails from campaign
staff and Members of Congress--did not have any kind of decision-making
authority over policy enforcement. But how would anyone know that,
especially when other big companies blur the lines between these
functions?\21\ Twitter set up its teams to promote impartiality; but in
the absence of transparency, people reasonably assume that there's
opportunity for abuse.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Emily Birnbaum, ``Facebook staff complained for years about
their lobbyists' power,'' Politico, October 25, 2021, https://
www.politico.com/news/2021/10/25/facebook-fatal-flaw-technologists-
lobbyists-516927.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legislation and regulation can help here. The bipartisan Platform
Accountability and Transparency \22\ and Digital Services Oversight and
Safety \23\ Acts, for example, would require platforms to provide data
to independent researchers, and empower the FTC to compel them to do
so. And, Chairman Comer, your proposal in the Protecting Speech from
Government Interference Act to restrict how Government employees may
pressure social media companies to moderate content would be an
important step forward in establishing clear boundaries between
Government and the private sector.\24\ Understanding what platforms are
doing and why--and what the influences on them are--is the cornerstone
of reestablishing public trust in social media.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Editorial Board, ``A small step toward solving our social
media woes,'' The Washington Post, January 17, 2022, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/01/17/legislative-step-toward-
solving-our-social-media-woes/.
\23\ Justin Hendrix, ``Reps. Trahan, Schiff, & Casten Introduce
Digital Services Oversight and Safety Act,'' Tech Policy Press,
February 23, 2022, https://techpolicy.press/reps-trahan-schiff-casten-
introduce-digital-services-oversight-and-safety-act/.
\24\ Committee on Oversight and Accountability, ``Comer, McMorris,
Rodgers, Jordan Introduce Bill to Stop Biden Administration from
Pressuring Social Media Companies to Censor Americans,'' Press Release,
January 12, 2023, https://oversight.house.gov/release/comer-mcmorris-
rodgers-jordan-introduce-bill-to-stop-biden-administration-from-
pressuring-social-media-companies-to-censor-americans-2/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is often said that humor can be an effective antidote to stress.
On some of the more challenging days, I've joked that, in trust and
safety, there are no good options; just a bunch of bad ones, and your
job is to try to pick what the least bad one is. While I was Head of
Trust & Safety at Twitter, I strove to do this work with impartiality
and a commitment to the fair enforcement of Twitter's written rules.
Each day at Twitter, my team and I worked to build trust with the
platform's millions of users around the world: By proactively
addressing the harms that can come from social media; and by doing that
work in a principled, consistent, and transparent way. But whether it's
me, or Elon Musk, or another future policy maker, someone will have to
make choices about the governance of on-line spaces. Those decisions
shouldn't be made behind closed doors, or based on personal whims. I
hope that we can work together to find ways to bring greater trust and
transparency to social media, and I look forward to answering the
committee's questions about any of these topics to the best of my
ability.

Mr. Ivey. I do have a couple of other articles here and
testimony. One is the testimony of Kate Starbird, director of
the Center for an Informed Public at the University of
Washington. The other is Marc Rogers, co-founder of the Cyber
Threat Intelligence League.
Chairman Bishop. Without objection, ordered to be submitted
with the record.
[The information follows:]
Statement of Dr. Kate Starbird, Associate Professor and Director of the
Center for an Informed Public, University of Washington
December 13, 2023
Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Ivey, and Members of this
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide this statement
describing the threats of mis- and disinformation to election integrity
specifically and democracy more broadly.
I currently am an associate professor at the University of
Washington (UW) where I also direct the Center for an Informed Public
(CIP). For more than a decade, my research has explored how
misinformation and disinformation spread on-line during crises and
breaking news events. My team and I have published more than 50
academic papers and articles on the topic and have watched as rumors,
conspiracy theories, and disinformation campaigns have become
increasingly prominent within social media platforms--leading to a
range of harms, including diminished trust in information, in our
fellow citizens, and in democracy more broadly.
Earlier this year, I provided voluntary testimony to this
subcommittee and to the House Judiciary Committee in separate
transcribed interviews which include additional details on my academic
background and current research. For the sake of brevity, I will
refrain from rehashing that content here.
I would like to comment on the threat disinformation poses to
America's elections and on the chilling effect on disinformation
researchers from harassment and threats.
how pervasive mis- and disinformation threaten election integrity
Within our modern information environment, the spread of
misinformation (defined as information that is false, but not
necessarily intentionally false) and disinformation (defined as
misleading information that is intentionally seeded and/or spread for
political, financial, or reputational gain) is pervasive.
Although the problems are difficult to precisely quantify,
researchers have repeatedly documented how on-line rumors and
misinformation spread much further and faster than their
corrections,\1\ how disinformation campaigns have infiltrated on-line
conversations and on-line communities,\2\ and how false conspiracy
theories have metastasized within large, international networks of
connected internet users and inspired acts of terrorism across the
globe.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Vosoughi, Soroush, Deb Roy, and Sinan Aral. ``The spread of
true and false news online.'' Science 359, no. 6380 (2018): 1146-1151.
\2\ Ong, Jonathan Corpus, and Jason Vincent A. Cabanes.
``Architects of networked disinformation: Behind the scenes of troll
accounts and fake news production in the Philippines.'' (2018).
\3\ Smith, Patrick. ``The Buffalo shooting is part of a global
network of white nationalist terror.'' NBC News. (May 17, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Contributors to the spread of falsehoods have included social media
platforms that are designed to optimize for and monetize attention, and
that have supercharged the spread of accidental misinformation and have
been manipulated to spread intentional disinformation. Over time, these
dynamics have reshaped the networks (the connections between accounts
through which information spreads) and the algorithms (the computer
programs that power the recommendations systems that determine who and
what we see on social media), leading to some parts of our social media
systems becoming ``wired'' to spread mis- and disinformation. Many
influencers, i.e., accounts with large followings that play an outsized
role in shaping on-line discourse, have gained reputation and
visibility by sharing unsubstantiated claims, especially during high
uncertainty events like crises and elections. Audiences have become
primed to believe and are incentivized to share misleading or
unsubstantiated content--and this is particularly true within
conversations about election integrity.
Unfortunately, the pervasive spread of mis- and disinformation has
negative consequences. In particular, falsehoods about voting processes
and election results, including both intentional mischaracterizations
and unintentional misinterpretations, can cause harm to election
integrity--and to democracy more broadly in several different ways:
(1) In a democracy, we don't have to agree on the best candidates,
but we do have to agree upon the rules that govem how those
candidates are elected, just as we must agree to abide by
election outcomes. Disinformation about election integrity
threatens to undermine the ``common knowledge'' necessary for a
healthy democracy''.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Farrell, Henry, and Bruce Schneier. ``Common-knowledge attacks
on democracy.'' Berkman Klein Center Research Publication 2018-7
(2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(2) Falsehoods about election processes--e.g., when, where, and how
to vote--can interfere with participation and disenfranchise
voters. Intentionally misleading people about when and where to
vote is illegal, and indeed we have seen prosecutions of
``social media influencers'' for this crime in recent years.\5\
Accidental misinformation, for example due to
misinterpretations around varying laws about when mail-in
ballots are due, can be just as damaging to the process if the
confusion it causes leads to someone missing their opportunity
to vote.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/social-media-influencer-
sentenced-election-interference-2016-presidential-race.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(3) Similarly, false claims about violence at the polls can result
in voter suppression. False rumors about violence at polling
locations, which resonate with historical strategies of voter
suppression, can discourage people from voting in person.
(4) False and misleading claims that delegitimize the outcomes of
elections can undermine trust in election outcomes and in
democracy more broadly, and, in extreme cases, can lead to
disruptions in the peaceful transfer of power. After the 2020
election, wide-spread misinformation about voting and false
allegations of a ``rigged election'' were mobilized into the
violent events of January 6, 2021--where political operatives
and activists attempted to stop the certification of the
Presidential election.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.govinfo.gov/collection/january-6th-committee-final-
report?path=/GPO/-
January%206th%20Committee%20Final%20Report%20and%20Supporting%20Material
s%20- Collection.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(5) False claims about election integrity have motivated wide-
spread harassment and threats against election officials,\7\
causing some officials to leave their jobs and discouraging
others from taking on these roles. Since 2020, numerous
election officials have resigned from their positions, many
citing threats related to misinformation about their work.\8\
This dynamic threatens the very foundations of our elections,
and our democracy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ For example, recently election officials in several States
received envelopes with suspicious letters and white substances,
including fentanyl: https://www.npr.org/2023/11/09/1212045794/
envelopes-with-fentanyl-or-other-substances-were-sent-to-several-
elections-offic.
\8\ https://abcnews.go.com/US/us-false-accusations-election-fraud-
prompt-election-workers/story?id=88739763.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(6) Pervasive mis- and disinformation about election integrity can
lead to maladaptive changes to election procedures that make
election outcomes more uncertain. Scholars have long explained
that uncertainty powers the rumor mill, creating conditions
where people are more vulnerable to rumoring and manipulation.
In response to false claims about election procedures, we have
seen election processes changed in ways that add uncertainty to
the process, for example by delaying the processing or counting
of ballots or removing systems that check for people who are
registered to vote in multiple states.\9\ These changes can
lead to more misinformation, feeding a kind of ``unvirtuous
cycle'' where misinformation reduces election integrity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ For example, after conspiracy theories targeted the ERIC system
which helps to maintain voter rolls and check for duplicates across
States, multiple States have exited the program. https://
www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/03/06/election-deniers-voter-
rolls.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(7) Additionally, pervasive mis- and disinformation about voting
processes and election results creates a ``boy who cried wolf''
situation where real threats to election integrity could be
overlooked, lost within the noise of false claims. Bad actors,
including foreign adversaries, may seek to exploit these
conditions to advance their aims through actual attacks on
election integrity.
(8) Foreign adversaries are known to use active measures and
disinformation to undermine trust in democratic processes and
results. The pervasive spread of falsehoods about U.S.
elections creates informational conditions that render us
increasingly vulnerable to outside manipulation, and foreign
actors may attempt to exploit these conditions--both by
amplifying domestically-created rumors and by seeding new
falsehoods--to advance their aims.
the chilling effect on disinformation researchers
Alongside the rise of mis- and disinformation which rattles
confidence in our elections and electoral processes, we have also
witnessed a multi-dimensional attack on the researchers and academics
who seek to understand misinformation and its impacts. Quite
personally, over the past year my team and I have been subjected to
persistent negative reporting in partisan media, on-line harassment,
threats, lawsuits, subpoenas, Congressional probes, and dozens of
public records requests. These have become a significant tax on our
time, financial resources, and well-being. Many other researchers are
experiencing the same.
This attack on our field is having a marked chilling effect on the
speech of misinformation researchers. Prominent voices in public debate
have gone silent, encumbered by legal stress and institutional
pressure. Some institutions, fearful of the political blowback, are
stepping back from publicly supporting their researchers and in some
cases are pressuring their researchers to refrain from public comment,
even to refrain from defending themselves against false allegations.
Additionally, some junior scholars are expressing fears about working
within a field where future institutions may be reluctant to take on
the risk of hiring them.
At a time when pervasive disinformation has become a critical
challenge for democratic societies, the very people who study and
provide insights into addressing that challenge are being silenced by
those who purport to stand for ``free speech'' and falsely frame our
work as ``censorship''. But, just as the First Amendment protects the
rights of U.S. citizens to openly express their opinions about our
elections, even if some turn out to be false, it also certainly
protects the rights of researchers to call out powerful people and
platforms for spreading misinformation and disinformation.
______

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Chenoweth. Mr. Chairman, could I respond to the Yoel
Roth point? Is that possible?
Chairman Bishop. Well, let me see, Mr. Chenoweth. I think
there is a reasonably good likelihood we will enter a second
round. We want to stick to the time so no Members are
disadvantaged.
That is true. I will tell you, let me see, we will see
whether we get through the other witnesses. We will try to
remember to come back to the point at some point in time, if we
can, if a Member's time permits. Sorry about that, Mr.
Chenoweth.
With that, I recognize Ms. Greene for 5, is that right, Ms.
Greene? Ms. Greene for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Greene. Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you for
doing this hearing.
CISA claims that it has not engaged in censorship, and that
is a complete and total lie. Mr. Shellenberger, I read an
article recently that you had written and it was about me and
the fact that I had been censored. It was through CISA engaging
with the DNC, the NAACP, homeland security, flagging my tweets,
writing tickets on them. Also, amazingly, which to my shock, I
read details of these tickets, making up complete falsehoods
about me. Talk about misinformation. This is taxpayer-funded
Government agencies lying about a Member of Congress, about
what I said, taking other people's statements and writing it in
context of what I said on my own social media, then taking down
my actual social media post, which is shocking, absolutely
shocking.
So, Mr. Shellenberger, I would like to ask you a little bit
more. You worked on the Twitter files, and I want to thank you
for that work and thank you for writing this article, calling
attention to the fact that me, as a Member of Congress, had my
own First Amendment violated. That is also a First Amendment
violation on behalf of my entire district because they elected
me and sent me here to represent them. So thank you. Thank you
very much for that. What most surprised you or further alarmed
you when you learned everything you did through Twitter Files?
Mr. Shellenberger. Thank you for the question,
Congresswoman.
I mean I think I was shocked to see Members of Congress
being censored. That was shocking to me. We were shocked to see
how many Government employees were constantly emailing Twitter.
Carlos Monje, an executive I cited in my Twitter Files on the
Hunter Biden laptop, complained about all the pressure that
they were getting from the Federal Government. I think the most
shocking thing, though, was it was sort-of like what you're
saying is that the censorship was actually in service of
disinformation efforts, and that what you're really looking at
when you're looking at the Cyber Threat Intelligence League is
an operation. It looks like a military intelligence operation
that clearly they drew right from fighting terrorists abroad
and they turned those tools against the American people. So
censorship was just one of the countermeasures that they had
set up.
But with the Hunter Biden laptop, it was a disinformation
campaign aimed at tying the laptop to the Russians, even though
there was no evidence for it. So you might have a situation
where Yoel Roth is like, oh, I've got a good relationship with
the FBI, but he's the target of an operation that was aimed at
convincing him that there was something suspicious about the
Hunter Biden laptop, even though they had the receipt from
Hunter Biden and they had the FBI subpoena taking the laptop in
December 2019. So, in fact, their own review of the laptop,
they came back that it was not the result of a hack. So what
you see is that, I think, to what Mr. Chenoweth was describing,
is it's not just coercion. They're actually sort-of--I don't
know, how do you describe it--they're kind-of working, these
guys. They're using a lot of--they're being very sweet often.
It's often very kind and friendly, a lot of trying to be like,
we're all on the same team here. You have to remember, I think
it was like, over 96 percent of all Twitter executive donations
went to Democrats. So it's a very partisan institution to begin
with. So they're already primed to believe that there may be
something wrong with that Hunter Biden laptop.
So what was important is not just that it was censored, but
really that Twitter participated in the disinformation effort
to create the perception that there was something illegitimate
about it and that it was a result of a hacking leak.
Ms. Greene. Right. So did Facebook.
Mr. Shellenberger. Yes.
Ms. Greene. So did Google.
Mr. Shellenberger. That's right.
Ms. Greene. Largely the internet.
Speaking of the partisan difference there, we have who was
being censored? President Donald J. Trump, Senator Thom Tillis,
Speaker Newt Gingrich, Governor Mike Huckabee, Congressman
Thomas Massey, Congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene, Newsmax,
the Babylon Bee, Sean Hannity, Mollie Hemingway, Harmeet
Dhillon, Charlie Kirk, Candace Owens, Jack Posobeic, Tom
Fitton, James O'Keefe, Benny Johnson, Michelle Malkin, Sean
Davis, Dave Rubin, Paul Sperry, Tracy Beanz, Chanel Rion. Then
add in the most offensive--what I consider to be the most
offensive, an untold number of everyday Americans of all
political affiliations. These are people that don't have
powerful platforms like me as a Member of Congress, these are
average American citizens that rely on the Government to
protect their rights, their freedom of speech. It is
outrageous.
Mr. Chairman, I certainly would like to completely defund
CISA. It is an agency that should not exist. It has violated
the American people's rights. We should completely get rid of
it, and it shouldn't be entitled to do this anymore.
Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Bishop. The gentlewoman yields back.
I recognize Ms. Clarke for 5 minutes of question.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you, Ranking
Member Ivey, and good afternoon.
Before I begin, I want to correct some statements made by
the Chairman about Jen Easterly and CISA. First, Jen Easterly
never recommended regulating cognitive infrastructure. I ask
unanimous consent to submit into the record an article from The
Hill containing her full quote.
[The information follows:]
Cyber Agency Beefing Up Disinformation, Misinformation Team
By Maggie Miller--11/10/21 2:52 PM ET, The Hill
The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) is
beefing up its disinformation and misinformation team in the wake of a
divisive Presidential election that saw a proliferation of misleading
information online.
``I am actually going to grow and strengthen my misinformation and
disinformation team,'' CISA Director Jen Easterly said during virtual
remarks at the RE:WIRED conference on Wednesday.
Easterly noted that earlier this week she had a meeting with ``six
of the nation's experts'' in the disinformation and misinformation
space. She stressed her concerns around this being a top threat for
CISA, which is charged with securing critical infrastructure, to
confront.
``One could argue we're in the business of critical infrastructure,
and the most critical infrastructure is our cognitive infrastructure,
so building that resilience to misinformation and disinformation, I
think, is incredibly important,'' Easterly said.
``We are going to work with our partners in the private sector and
throughout the rest of the government and at the department to continue
to ensure that the American people have the facts that they need to
help protect our critical infrastructure,'' she added.
Despite the political pressure, the rumor control site remains up.
Easterly pledged in September to continue using the page, and CISA did
indeed use the rumor control site to counter election disinformation
and misinformation during the recent 2021 elections in 30 States,
including the closely watched Virginia Governor's race.
``We now live in a world where people talk about alternative facts,
post-truth, which I think is really, really dangerous if you get to
pick your own facts, and it's particularly corrosive when you talk
about matters of election security,'' Easterly said Wednesday.
``There is a certain percentage of the American people that are not
going to be convinced and are not going to listen to the government, we
get that, but there is a certain part of the American public that do
still trust the government and that do still come to us and that get
facts about things that can be difficult to understand,'' she said.
Microsoft President and Vice Chairman Brad Smith on Wednesday
separately sounded the alarm about online disinformation and
misinformation impacting issues including elections and COVID-19
vaccine rollout.
Smith specifically warned about the ability of foreign governments
to use disinformation to meddle in another country's affairs, an issue
that became particularly concerning following Russian efforts to spread
disinformation to sway the 2016 U.S. Presidential election in favor of
Trump.
``It has become in some ways almost a tool of choice to disrupt a
democracy, to sow dissent, to cause people to question even fundamental
facts like who won the election and is this vaccine safe, or does it
work,'' Smith said in a speech at the Sciences Po Paris School of
International Affairs. ``In some ways, it may be far more effective,
it's certainly less expensive, to launch a government-sponsored
disinformation campaign than it is to build a hypersonic missile, and
we have some countries that have the resources easily to do both.''

Ms. Clarke. On a related manner, aside from cyber incident
reporting, CISA is not a regulator. It has no authority to
regulate critical infrastructure outside of cyber incident
reporting.
Second, when asked at an appropriations hearing, Jen
Easterly responded to questions about switchboarding in the
present tense. It is true that CISA no longer engages in
switchboarding. Switchboarding occurred during the previous
administration.
Finally, the CISA advisory committee's MDM subcommittee
does not exist any longer and hasn't existed for over a year.
Every recommendation the subcommittee made while it has existed
is on the website.
So, having said that, there has been a lot of discussion
and fear-mongering about the work of DHS and CISA in particular
and I appreciate this opportunity to set the record straight.
Mr. Shellenberger, in your testimony, you advocate for
abolishing CISA, an agency created by legislation led by former
committee Chairman Mike McCaul, a Republican, and signed into
law by former President Donald Trump. At the time, President
Trump stated that CISA would, and I quote, ``lead Federal
Government's civilian response to cyber threats against our
Nation''. We have had many, many threats. The men and women of
the new Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency will
be on the front lines of our cyber defense. They will partner
with the private sector and all levels of government to defend
America's power grids, banks, telecommunications, and other
critical parts of our economy. As the cyber battleship evolves,
this new agency will ensure that we confront the full range of
threats from nation-states, cyber criminals, and other
malicious actors, of which there are many. This is an enormous
mission.
Over the past 5 years, CISA has rapidly built capacity to
help State and local governments and critical infrastructure
defend against and build resilience to a range of cyber
threats. CISA spends $45 million of its nearly $3 billion
budget on election security.
So, Mr. Shellenberger, do you know what percent of CISA's
budget, overall budget that is? Let me tell you that that is
about 1.5 percent of its overall budget--about 1.5 percent. Of
the $45 million CISA spends on election security, about $2
million of those funds are used to support efforts to counter
influence operations.
Mr. Shellenberger, do you know what percentage of CISA's
budget that is?
Mr. Shellenberger. Too much.
Ms. Clarke. It is not even one-tenth of a percent of CISA's
overall budget.
Mr. Shellenberger. Yet, here we are debating it.
Ms. Clarke. Excuse me. I am reclaiming my time.
Mr. Chairman, at the outset, it is clear that CISA has not
engaged in any nefarious or unconstitutional activity. There is
simply no evidence of it. But suggesting to abolish an agency
because you disagree with less than 2 percent of what it does
is just not a serious recommendation.
So let me thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman Bishop. The gentlewoman yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Crane for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today. I want to say thank you to those of you on the
panel for showing up.
I want to start with just asking the panel, generally, do
you trust the Federal Government to censor speech? I will start
with you, Mr. Shellenberger.
Mr. Shellenberger. No.
Mr. Chenoweth. I do not.
Mr. Abdo. The government should not be censoring speech.
Mr. Lawkowski. Absolutely not.
Mr. Crane. Would all of you gentlemen say that generally,
you are students of history? Generally.
Mr. Shellenberger. Generally.
Mr. Crane. OK. What kind of governments typically are most
likely to censor their people?
Mr. Shellenberger, I will start with you.
Mr. Shellenberger. Authoritarian and totalitarian ones.
Mr. Crane. Yes. What about you, sir?
Mr. Chenoweth. I agree.
Mr. Abdo. I agree.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Lawkowski.
Mr. Lawkowski. I agree. I would add ones that aren't
confident in their own abilities to govern.
Mr. Crane. Yes, absolutely. Now, why do you think these
types of governments typically want to control and censor the
speech of their own citizens?
Mr. Shellenberger. Because they are behaving
undemocratically in a variety of ways, and they don't want to
be called out for it.
Mr. Crane. Absolutely.
What about you, Mr. Chenoweth.
Mr. Chenoweth. I think there's many reasons. I think they
want to hold on to power. Anything that's happening in their
society that appears to be out of control, that's out of their
power, is something that is a threat to them being dislodged
from power. So they want to control the information atmosphere
in order to hold on to power.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Abdo.
Mr. Abdo. Generally to silence dissent.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Lawkowski.
Mr. Lawkowski. I would say it's out of a sense of
arrogance, the sense that they're right and that anyone who
disagrees with them is wrong, and that that needs to be
corrected through a proper degree of humility.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Lawkowski, do you see any of those signs
that you just pointed out, the arrogance, in this Federal
Government?
Mr. Lawkowski. Absolutely. I think it was on vivid display
during the COVID response and in a number of other areas.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Shellenberger, how about you? Do you see any
of those signs in this current Government?
Mr. Shellenberger. Yes, many signs.
Mr. Crane. Do you think it is rational to believe that a
private company, even one as large as Twitter or Facebook,
might feel intimidated or coerced if the most powerful
Government in the history of the world contacted them to alert
them to a post that they found problematic?
Mr. Shellenberger. Yes, and we saw that intimidation
repeatedly in the Twitter files.
Mr. Crane. What about the rest of you guys? You think they
might feel coerced or intimidated?
Mr. Chenoweth. Absolutely. We've had four Federal judges
who have found that, in fact, that happened.
Mr. Crane. In your opinion, do you think the American
people have any reason to question the official narratives put
out by this Government, both this one right now and past
Governments?
Mr. Abdo. Yes, many reasons.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Shellenberger, can you go into a short list
of official positions that they have released on certain things
that you found to be problematic and rightly see the American
people being rational to question those narratives?
Mr. Shellenberger. I would say the Afghanistan pull-out,
the Ukraine war, the efficacy of the COVID vaccine, the lack of
transparency on COVID origins, the cost of the Inflation
Reduction Act, viability of renewables. Anyway, how long do you
have?
Mr. Crane. Yes, I had some of those same ones on my list.
What about the Hunter Biden laptop? Would that be on your list,
sir?
Mr. Shellenberger. Yes, for sure. I mean, it was clearly a
disinformation campaign that involved existing and former
Government officials.
Mr. Crane. Yes. What do you gentlemen typically think when
you see the billboards pulled up with official statements from
individuals at CISA? You know, nothing to see here, nothing to
see here. What do you guys think about that? Just more of the
same CYA, cover your ass, type deals?
Mr. Shellenberger, I will start with you.
Mr. Shellenberger. I'm mixed between it being sinister and
comedic.
Mr. Crane. Yes. What about you, Mr. Chenoweth?
Mr. Chenoweth. I think that there's a misimpression on the
part of some of these individuals that if they act through
third parties that they're not violating the First Amendment.
They're wrong about that, but they're not all lawyers, I get
that. But they need to understand that they are blatantly
violating the First Amendment when they work through third
parties to achieve censorship.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Abdo, do you have anything to add to that?
Mr. Abdo. Yes, Congressman, I think the question, the
Constitutional one that the Supreme Court set out in 1963, is
whether the Government has coerced the suppression of speech.
I'll give you just a couple of examples where I think it's
actually important for the Government to be able to contribute
to public discourse and also to contribute to persuading
private actors into making decisions about the speech.
In 2004, the New York Times was leaked information about
the Bush administration's warrantless wiretapping program, and
members of the Bush administration met with the New York Times
and convinced the New York Times that to disclose that
information in 2004 would result in deaths in the disclosure of
undercover sources. The New York Times held on to that story
for a year. I happen to think the New York Times probably made
the wrong decision in being persuaded by the Bush
administration to hold on to that story for a year. But I think
it's relevant to the New York Times' decision making what the
Government thinks about the likelihood that disclosing that
information would cause real harm to the national security
interests of the United States, even though the New York Times'
publication of that story was unquestionably Constitutionally-
protected.
So I think there is a role for Government in persuading
private actors to take into account the harms of the
independent editorial decisions they make.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr.----
Mr. Chenoweth. But that was the New York Times' own speech
that it was holding back on, not a third party's speech.
Mr. Abdo. I think that the Bantam Books case is the case
about third-party speech. It was a lawsuit brought against--I
think inconsistently what you said earlier, Mr. Chenoweth--it
was a lawsuit brought against the Rhode Island Commission on
Morality and Youth, arguing that that commission had exceeded
its authority in attempting to coerce book distributors and
publishers into taking off their shelves material that the
commission had deemed to be obscene or offensive.
Mr. Crane. Thank you. Thank you.
I yield.
Chairman Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Crane.
I thank the witnesses. I would actually love to hear from
all of you more. Our time is unfortunately limited. We have
another panel.
The Members of the subcommittee may have additional
questions for this panel of witnesses. We would ask the
witnesses to respond to those in writing. Pursuant to committee
rule VII(D), the hearing record will remain open for 10 days
for that.
These witnesses are dismissed and the committee will be in
recess for 15 minutes to commence with the second panel.
[Recess.]
Chairman Bishop. The Committee on Homeland Security
Subcommittee on Oversight, Investigations, and accountability
will come to order.
I am pleased to have as our second panel a panel of
witnesses from the Department of Homeland Security before us
today to speak on this very important topic.
I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise your right
hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Bishop. Thank you. You may be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses have answered in
the affirmative.
I would now like to formally introduce our additional
witnesses. I hope I am going to get your name right, sir. Mr.
Iranga Kahangama is the assistant secretary for cyber,
infrastructure, risk, and resilience at the Department of
Homeland Security. Ms. Mona Harrington is the assistant
director for the National Risk Management Center at the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency.
I thank these witnesses for being here today.
The Chair will now recognize each witness for oral
statements. Each oral statement will be limited to 5 minutes,
but submitted written statements by witnesses will appear in
the hearing record in their entirety.
I now recognize Mr. Kahangama for 5 minutes for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF IRANGA KAHANGAMA, ASSISTANT SECRETARY, CYBER,
INFRASTRUCTURE, RISK, AND RESILIENCE, OFFICE OF STRATEGY,
POLICY, AND PLANS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Kahangama. Thank you.
Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Ivey, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me here
today to discuss the Department of Homeland Security's efforts
to counter the impacts of foreign influence operations and
disinformation impacting our homeland security.
I serve as the Department's assistant secretary for cyber,
infrastructure, risk, and resilience. In this role, I lead the
Department's efforts on cybersecurity and critical
infrastructure policy. Nation-state adversaries, such as
Russia, China, and Iran, are likely to continue to conduct
overt and covert influence operations to shape U.S. policy and
undermine trust in U.S. Government institutions, social
cohesion, and democratic processes. With the upcoming election
cycle of 2024, our adversaries are likely seeking more
opportunity than ever before.
The U.S. intelligence community's Annual Threat Assessment
for 2023 notes that the People's Republic of China seeks to
expand its malign influence campaigns to better support its
political, economic, and security goals. Beijing utilizes a
broad array of highly sophisticated covert, overt, licit, and
illicit means to conduct these operations. Their U.S.-based
influence operations are focused on shaping U.S. policy and the
American public's perception of the DRC. Russia presents one of
the most serious foreign influence threats to the United States
because it utilizes its intelligence services, proxies, and
wide-ranging influence tools to try to sow discord inside the
United States and divide Western allies. Moscow views U.S.
elections as opportunities for malign influence as part of its
broader foreign policy strategy.
While these risks are not new, our interconnected world,
the anonymous nature of the internet, and emerging technologies
change the nature of that threat. For example, these same
adversaries are likely to use generative artificial
intelligence tools and strategies to improve the quality,
scope, and scale of their influence operations. The wide-spread
proliferation and accessibility of these AI tools will boost
foreign malign influence campaigns by enabling threat actors to
create synthetic text, audio, and images at a lower cost and
with higher quality.
DHS is charged with safeguarding the United States against
threats to its security. In recent years, many of those threats
have been exacerbated by disinformation. As part of its
mission, DHS has worked across multiple administrations to
address and mitigate different forms of disinformation that
threaten authorized missions of the Department. Examples of
such efforts include working to combat human smuggling,
protecting critical infrastructure, and responding to foreign
malign influence. In the context of these threats, the
Department takes seriously our responsibility to safeguard the
United States, its people, and its values. Providing the public
with accurate information in response to foreign malign
influence campaigns is critical to fulfilling DHS's
Congressionally-mandated mission.
The Department is committed to carrying out its mission in
a way that ensures that privacy, civil rights, and civil
liberties are protected for all Americans. This includes the
freedom of speech. These rights are fundamental to our freedom
and to who we are as a Nation. Like everything we do, the work
of DHS to address foreign influence operations must be
consistent with the Constitution and in compliance with U.S.
laws, regulations, and policies. The Department works every day
to ensure that all of our activities are carried out in a
manner that protects these values. DHS is committed to
continuing to build resilience to foreign influence operations
and disinformation in close coordination with our interagency
partners. In these efforts, DHS will continue operating within
our authority in accordance with all legal requirements with
respect for the Constitutional rights and civil liberties of
all Americans.
I thank you again for the opportunity to testify here
today, and I look forward to taking your questions.
Thank you.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Kahangama and Ms.
Harrington follows:]
Joint Prepared Statement of Iranga Kahangama and Mona Harrington
December 13, 2023
introduction
Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Ivey, and Members of the
subcommittee, we appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today
to discuss the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS or the
Department) efforts to counter the impacts of foreign influence
operations and disinformation impacting homeland security.
First and foremost, at the core of the Department's mission is a
commitment to safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our
values. We are committed to carrying out this mission in a manner that
protects the privacy, civil rights, and civil liberties, including the
freedom of speech, of all Americans. These rights are fundamental to
our freedom and to who we are as a Nation. The Department works every
day to ensure that all our activities are carried out in a manner that
protects these values.
In its Homeland Threat Assessment for 2024, the Department's
Intelligence Enterprise assesses Russia, China, and Iran likely see the
upcoming election season in 2024 as an opportunity to conduct overt and
covert influence campaigns aimed at shaping favorable U.S. policy
outcomes and undermining U.S. stability, and they will likely ramp up
these efforts in advance of the election. These adversarial states are
likely to use generative artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled
technologies to improve the quality, scope, and scale of their
influence operations targeting U.S. audiences.
Further, nation-state adversaries likely will continue to conduct
influence operations aimed at undermining trust in Government
institutions, our social cohesion, and democratic processes. The
proliferation and accessibility of emergent cyber and AI tools probably
will help these actors bolster their malign information campaigns by
enabling the creation of low-cost, synthetic text-, image-, and audio-
based content with higher quality. Russia, China, and Iran continue to
develop the most sophisticated malign influence campaigns on-line. Many
of the tactics these adversaries use to influence U.S. audiences will
likely be used in the lead-up to the 2024 election.
This risk is not new. In its 2023 Annual Threat Assessment, the
U.S. intelligence community noted that China largely concentrates its
U.S.-focused influence efforts on shaping U.S. policy and the U.S.
public's perception of the People's Republic of China (PRC) in a
positive direction but has shown a willingness to meddle in select
election races that involved perceived anti-PRC politicians. For
example, Beijing's growing efforts to actively exploit perceived U.S.
societal divisions using its on-line personas move it closer to
Moscow's playbook for influence operations.
Russia presents one of the most serious foreign influence threats
to the United States because it uses its intelligence services,
proxies, and wide-ranging influence tools to try to sow discord inside
the United States. Moscow views U.S. elections as opportunities for
malign influence as part of its larger foreign policy strategy. Moscow
has conducted influence operations against U.S. elections for decades,
including as recently as the U.S. midterm elections in 2022. Russia's
influence actors have adapted their efforts to increasingly hide their
hand, laundering their preferred messaging through a vast ecosystem of
Russian proxy websites, individuals, and organizations that appear to
be independent sources.
election infrastructure mission
In 2017, the Secretary of Homeland Security established election
infrastructure as a critical infrastructure subsector. To manage risks
to the Nation's election infrastructure on behalf of the Department,
the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) works
collaboratively with State and local governments, election officials,
Federal partners, and private-sector partners. The collaboration
includes working in a nonpartisan, voluntary manner with State and
local election officials, who are the trusted and expert voices within
their communities, to hold secure elections in their jurisdictions and
to equip the American public with accurate information about the
conduct and security of elections.
CISA provides publicly-available resources on election security for
both the public and election officials in its efforts to protect
America's election infrastructure against new and evolving threats. For
example, CISA recently publicly released the No Downtime in Elections
Guide to Mitigating Risks of Denial of Service. Moreover, CISA has
partnered with the Federal Bureau of Investigation to publish election
security-related Public Service Advisories; and CISA has compiled a
toolkit of free services and tools intended to help State and local
government officials, election officials, and vendors enhance the
cybersecurity and cyber resilience of U.S. election infrastructure.
CISA also provides numerous voluntary and no-cost election security
services, such as cybersecurity assessments, cyber threat hunting,
cyber incident response, training, and exercises to State and local
government officials and private-sector election infrastructure
partners. In addition, CISA reduces risk to U.S. critical
infrastructure by building resilience to foreign influence operations
and disinformation intended to impact critical infrastructure.
Through these efforts, DHS helps the American people understand the
scope and scale of activities targeting election infrastructure and
enables them to take action to mitigate associated risks. The
Department's efforts include an emphasis on transparency with respect
to sharing accurate information about election infrastructure security,
as well as increasing awareness about the threat posed by foreign
influence operations and disinformation.
foreign influence operations and disinformation
DHS is charged with safeguarding the United States against threats
to its security. In recent years, many of those threats have been
exacerbated by disinformation. As part of its mission, DHS has worked
across multiple administrations to address and mitigate different forms
of disinformation that threaten the authorized missions of the
Department. Countering disinformation that threatens the homeland and
providing the public with accurate information in response are critical
to fulfilling DHS's Congressionally-mandated missions. DHS efforts are
limited to combating disinformation that threatens the homeland and
homeland security missions, such as border security, emergency
response, and infrastructure security. Examples of such efforts include
working to combat human smuggling, protecting critical infrastructure,
and responding to malign foreign influence efforts.
CISA's work on foreign influence operations and disinformation
targeting election infrastructure is of limited scope and focuses
predominantly on its impact to public confidence in election
infrastructure security. Out of CISA's $2.9 billion budget, less than
0.07 percent is spent on these efforts. CISA's work has been
transparent, briefed to Congress many times, and is available to the
public on its website at cisa.gov.
In support of these efforts, CISA has developed voluntary resources
to help individuals identify and mitigate the threats of foreign
influence and disinformation operations. Recently, CISA has released
guides that highlight tactics, such as manipulating content service
providers or defacing public websites, used by foreign actors engaged
in disinformation campaigns that seek to negatively impact U.S.
critical infrastructure and disrupt American life. Such public products
help Americans understand how automated programs like social media bots
simulate human behavior on social media platforms and how foreign
malign actors use them to spread false or misleading information, shut
down opposition, and elevate their own platforms for further
manipulation.
Additionally, CISA provides context to common disinformation
narratives and themes that relate to the security of election
infrastructure through our Election Security Rumor vs. Reality website.
Last, CISA seeks to combat foreign disinformation by amplifying
accurate election security-related information shared by State and
local officials with the public.
conclusion
DHS is committed to continuing to build resilience to foreign
influence operations and disinformation, in close coordination with our
interagency partners. In these efforts, DHS will continue operating
within our authority and in accordance with all legal requirements, and
with respect for the Constitutional rights and civil liberties of all
Americans.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you today, and
we look forward to continuing to work closely with you to keep our
homeland safe and secure.

Chairman Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Kahangama.
I now recognize Ms. Harrington for 5 minutes for her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MONA HARRINGTON, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, NATIONAL RISK
MANAGEMENT CENTER, CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY
AGENCY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Ms. Harrington. Thank you.
Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Ivey, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the
National Risk Management Center's efforts to build resilience
to the impacts of foreign influence, operations, and
disinformation targeting election infrastructure.
First and foremost, at the core of the Department's mission
is a commitment to safeguard the American people, our homeland,
and our values. We carry out this mission in a manner that
protects privacy, civil rights, civil liberties, including the
freedom of speech of all Americans. These rights are
fundamental to our freedom and to who we are as a Nation.
I began serving as the assistant director of the National
Risk Management Center, the NRMC, in October 2022. I have over
20 years of Federal Government experience working in different
leadership roles. My expertise spans cybersecurity, strategy,
risk management, critical infrastructure, human capital
operations, and the implementation of best practices in
critical infrastructure environments. I have led efforts to
further the NRMC's critical analytics support to CISA's mission
to understand, manage, and reduce risk to the cyber and
physical infrastructure Americans rely on every day. Our work
enables CISA and other Federal, State, local, Tribal,
territorial, and critical infrastructure partners to apply
actionable analysis in support of risk management decisions.
Over the last year, we have produced 1,600 tailored products
and engaged over 6,300 stakeholders to improve security of U.S.
critical infrastructure.
The election security and resilience team is one of many
efforts within the NRMC. The election security and resilience
team works collaboratively with election officials, Federal,
and private-sector partners. The collaboration includes working
in a non-partisan manner on a voluntary basis with State and
local election officials to improve the security of election
infrastructure necessary for the elections they are responsible
for administering. CISA provides voluntary support to these
officials with intelligence and information sharing, guidance,
and best practices, and no-cost security services such as cyber
incident response, cybersecurity assessments, and exercises.
CISA's work on foreign influence, operations, and
disinformation is a very small part of the election security
and resilience team and it's narrowly scoped. CISA's work in
this space includes developing publicly-available resources to
inform and assist stakeholders and the public. For example, we
released a guide that highlights tactics used by foreign
actors, such as manipulating content service providers or
defacing public websites. These products are intended to build
awareness of how foreign malign actors spread false or
misleading information. CISA's work has been transparent,
briefed to Congress many times, including this committee, and
is available to the public on its website at CISA.gov.
Thank you again for this opportunity and I look forward to
your questions.
Chairman Bishop. Thank you, Ms. Harrington.
Members will now be recognized, by order of seniority for 5
minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning may
be called after all Members have been recognized.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Harrington, there was a CISA video on YouTube that had
the fictional character--I think her name was Susan or Sharon--
and she said that the idea was that she had interacted with her
uncle on social media, he was posting things that were
disinformation or mal information or something like that. It
concluded with a recommendation that she report the
disinformation from her uncle. CISA took that down. Why did
CISA take that video down?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, respectfully, I'm not aware
of that. That must predate my time. I'm not at all familiar
with that.
Chairman Bishop. How about Mr. Kahangama? Do you know what
I am talking about?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm not familiar with
that video.
Chairman Bishop. All right. Let me ask you generally, Mr.
Kahangama, and then I will go back to Ms. Harrington, how have
DHS and CISA's efforts or activity concerning dealing with
disinformation, misinformation, malinformation changed as in
consequence of the Missouri v. Biden preliminary injunction
that has been upheld by the Fifth Circuit or otherwise since
the last election?
Ms. Harrington. Thank you, Chair, for the question.
While I understand and am aware of the Missouri v. Biden
case, I understand that that is still on-going pending
litigation in front of the Supreme Court and so I'm unable to
speak to the specifics of that case.
But what I will say is that the Department and its work in
combating disinformation in defense of its specific mission
area is done with robust oversight in coordination with civil
rights and civil liberties, our statutorily-mandated offices,
as well as in close coordination with our Office of General
Counsel.
Chairman Bishop. Well, see, that is what concerns me is
that has been said to us for a number of years. In fact, it has
always been said by CISA, by DHS, the recital that we are
concerned about rights under the First Amendment and we always
are carefully taking action to avoid infringing those or
abridging free speech. Yet a District Court has found, and an
Appellate Court has affirmed that--and, of course, it is still
pending for final determination, so I am not asking you about
the facts or the determinations in that case, what I am asking
you is--let me put it this way, because I asked you how things
have changed, whether things have changed. Since that decision
has been made has DHS changed the way it deals with
disinformation?
Mr. Kahangama. Again, thank you for the question, Chair.
I am not in a position to answer anything as it relates
specific to the implications of that case.
Chairman Bishop. All right, let me ask this then. Since the
last election--disregard the case if you want to--how is DHS
dealing with disinformation differently than it did then?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you, Chair, for the question.
DHS's approach to election security has been around
election infrastructure, making sure that they are preventing
the infrastructure from being impacted by cybersecurity issues
and working to advance the mission of State and local partners
that we trust as the authoritative voices on elections in this
election space.
Chairman Bishop. But I didn't ask you about how you are
protecting elections infrastructure from hacking and so forth.
What I am asking you about are your efforts vis-a-vis
disinformation.
Let me just ask you, you still have an MDM team, don't you?
Mr. Kahangama. I do not have one at the Department of
Homeland Security.
Chairman Bishop. All right, Ms. Harrington, is there still
an MDM team at CISA?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, yes, we still have an MDM
team.
Chairman Bishop. How is the MDM team and the other efforts
relating to the MDM team concerning disinformation, how have
you changed those at CISA?
Ms. Harrington. Representative the work that we do around
MDM are threefold. One, we are putting out literacy packets----
Chairman Bishop. No, no, no, don't give me a discourse
about three with three parts. What I am asking is what has
changed? What has changed, if anything? If you are proceeding
and dealing with disinformation in exactly the way you did
then, which you have contended respects all First Amendment
rights, notwithstanding evidence to the contrary, say that. But
otherwise, I want you to tell me how it has changed. How have
you changed your practices in this area?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, respectfully, I'm not aware
of direct changes to the on-going litigation.
Chairman Bishop. No, I am not trying to qualify in terms--
in fact, we covered that with Mr. Kahangama. What I am asking
is, leave aside the litigation, since the election in 2020, how
have you changed, how has CISA changed the way you are dealing
with disinformation?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, I can tell you the three
ways that we deal with disinformation and counter foreign
influence, which are----
Chairman Bishop. So you can't tell me how you have changed
them?
Ms. Harrington. First of all, going back to 2020, that
predates my tenure at the agency, but I'm happy to tell you
what we are doing.
Chairman Bishop. Are you aware, by virtue of policies you
have been exposed to, managerial discussions at CISA, whether
there have been changes to the way CISA addresses
disinformation?
Ms. Harrington. Representative I'm not aware of what you're
referencing as far as changes.
Chairman Bishop. OK, you are not aware of any? That is
concerning to me.
By what justification does a Government agency tasked with
curtailing and preventing computer hacking stray into governing
or babysitting Americans' free speech on social media?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, respectfully, we don't
censor.
Chairman Bishop. OK. What is the source of authority for
DHS--Ms. Clarke said in her questioning on our first panel, and
I think she is exactly right, that CISA and--Excuse me, I see
my time has expired and I have let it go over.
Let me just stop there and yield back.
I recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Ivey, for his 5
minutes.
Mr. Ivey. If I might, I would let Mr. Thanedar go.
Chairman Bishop. Dr. Thanedar is recognized.
Mr. Thanedar. Chairman Bishop, thank you for holding this
hearing. Ranking Member Ivey, thank you for your incredible
kindness to let me speak here out of order. Maybe a little
earlier than I am supposed to, but thank you so much.
Well, CISA has been incredibly transparent about its
interactions with social media companies on the topic of
election-related mis- and disinformation. In numerous hearings
before this committee and others, witnesses from CISA
repeatedly told Congress that they were in regular
communication with social media companies and even told us that
these companies were taking a very aggressive posture toward
election-related misinformation.
Chairman Bishop, I would like to enter into the record the
transcripts of a hearing this committee held in 2019 regarding
how CISA was preparing for the 2020 election.
Chairman Bishop. Without objection, so ordered.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The document has been retained in committee files and is
available at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-116hhrg40456/pdf/
CHRG-116hhrg40456.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Thanedar. In fact, I think it is incredible--in fact, I
think it is interesting that it was not until Donald Trump lost
the 2020 election that my Republican colleagues began to take
issues with CISA's disinformation activities.
Ms. Harrington, can you speak to CISA's transparency
efforts in this area and describe what the agency has done to
explain to Congress, the media, and the public its election-
related disinformation work?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, thank you for the question.
CISA has all of its materials on its website. We are
incredibly transparent. We have all of our publications
regarding disinformation, encountering foreign influence
published publicly. All of that information can be found there.
We regularly work with State and local partners. All of our
partnerships and communication around the work that we do can
be found publicly, and it's on our website.
Mr. Thanedar. All right.
Well, thank you so much. Thank you. Appreciate both of you
being here and for your testimony.
Chairman Bishop, I yield back.
Chairman Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Thanedar.
I recognize Mr. Ezell for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for being
here today.
Recently, documents were obtained under the Freedom of
Information Act by Americans for Prosperity regarding DHS
Disinformation Governance Board, which was stood up by the
Biden administration and was almost immediately shut down due
to massive public pushback. Behind me today are two of these
documents. Well, besides the title, there isn't much that we
can learn from these documents.
Mr. Kahangama, help me fill in some of the words on this
blank page. What authorities does DHS believe it has to counter
misinformation, disinformation, and malinformation?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you, representative, for the question.
DHS believes its authorities to authorize its specific
mission use cases provides us the authority to provide correct
accurate information in response to false information that may
directly impact the operations of the Department.
Mr. Ezell. Also behind me as well is a completely redacted
memo titled ``Ukraine MDM Playbook''. Do you think DHS has the
authority to control public conversations on foreign wars? If
so, where do you believe this is under their mission?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you for the question. Congressman.
Could you please repeat the question?
Mr. Ezell. Do you think DHS has the authority to control
public conversations on foreign wars?
Mr. Kahangama. No, DHS does not have that authority. We do
not monitor the content of American speech.
Mr. Ezell. Is suppressing domestic speech included in the
memos strategy?
Mr. Kahangama. I'm sorry?
Mr. Ezell. Is suppressing domestic speech included in the
memo's strategy?
Mr. Kahangama. I'm not familiar with the memo that you're
referencing.
Mr. Ezell. The Homeland Security Advisory Committee
recommended to DHS that it should, ``bring disinformation to
the attention of platforms hosting these falsehoods''. I ask
that DHS shares to the committee their communications with
these platforms on this topic. Is that something you can
provide?
Mr. Kahangama. Respectfully, Congressman, I would have to
defer to our Office of Legislative Affairs, who I believe is
already in contact with the committee staff about document
production and anything else that can be shared. But we'd be
happy to.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you very much.
Ms. Harrington, does CISA have any plans to combat MDM
during the 2024 election?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, respectfully, CISA will
continue doing the work that it's currently doing, which is
essentially amplifying election official voices. We have a
rumor control page up on CISA.gov, and we also are putting out
literacy publications so the American people can spot
disinformation tactics and learn about the tactics that foreign
adversaries are using to essentially spread disinformation.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you.
Recently, the director of CISA testified before Congress
that ``The most critical infrastructure is our cognitive
infrastructure. Building that resilience to misinformation and
disinformation, I think is incredibly important''. I want to
repeat that again. The director of CISA testified before
Congress, and I quote, ``The most critical infrastructure is
our cognitive infrastructure. Building that resilience to
misinformation and disinformation, I think is incredibly
important''. I look at CISA's website, and cognitive
infrastructure is not listed as a sector CISA is tasked with
protecting. What does cognitive infrastructure mean?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, in executing our mission we
are guided by the definition of critical infrastructure in
Presidential Policy Directive 21. That is, the U.S. Government
determines critical infrastructure by that PPD 21. There are 16
critical infrastructure sectors that are considered vital to
the United States, includes their asset systems and networks,
whether physical or virtual, that are so important that their
incapacitation or destruction would have a debilitating effect
on security, National economic security, National public health
or safety, or any combination thereof.
Mr. Ezell. Again, what does cognitive infrastructure mean?
I don't get it.
Ms. Harrington. Representative, respectfully, that is how
we execute our mission, with the definition of critical
infrastructure defined in PPD 21.
Mr. Ezell. Do you think that DHS has this authority?
Ms. Harrington. Our authorities are outlined in PPD 21.
Mr. Ezell. Have you discussed the cognitive infrastructure
with Director Easterly?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, again, critical
infrastructure is defined in PPD 21. It's got the 16 sectors of
which are the sectors which make up critical infrastructure of
the United States.
Mr. Ezell. I am concerned that we continue to find examples
that seem clear that the Biden administration is weaponizing
the Federal Government against its citizens. These agencies are
out of control, and this committee will not stop until we hold
folks accountable for that.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Bishop. The gentlemen yields back.
I recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Ivey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want a couple of follow-up points from our previous
panel. I did want to say we had a number of questions
addressing--or actually statements suggesting that the social
media platforms were coerced by the Government and that they
didn't have the ability to resist Government requests or
flagging of information. I did want to reiterate the point that
I made in my opening statement about how these social media
platforms have dealt with this. So a post flag by the EIP,
Election Integrity Partnership, platforms took action on 35
percent, 21 percent of those were labeled, 13 percent were
removed, and 1 were left soft-blocked, which I believe means
that they don't permit the algorithm to allow it to go viral.
No action was taken on 65 percent of these interactions. So we
might disagree about whether they should be doing this or not,
but I don't think Elon Musk has had any trouble resisting or
disagreeing with the Biden administration. My recollection from
when I worked with Microsoft was that they didn't have trouble
disagreeing with the Government at the time either. So.
With respect to the issue about rumor control and
disinformation tactics, Ms. Harrington, I wanted to ask you to
elaborate a little bit on that. What does that mean? What kinds
of activities are you taking or is your entity taking with
respect to those kinds of situations?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, so we have a rumor control
page set up which helps to amplify election official voices. So
the State and locals that are running the elections, we have a
number of rumor narratives and the reality providing factual
information. Again, that could be found transparently on our
website. We work closely with State and local election
officials, and we have that all cross-linked to, for example,
the National Association of Secretaries of States, also the
National Association of State Election Director websites, and
there are a number of other sources, so that Americans can read
that information and make their own decisions about the facts
surrounding how election administration works.
So that is one mechanism that we have where we amplify
election official voices and put out actual information to
educate and ensure that we are putting out literacy information
to the American people to make good decisions.
Mr. Ivey. All right. So in Maryland, I believe we had a
misinformation scenario that spread about the last day to
request a mail-in ballot and about the process of voting in
person. Are those the types of scenarios that you are
referencing, or would that be addressed by a different
mechanism?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, we don't go into specific
detail around the rules for each specific jurisdiction, if you
will, but we have more broad narratives that are corrected on
there. As you know, elections are decentralized, and each State
has their own specific rules and requirements that govern how
they run their elections. So we don't get into that level of
granularity, but more broad narratives.
Mr. Ivey. Well, give me an example of a scenario where you
would have gotten involved.
Ms. Harrington. So, for example, we have an entry on Rumor
vs. Reality that says voting system hardware and software
undergo testing from Federal, State, and/or election
authorities. The rumor on that is that voting system software
is not at all reviewed or tested, period. So that would be an
example of an entry, broad entry.
Mr. Ivey. All right. Then what would you do to address
that? Or if that is actual, how did you respond?
Ms. Harrington. That's an actual listing on the Rumor vs.
Reality web page. So I'm just demonstrating the broad
narratives that we try to correct.
We have other entries on there, such as voters are
protected by State and Federal law from threats or
intimidations at polls, including from election observers. So
that's another reality that we have on there. The rumor
associated with that reality is observers in polling places are
permitted to intimidate voters, campaign, and or interfere with
voting. So you could see they're broad narratives that we just
put out to educate, but we don't get into the granularity of
specific jurisdictions, per your question.
Mr. Ivey. All right.
Well, I see my time has expired, so I yield back.
Chairman Bishop. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Strong for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Chairman Bishop.
Ms. Harrington, at an event for the Center for Strategic
and International Studies on November 1, 2022, CISA Director
Jen Easterly said, and I quote, ``We make sure people
understand the tactics around disinformation and that Americans
understand, you know, how to build resilience against it, how
to recognize it, how to investigate it, asking about the
source, questioning it, not amplifying it''. Who does CISA
suggest as a credible source during these education efforts,
and how does CISA make that determination?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, could you please repeat the
question?
Mr. Strong. How does CISA suggest a credible source during
these educational efforts, and how does CISA make the
determination of that credible source?
Ms. Harrington. Respectfully, I apologize. I still am not
clear on what your question is.
Mr. Strong. OK. I will move further. Does CISA partner with
any outside experts or entities in developing its educational
MDM content? Do you use outside sources to do this effort?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, I just want to make sure
we're talking about the same thing. We put out literacy
publications to educate around disinformation, encountering
foreign influence tactics. They're educational materials. They
can be found on our website.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. I appreciate that. My question is,
do you use outside sources or do you do it all within your
team?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, let me get back to your
staff on that.
Mr. Strong. I will reclaim my time. That is not a hard
question.
Ms. Harrington. I'm not certain if----
Mr. Strong. I will make it easy. I will move on.
Ms. Harrington [continuing]. There's a contractor that
assists with publication.
Mr. Strong. I will move on. Ms. Harrington, what types of
MDM efforts does CISA currently have under way? What type of
efforts?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, the three efforts that we
have and that we continue to work on, as I previously stated,
are the rumor control page, and I gave some examples just a
moment ago, literacy publications. We've got things like
tactics of disinformation, disinformation stops with you, other
infographics, social media bots, infographic set, optical
illusions, other publications that you can find on our website.
We amplify election official voices as the State and locals who
know best how their processes and systems work.
Those are the three efforts that CISA has within the
disinformation, countering foreign influence.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Does CISA work with other DHS components on combating MDM?
If they do, which ones do they work with?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, respectfully, I'm not aware
of any coordination across other components.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Sir, the next question. On November the 15th of this year
you spoke at an Aspen Institute summit where you said that DHS
has many different operational applications of AI that we are
actively using, whether that is generative AI or more
traditional machine learning. What operation using AI has DHS
already undertaken? What are they already doing?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you, representative. Thank you for the
question.
Obviously, generative AI has been very much popular in the
news and so this has been a really interesting space for us to
do a lot of work for the Department operationally across many
of the components. Our OCIO recently put out some guidance
about how employees can propose projects and to use AI as a
means to make work more efficient and a better use of an
employee's time.
For instance, on the cybersecurity mission, when we are
working to protect Federal networks, we can apply machine
learning so that we can inject indicators of compromise,
malware samples, computer viruses. We can use machine learning
and AI tools to automate that so that we're more able to
quickly identify where vulnerabilities may exist and how to
patch them.
We also want to explore the ability to use AI in different
mission spaces. Our Homeland Security Investigations is using
it on the countering child sex exploitation and CSAN material,
that we can better identify victims and protect those
communities using artificial intelligence. We also have pilots
going where we want to use them on the border to better scan
for goods in the customs and border protection mission.
So we have a lot of actual good news stories in this space
that we're excited about.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Chairman Bishop. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Crane for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is for both of you. Were you here for the panel prior?
Ms. Harrington. We were in another room, but we were able
to watch some of it on the TV.
Mr. Crane. OK.
I am going to start with you, Mr. K. I will just say Mr. K.
Is that all right? Go ahead and tell me how to pronounce it.
Mr. Kahangama. You could say Kahangama.
Mr. Crane. Kahangama. OK.
Do you trust the Government to censor American speech?
Mr. Kahangama. Respectfully, Congressman, the Department of
Homeland Security does not censor content.
Mr. Crane. OK. Did you hear Mr. Shellenberger's evidence
about how our Government was using some of its institutions and
organizations to censor the speech of Americans on social
media? Were you here for that?
Mr. Kahangama. I saw the hearing, the first part, yes.
Mr. Crane. OK. So are you arguing that that wasn't
censorship?
Mr. Kahangama. I'm not familiar with what exactly you're
referencing.
Mr. Crane. OK. Well, he had emails going from our
Government to social media platforms flagging and requesting
the removal of social media posts. Do you classify that as
censorship?
Mr. Kahangama. So while I heard the testimony of Mr.
Shellenberger, I haven't reviewed the specific documents that
you are referencing, so I can't speak to the veracity of them.
Mr. Crane. OK. Well, let's just go general then. Do you
think that it is censorship for the Federal Government to be
reaching out to social media platforms and asking them to
remove postings from American citizens?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you, Congressman.
I would reiterate that the Department of Homeland Security
does not engage in content moderation conversations with social
media companies.
Mr. Crane. OK. That is not what I asked you.
OK. Do you study history, Mr. K?
Mr. Kahangama. Generally.
Mr. Crane. Generally? OK. What about you, ma'am, Ms.
Harrington. Generally?
Ms. Harrington. Generally.
Mr. Crane. OK. Typically, what types of governments censor
their own people? Go ahead, either of you.
Ms. Harrington. Authoritative?
Mr. Crane. Yes. Sir?
Mr. Kahangama. Yes, I would agree.
Mr. Crane. Do totalitarian governments do that? Yes? No? It
is not hard.
Mr. Kahangama. Broadly, yes.
Mr. Crane. Do communistic governments do that? Socialistic
governments do that? Why do you think they do that? Why do they
think that they try and control the speech of their own people?
Ma'am? Ms. Harrington.
Ms. Harrington. Yes, I think that's correct, probably
political control.
Mr. Crane. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. K.
Mr. Kahangama. Yes, I would agree.
Mr. Crane. Do you think it is important that we try not to
become like them?
Mr. Kahangama. I believe this Government is not like them.
I believe we are respectful of our Constitutional rights. We
ensure that all the work that we are doing is protected by our
civil liberties and civil rights offices, and we do that with
respect to all of our freedoms, including----
Mr. Crane. Well, thank you, but I would actually
respectfully disagree with that point of view. As a matter of
fact, if you were paying attention to some of the evidence
produced in the last panel, you would know that. As somebody
who is involved in law enforcement, that was evidence, sir.
That is what any law enforcement officer would consider
evidence. Those emails going from our Government to social
media platforms, flagging and requesting the removal of posts
and speech from American citizens. So you can sit there and you
can give me all the little canned answers you want, but when
you actually open your mind and are willing to look at the
evidence being presented, it is obvious.
Now, this shouldn't be a partisan issue. We all know that
on this panel. It shouldn't be a Democrat or Republican issue.
It should be are we willing to become like other totalitarian
governments, communistic governments, socialistic governments
that censor the speech of our own people. I hope you two take
this very seriously, because I am sure that many of the people
that have participated in some of these communistic,
totalitarian governments in history felt like they were doing
the right thing. So I hope that you guys take this very
seriously, and I hope you take our Constitution very seriously
and free speech. Because I will tell you this, it is most
important to protect free speech not when you agree with
people, but when you disagree with them.
Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Bishop. The gentlemen yields back.
In the Chair's discretion, we will do another round of
questioning for the witnesses.
So I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Ms. Harrington----
Mr. Ivey. Mr. Chairman, if I might, perhaps the Chair could
do another round of questions.
Chairman Bishop. You don't care to?
Mr. Ivey. I do have some time constraints.
Chairman Bishop. No one has to stay. No one has to stay and
we are not going to be long, but I have got another 5 minutes.
You don't have to stay.
Mr. Ivey. Yes, sir. No objection to that? No objection to
that.
Chairman Bishop. All right, good. Thank you, sir.
It is at the election of every Member whether they have
further questions they want to ask.
So the Chair will ask 5 minutes of questioning. If you will
restore my time to 5 minutes, please.
Ms. Harrington, you have referenced a number of times that
CISA operates a rumor control website where you correct things
you have identified that are misinformation. You understand
from the prior testimony and the questions of Members, no one
has an objection to CISA having a website publishing what it
contends are corrections of rumors that are false? Right? You
understand that?
Ms. Harrington. Yes.
Chairman Bishop. Do you understand what the committee is
concerned about in terms of CISA's prior conduct? Are you
unaware of the subject matter that we are concerned about?
Ms. Harrington. I am aware. I'm aware of what you're
concerned about. Censorship, essentially. I am aware of that.
Chairman Bishop. OK. Do I understand your testimony
previously be that CISA really hasn't changed its policies to
avoid censoring?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, respectfully, we don't
censor.
Chairman Bishop. OK.
Ms. Harrington. I can tell you what we are doing.
Chairman Bishop. OK. No, hold on a second.
So do you know what switchboarding is?
Ms. Harrington. I was made familiar with that recently.
Chairman Bishop. OK. Did----
Ms. Harrington. I was not at the agency when that----
Chairman Bishop. I am really talking about CISA, not really
talking about specific to your career, obviously. You are here
as a representative of CISA. Did CISA switchboard?
Ms. Harrington. Yes.
Chairman Bishop. OK.
Ms. Harrington. But please allow me to explain what I
understand that----
Chairman Bishop. Well, I just want to know, because I
understand we may get lost in exactly what switchboarding kind-
of includes, but you have a notion in your mind of what it is.
Is CISA continuing to switchboard?
Ms. Harrington. CISA is not switchboarding. CISA is not
sending emails on behalf of election officials from both
parties to social media companies.
Chairman Bishop. OK.
Ms. Harrington. That is not happening.
Chairman Bishop. When did CISA stop switchboarding?
Ms. Harrington. My understanding, although it predates me,
is that CISA stopped after the 2020 cycle.
Chairman Bishop. Why did it stop?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, respectfully, again, this
predates me, but my understanding is that CISA makes decisions
to prioritize efforts based on where the most impact is and to
align resources with priorities. That was an agency decision.
Again, that predates me, but my understanding is it has stopped
and it is no longer happening now and it stopped in the 2020
cycle.
Chairman Bishop. See, my concern is if CISA stopped
switchboarding because it thought switchboarding was a
questionable practice or one that was exceedingly disapproved
of, then that might satisfy me more. But what I understand you
are saying is it is simply a resource allocation or
prioritization determination, so you could resume
switchboarding next week if you want to. Is that what you
think?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, respectfully, I understand
that was an agency decision. Again, it predates me and that
activity is not occurring.
Chairman Bishop. Yes, but that is not what I asked you. I
asked you whether you believe it to be true that CISA could
resume switchboarding next week.
Ms. Harrington. Representative, again, switchboarding is
not occurring and that stopped in the 2020 cycle. Forwarding
emails to social--a limited number of emails from both parties
to social media companies is not happening.
Chairman Bishop. In that case--you would agree with me,
would you not, that there is no reason that Congress shouldn't
restrict CISA's authority to make sure that it cannot
switchboard? Since you are not doing it, right?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, we are not censoring.
Chairman Bishop. So we can provide that in law, make sure
that that is a clear guardrail, correct?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, respectfully, it is already
in law.
Chairman Bishop. Oh, really?
Ms. Harrington. That we shouldn't censor? It is the First
Amendment.
Chairman Bishop. That you shouldn't switchboard. I agree. I
mean, you have kind-of hit the nail on the head with that last
statement.
Ms. Harrington. We are not censoring----
Chairman Bishop. Because the problem is----
Ms. Harrington. CISA doesn't censor.
Chairman Bishop. The problem is whether switchboarding is
censoring, and I think you just conflated the two, which is
exactly the problem.
Let me ask this question. Is CISA meeting on a regular
basis with social media platforms?
Ms. Harrington. CISA does not meet with social media
platforms.
Chairman Bishop. You said does not. Did it meet with social
media platforms on a periodic basis?
Ms. Harrington. I understand that it was meeting with them
at a time, yes.
Chairman Bishop. Monthly and then weekly during the run-up
to the 2020 elections, correct?
Ms. Harrington. I am not certain on completely what that
cadence is.
Chairman Bishop. OK. I will represent to you that that is
what it was since you don't know, but you should. They met with
them monthly and then weekly leading up to the 2020 elections.
Are those sorts of periodic meetings with social media
companies still going on?
Ms. Harrington. Representative, CISA is not meeting with
social media companies.
Chairman Bishop. Why did you stop?
Ms. Harrington. I understand that that activity stopped in
October 2022.
Chairman Bishop. Why?
Ms. Harrington. Because the staff were communicating
information to interagency partners as well as social media
companies on basic 101 election information and it was not good
use of their time given other priorities that would yield an
impact.
Chairman Bishop. All right.
My 5 minutes of questioning. The second round has expired.
Mr. Ivey, you don't have further questions?
Mr. Ivey. No, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Bishop. All right.
In that case, I thank these witnesses for your valuable
testimony and the Members for their questions.
The Members of the subcommittee may have additional
questions for the witnesses and would ask the witnesses to
respond to those in writing. Pursuant to committee rule VII(D),
the hearing record will be held open for 10 days.
Without objection, this subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:17 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
