- GOVERNMENT 2.0: GAO UNVEILS NEW DUPLICABLE PROGRAM REPORT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

GOVERNMENT 2.0: GAO UNVEILS NEW DUPLICABLE PROGRAM REPORT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 28, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-131

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
00-000                    WASHINGTON : 2009
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on February 28, 2012................................     1
Statement of:
Dodaro, Gene L., Comptroller General of the United States,
U.S. Government Accountability Office, accompanied by
Patricia Dalton, Chief Operating Officer, U.S. Government
Accountability Office, and Janet St. Laurent, Managing
Director of Defense Capabilities and Management, U.S.
Government Accountability Office; and Hon. Tom Coburn,
M.D., a U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma............     8
Dodaro, Gene L...........................................     8
Coburn, Hon. Tom, M.D....................................    75
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Coburn, Hon. Tom, M.D., a U.S. Senator from the State of
Oklahoma, prepared statement of............................    77
Connolly, Hon. Gerald E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, prepared statement of...............   114
Cummings, Hon. Elijah E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Maryland, prepared statement of...............     5
Dodaro, Gene L., Comptroller General of the United States,
U.S. Government Accountability Office, prepared statement
of.........................................................    11

GOVERNMENT 2.0: GAO UNVEILS NEW DUPLICABLE PROGRAM REPORT

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 2012

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Darrell E. Issa
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, McHenry, Jordan, Chaffetz,
Lankford, DesJarlais, Farenthold, Kelly, Cummings, Maloney,
Norton, Kucinich, Tierney, Cooper, Connolly, Quigley, and
Murphy.
Staff present: Ali Ahmad, communications advisor; Kurt
Bardella, senior policy advisor; Robert Borden, general
counsel; Lawrence J. Brady, staff director; John Cuaderes,
deputy staff director; Adam P. Fromm, director of Member
services and committee operations; Jennifer Hemingway, senior
professional staff member; Christopher Hixon, deputy chief
counsel, oversight; Justin LoFranco, press assistant; Mark D.
Marin, director of oversight; Tegan Millspaw, research analyst;
Lisa Cody, minority investigator; Kevin Corbin, minority deputy
clerk; Ashley Etienne, minority director of communications;
Jennifer Hoffman, minority press secretary; Carla Hultberg,
minority chief clerk; Leah Perry, minority chief oversight
counsel; Dave Rapallo, minority staff director; and Mark
Stephenson, minority senior policy advisor/legislative
director.
Chairman Issa. The Oversight Committee will come to order.
We exist for two fundamental purposes: first, Americans
have a right to know the money Washington takes from them is
well spent and, second, Americans deserve an efficient,
effective government that works for them. Our duty on the
Oversight and Government Reform Committee is to protect these
rights.
Our solemn responsibility is to hold government accountable
to the taxpayers because taxpayers have a right to know what
they get from their government. It is our job to work
tirelessly in partnership with citizen watchdogs to deliver the
facts to the American people and bring genuine reform to the
Federal bureaucracy.
Today we are joined for just that purpose. The 2011 report
from the GAO identified 81 areas of duplication, overlap, and
fragmentation throughout the government. This year the GAO has
identified 51 new areas on top of the 81. Let's make it very
clear: we are going the wrong direction, not the right
direction.
This committee is well known for looking at the party in
power, the Office of the President, and calling strikes and
balls. In this case, the President has talked the talk; he
hasn't walked the walk. But let me make it very clear here
today: he is not the first president to talk about
organizational efficiency and, at the end of his
administration, have less of it, not more of it.
In fact, this problem began long before President George W.
Bush and it will not end until some fundamental changes occur.
First of all, Congress is to blame. We create the
stovepipes by our very nature. We have divided the Congress
along historic lines for authorization and appropriation. That
is all well and good to have expertise, but at the end of the
day we do not have a committee on consolidation; we do not
have, if you will, a standing Hoover Commission. As a result,
fiefdoms build up here in the House that in fact protect
redundant programs because they are under that authorization or
under that cardinalship of appropriations.
Second, it is clear this President owns these 51 new areas,
the 81 many of whom were not dealt with, and ultimately he owns
the fact that he asked for reorganizational authority and
offered us but a de minimis addition of a 23rd cabinet level
position. We have to think bigger than that. The President and
this administration has to be convinced to think much, much
larger.
Ultimately, real savings, as we will hear today from Mr.
Dodaro, will come from major changes in government and how we
think, changes in the House and the Senate, changes in the
executive branch.
Last, if we are to have a 21st century success story of
making government as lean as it can be in the delivery of
process, we are going to have to call out, and I will in a
future hearing, companies like Lockheed Martin, Northrop
Grumman, Boeing, Raytheon, General Dynamics, Booz Allen, and
many, many more that we rely on for government contracting. In
fact, this entire hearing could end before we could name the
names of all the government contractors America employs,
because ultimately those contractors also have a vested
interest in the pot of money that they have or sometimes 4, 5,
6, 10 pots of money to do the same job for different parts of
government.
As we explore whether in fact government gets a better deal
by the same contractor having five different contracts, five
slightly different instructions, producing often different
software with different details, or in fact whether contractors
need to be part of the solution in having a proactive
responsibility to find existing programs at least within their
own company and their partnerships. That is just the beginning
of the solution.
I will, in the days to come, upon conclusion of a number of
additional hearings, be calling in no uncertain terms for a
Hoover commission. I will be calling for a thorough
reorganization of government. And let me go on record here
today: the President's request for reorganizational authority
is dead on arrival in this committee unless the administration
is willing to be much bigger in their thought.
If the administration, instead of asking for authority,
delivering us virtually no facts and the facts they deliver
showing a very small reorg for the sake of saying there is a
reorg, if they are not willing to talk about attacking the very
problems we will see here today organizationally, then we have
little to talk about.
My first question to the Honorable Gene Dodaro will in fact
be, what is the status of the now-famous Goldwater-Nichols?
What are the failures of it? What are the successes of it? And
how can we begin looking at that kind of cross-government
thinking in a way that will guaranty, if not next year, at
least in years to come, these lists will be smaller to begin
with and will have taken care of far more of their past sins?
With that, I recognize the ranking member for his opening
statement.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Dodaro. We welcome you back. And I thank GAO
for testifying here today.
Because of our committee's uniquely broad jurisdiction, we
have a tremendous opportunity to examine programs across the
entire Federal Government. Today GAO is issuing a report to
help us determine the most promising ways to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of these programs.
In my opinion, our committee does its best work when we are
guided by a sincere effort to get more value out of Federal
programs on behalf of the American people. I hope we can do
that today.
For this reason, I hope we steer clear of politically
charged rhetoric that condemns the entire government as being
obese or bloated, and I hope we honor the millions of Federal
workers who do so much for this country on a daily basis.
One of the most compelling facts in the GAO report is that
Congress has a much worse record than the administration in
implementing GAO's recommendations. Last year GAO identified
176 specific actions that Congress and the executive branch
could take to address duplication in government programs and
enhance taxpayer revenues. This year GAO reports that the
administration has fully or partially implemented 76 percent of
the recommendations relating to executive branch actions. The
Congress has fully or partially implemented only 38 percent of
the recommendations for legislative reform.
For example, GAO has reported that oil and gas companies,
which are now making the highest profits of any industry in
history, currently pay no royalties on some of their leases
with the U.S. Government in the Gulf of Mexico. Even Chairman
Issa has recognized this problem, estimating in a previous
report that this unintended loophole is costing the American
people up to $80 billion in foregone revenue.
Although Democrats have offered legislation to address this
fundamental injustice, House Republicans have repeatedly
rejected it. Although it is appropriate to examine the
administration's record on these issues, I hope we will also
look at our own record right here in Congress.
With respect to the recommendations for the executive
branch, GAO reports that Federal agencies have taken
substantial action to address them. For example, the
administration has taken steps to reduce improper payments by
the Federal Government. Agencies have also achieved $1.5
billion in savings through the disposal of excess or
underutilized Federal buildings, as well as identifying
additional savings opportunities.
In addition, the President has proposed reorganizing and
consolidating a number of our Nation's trade agencies into a
single department to improve coordination and effectiveness,
while saving billions of dollars in the process.
Of course, GAO's reports finds that many challenges still
remain. For example, the Departments of Defense and Veterans
Affairs need to improve integration of health care and case
management to reduce duplication and provide more effective
assistance to our service members, particularly as they leave
active duty and transition into the VA system. This is
something that our National Security Subcommittee has focused
in on closely, and I know their efforts will continue.
So I look forward to today's testimony from GAO, as well as
the testimony from Senator Coburn, who has also been very
active on these issues.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Elijah E. Cummings
follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.002

Mr. Quigley. Mr. Cummings, would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Cummings. I yield.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you to the ranking member and the
chairman.
When I was a county commissioner I wrote eight reports
about this, about government efficiency and what we can do, and
it reminded me of something very political, what the President
said when he accepted the nomination in Denver. He said, in the
middle of the speech, and it didn't get a lot of attention, he
said we're not the far right who thinks that government doesn't
matter and we can't be the far left that thinks we can tax and
spend our way out of all of our problems, because we need to
meet in the middle, streamline and consolidate our government
and make it the most efficient.
So, to me, that is what both the chairman and the ranking
member were alluding to. We can do this on a bipartisan basis
by asking ourselves just the following question, what should we
do, who should do it, and how should it be done, when we look
at any government function, not because government doesn't
matter, but because the mission matters and we can operate it
more efficiently.
Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Would the ranking member further yield?
Mr. Cummings. Definitely.
Chairman Issa. You brought up in your opening statement, I
think it is noteworthy, even though it is a little off subject,
the history of the MMS flawed contracts. That is an area in
which we have tried to operate on a bipartisan basis.
I would offer to the ranking member that if the pieces of
legislation that have been offered, most of which that I have
seen duplicate ones that were offered and went nowhere under
the 4-years of Speaker Pelosi, because this problem goes all
the way back to the Clinton administration; not to them
personally, but to actions of nonpolitical appointees during
that time.
If you can in fact bring to the committee agreement by this
staff that we have a piece of legislation which can pass the
contract sanctity test, I am perfectly happy to hold a hearing
on it and, if we can reach that consensus, a markup. It has
been vexing to us on both sides. We pushed hard under President
Bush to try to get a solution prior to some of these companies
being sold and so on.
But I stand with the ranking member that this is still an
area that if we can find something which we are not simply
passing a law that ultimately would be struck down in the court
based on the contract sanctity rule, I am there for you and
would love to have a further hearing on it.
Mr. Cummings. With that, I appreciate it. We will work with
you to make that happen. Matter of fact, I welcome the
bipartisanship.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
With that, having settled at least $60 billion to $80
billion worth of past failures right here----
Mr. Cummings. In 1 minute.
Chairman Issa [continuing]. In 1 minute, we now recognize
the Honorable Gene Dodaro, Comptroller General of the United
States, returning here for, I should have it here, about the
fifth or sixth time in this role and, of course, several times
before he had the job. He is accompanied today by Ms. Patricia
Dalton, who is Chief Operating Officer of the GAO.
Additionally, Ms. Janet St. Laurent, who is Managing Director
of Defense Capabilities and Management at the GAO.
I understand that Ms. Dalton and Ms. St. Laurent do not
have opening statements, but to make it clear that they could
answer questions directly or obviously advise the general. We
will have all of you sworn in.
Additionally, an additional witness is expected about
halfway through this process, and that would be our friend and
colleague on waste control, Senator Tom Coburn of Oklahoma.
So, with that, would you please rise to take the oath?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Issa. Let the record indicate all three answered
in the affirmative.
Unlike some of our hearings, we are not taxed for time in
the time that you choose to begin the briefing. You are an
experienced witness who knows that if we, the Congress, want
you to give a prepared statement, you go ahead and give it.
Take as much time as you want. Quite frankly, I would love to
get to questions quickly, but at the same time this is all
about your report and the message you want to deliver to us.
The general is recognized.

STATEMENTS OF GENE L. DODARO, COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF THE UNITED
STATES, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, ACCOMPANIED BY
PATRICIA DALTON, CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER, U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, AND JANET ST. LAURENT, MANAGING DIRECTOR
OF DEFENSE CAPABILITIES AND MANAGEMENT, U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; AND HON. TOM COBURN, M.D., A U.S.
SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA

STATEMENT OF GENE L. DODARO

Mr. Dodaro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am very
pleased to be here today before the committee, Ranking Member
Cummings, members of the committee, to talk about GAO's body of
work on overlap, duplication, and fragmentation in the Federal
Government, and opportunities to achieve greater efficiencies
and effectiveness in Government. Our report this year, for
2012, like the report last year, touches on many parts of the
Federal Government, most civilian major departments and
agencies, as well as the Defense Department.
In Defense, for example, one of the areas we point out is
unmanned aircraft systems, of which the Department plans to
spend over $37 billion over the next 4 years to purchase not
only aircraft, but payloads, which are operating systems,
sensors, etc., as well as ground control stations.
Now, we found that the service-centered requirements,
rather than an effective overall Department strategy, is
causing a great degree of overlap in this effort. For example,
the Navy was unable to provide us justification why it was
going to develop an aircraft similar to the Air Force Global
Hawk aircraft, as opposed to buying additional Global Hawk
aircrafts. And also the Army and Navy are separately pursuing
software for cargo and surveillance technologies that are
likely to produce similar requirements going forward.
So we have made a number of recommendations to strengthen
management of this program. There are huge opportunities for
significant savings if the Department can better manage these
programs and focus on commonality of requirements and making
sure that there is effective management of this program. This
is especially important since, in the new defense strategy,
there is going to be greater reliance on unmanned aircraft
systems. We point out in our report the same things are true in
the Department's efforts for electronic warfare and also
countermeasures for improvised explosive devices.
Now, on the civilian front, one good example is in the
housing area, which is a new area for this year. We point out
there are over 20 different entities managing over 160
different programs, tax expenditures and other activities to
promote home ownership and to provide rental support to
Americans. One area that we have singled out this year for
consolidation potential is in the areas involving the
Agriculture Department and the Housing Department.
Now, in 2009 you have eight times as many single-family
home loans given to economically distressed rural communities
by HUD than you do by Agriculture. Conversely, Agriculture has
given many of its loans near urban areas. In fact, 56 percent
of them in 2009 were given in metropolitan counties. So there
are opportunities here. The administration has a task force
they are putting together to look at the housing areas. We are
looking more closely at it. But I think that is one area that
is very ripe for potential consolidation and streamlining
activities.
Also, there are many support operations of the Federal
Government where there is a need for streamlining and
efficiency. For example, we looked at the Department of Defense
and Energy and the Department of Homeland Security to look to
see if they had duplicative IT investments and, indeed, we
found 37 different areas within Defense and Energy alone that
were potentially duplicative IT investments, and those
investments represented over $1 billion in funding for those
areas. We didn't find any on our own in the Department of
Homeland Security, but they found some on their own that saved
$41 million and identified other opportunities.
There are also opportunities we found in facility security
assessments. Agencies were doing their own facility security
investments while also paying the Department of Homeland
Security Federal Protective Service for doing security
assessments that they weren't doing, so there was duplication
there.
The same thing is true in background investigations for
security clearances. We find a number of areas where agencies
were standing up on their own case management and adjudication
systems, rather than a shared common system across the Federal
Government, so that there was redundancies there and money
spent that did not have to be spent.
Now, like last year's report, in addition to overlap,
duplication, and fragmentation, we highlight additional cost
savings opportunities and opportunities for revenue
enhancements. For example, in cost savings, there are billions
of dollars that could be saved through wider use of information
technology to deal with improper payments in the Medicare and
Medicaid areas.
There are also refinements that could be made in the
process by which there are adjustments made to the Medicare
advantage payments based upon the diagnosis given beneficiaries
and the differences between their coding systems and the fee-
for-service system. We have estimated that could be between
$1.2 billion and $2.7 billion right there.
On the revenue enhancement side, we point out many
opportunities such as the potential for selling excess uranium
inventories that the Department of Defense have. There are user
fees that could be adjusted to be more contemporary for
international travelers coming into the country that could take
away from the need to use general appropriations to pay for
those activities.
And there are many opportunities for the Internal Revenue
Service to deal with tax enforcement of what is now estimated
to be a $385 billion gap between taxes owed under the current
system and taxes paid. That is up from $290 billion the last
time I appeared before this committee. So we recommend a number
of activities in those areas.
In addition, we published a separate report, Mr. Chairman,
as you alluded to in your statement and Representative
Cummings, about progress from last year, and we found, of the
81 areas, 4 had been fully addressed, 60 had been partially
addressed, and 17 had not been addressed.
So there are many opportunities. We think collectively,
through the opportunities pointed out in our report last year
and the new ones this year, there are tens of billions of
dollars that could be saved and, more importantly, more
effective and streamlined government serving the American
people.
So I look forward to answering your questions and I
appreciate the opportunity to be here today. So thank you very
much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dodaro follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.051

Chairman Issa. Thank you. I now recognize myself for a few
questions.
General, you mentioned what the administration got, what
they closed, what they partially addressed. In your estimation,
and I say this because one of my predecessors, Mr. Waxman, held
a hearing just to ridicule the Bush administration for how many
they had been notified to, both IGs and GAO reports, and how
many they closed, and didn't give much credit for the fact that
the vast majority of them were from roughly the last year.
What would you say was reasonable with any president to
have closed, and how many more these that have been partially
acted on, the 60, would you expect to make further progress and
be completed the following year? In other words, should we look
at a 1-year time line? And I want you to give us the 1-year
time, but is this a satisfactory direction on these other sub-
81 where we are looking at the final report at the end of 2 or
2\1/2\ years would look different?
Mr. Dodaro. First, I would say last year's report was an
accumulation of issues we identified previously as well, so I
think there was more than 1 year opportunity to deal with some
of those issues.
Chairman Issa. You mean you had to reiterate what hadn't
been fixed either by this President or his predecessor.
Mr. Dodaro. That is correct. Or actions that we had
recommended to the Congress and they hadn't taken action on. So
this year we are positing new ones, so the 1-year timeframe I
would expect would be more reasonable as a benchmark, compared
to what you were talking about.
But I would hope that of the 60 areas that are partially
addressed, that many of those areas can be closed within the
next year activities. I think it is within the grasp of the
administration and the Congress to do that and I would hope to
see progress.
I was pleased that the administration required the
agencies, through their budget submission process, to address
all the areas that we identified in the report. So that was a
good step. But there needs to be more assertive action,
particularly across government. Many of the areas we identified
transcend one department and agency, so they really require OMB
and the administration to take a very active role in looking at
these activities across government.
Chairman Issa. I am going to go back to my opening
statement and what I alluded to. I have looked at the military
both before and after Goldwater-Nichols. Before Goldwater-
Nichols, as an Army officer, I thought Army, I bled Army, and
all I really thought about was beat Navy, because we didn't
care about those former Army people known as the Air Force. So
that changed to a great extent with the requirement for senior
officers, as part of their career, to have joint assignments,
very often being trained in another war college or another
commanding general staff.
How is that going and is it a partial blueprint for a more
governmentwide system, particularly with civil service? Do we
need to cross-pollinate in order to drive down this tendency to
stovepipe differences that may be of no purpose other than to
facilitate additional cost?
Mr. Dodaro. That clarification that you mentioned, of roles
and responsibility and the jointness and rotations and training
programs, joint exercises, that part of the Goldwater-Nichols
reform has gone very well in our opinion, made a material
difference and greatly improved the ability of the Department
to carry out operations.
On the side in terms of the management reforms under
Goldwater-Nichols, the requirements part of the process, they
introduced some joint processes. That is not going as well. In
fact, many of the areas that I mentioned in my opening
statement and our report are because the management of those
joint requirements aren't going as effectively as they could
be.
Now, in terms of the lessons learned, on the jointness, as
you point out, I think there are tremendous opportunities to
use that in the rest of the Federal Government. In fact, we
pointed out where that could be expanded with the National
Security agencies to be more effective as well, but also with
the civilian agencies I think it is very important.
More and more problems are requiring a number of agencies
to work together to resolve those problems, whether we are
talking homeland security, food safety, or a number of other
areas. So I think that is an excellent course to pursue, Mr.
Chairman, and we would be happy to support you in your efforts
in that arena.
Chairman Issa. In my final 15 or so seconds, do you also
support the idea that reorganization of government would need
to be done much more in the Hoover Commission fashion, one in
which we start off with a much larger goal, much more
jointness, if you will, between Executive and, to be honest,
your organization and a few Members of Congress, to set much
bigger goals, much longer, for a long-term reorganization,
including some of the things you are presenting today?
Mr. Dodaro. I think that has tremendous potential and I am
in favor of that. I think there is really no entity in the
Federal Government focused on looking at organizational issues
on a continual basis and having strategic planning, being able
to look to see if we have the government that we need for the
21st century, and I think having a commission, a Hoover type of
commission is an excellent way to build consensus on that.
Because if you are going to have it work effectively, you need
consensus, and a commission is a good way to develop consensus
and take a broad view of it, and I think looking holistically
makes a lot of sense so you don't have unintended consequences
as well. And there is no magic one answer in these areas; you
can reorganize a lot of different ways.
The commission could also focus on implementation plans.
For example, in creating the Department of Homeland Security,
we don't think enough attention was made to the implementation
plans in that area. That could be rectified by a commission.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro, you testified last year about what you
considered to be some of the low-hanging fruit in these areas.
You talked about actions that could be taken in the short-term
to generate large payoffs for the Federal Government in the
long-term. One of these areas was improper payments, where you
estimated that the Federal Government might be losing as much
as $125 billion. How is the administration doing on that issue
and have they taken significant steps toward addressing the
problem?
Mr. Dodaro. The administration has made that area a
priority area. I think they have made some progress. They have
collected over $1 billion in overpayments. The estimating
process is still going on. There are still numbers of
departments and agencies that haven't made estimates yet; they
have set ambitious goals; they are focused on it.
One of the things that really needs to be done is that
there are categories of why the improper payments are being
made and really need to get to root causes. So I think there is
progress being made there. There are still many, many issues
that need to be resolved, but I think the administration is
focused on it and I am pleased with that.
Mr. Cummings. Can you name maybe the top three that you
know of so far or is that information available? I know you
said not all the departments. It seems kind of difficult to
address the issue if you don't know how much money we are
talking about. Do you have the reasons for $125 billion of
improper payments?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, half of the improper payments are in the
Medicare and Medicaid area, and there you have problems in
terms of providers that have been found not to be proper
providers, so there is an element of fraud in that area. There
are systems that have been tried to be put in place, we point
out in our report, to do post-payment claim reviews, but the
administration hasn't entered all the data in the systems yet
from the Medicare program, nor trained people on how to use the
technologies to detect those cases.
So the health care arena remains a big issue that needs to
be grappled with it, and it starts with the enrollment of
proper providers to do pre-payment screening processes with
predictive analytical technologies, to do post-payment claim
reviews, to do recoveries of known overpayments. So we are
looking at all phases of that approach to make sure that we are
making recommendations that can help guide them as they tackle
this very important issue.
Mr. Cummings. Well, as you make these recommendations, are
these recommendations ongoing?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. So, in other words, you don't just come at
one point and say these are the recommendations, then you wait
another year and then these are the recommendations?
Mr. Dodaro. Right.
Mr. Cummings. You are continuously making recommendations?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. And how is that done? In other words, do you
run into situations where you see a problem and do you
immediately let the administration know that?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Once we have confidence that our analysis
is complete, yes, we do that. We provide all our reports to the
agencies for comment and draft before we finalize them, but we
have ongoing dialog with them, so we share that on a continual
basis.
Mr. Cummings. Can you give us a sense of how many of the
proposals put forward by the administration in the 2013 budget
address GAO's issue areas from the 2011 report? Do you have any
idea?
Mr. Dodaro. There are some of them. Unfortunately, the
timing of our report was we had to close our field work before
the President submitted his budget, so we weren't able to
reflect all those in the report, but one we did mention is that
the new requirement for the administration to designate
crosscutting priority goals because of the Government
Performance and Results Modernization Act of 2010, they
identified 14 crosscutting goals, many of which touch on the
areas in our 2011 report and our 2012 report.
Mr. Cummings. Now, is it also true that the progress made
in disposing of excess or underutilized property has there been
progress there?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, yes. Actually, when I testified before
this committee last year on our high risk list, we mentioned we
had narrowed the focus of the high risk list on real property
because they had made some progress in that area. It is also an
area where they have submitted a legislative proposal. This
committee has acted upon it, the House has; it is pending
action in the Senate. So I think there is steady progress being
made in that area as well.
Mr. Cummings. So are you satisfied with that progress? I
know it's ongoing. I'm just curious.
Mr. Dodaro. Right. Well, I think that it would be good for
legislative action to be taken to be able to deal with some of
these barriers that they face in disposing of those real
properties, and I think greater progress is possible and
legislative action would provide an additional impetus and give
the administration an additional tool to deal with that area.
We are continually doing that.
Next year, when we testify before you, we will have a
definitive answer in our high risk list, but I am expecting
more progress; I think it is possible.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
We now go to the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. DesJarlais.
Mr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
for joining us today. Just a couple quick questions.
Mr. Dodaro, your testimony says that we could potentially
save tens of billions of dollars annually. What are the most
important areas we should focus on to realize these cost
savings?
Mr. Dodaro. There are a couple that are really important. I
mentioned one in my opening statement in terms of the
adjustment process. Congress mandated, in the Medicare
advantage portion of the Medicare program, that there be a
comparison with the fee-for-service program. There is a greater
advantage to people in coding beneficiary diagnoses for
Medicare advantage because they get paid based upon those
claims, where fee-for-service programs the diagnosis isn't as
important, if you will, going forward, to be as precise.
So they make an adjustment to the process. It was 3.41
percent that was developed because of these coding errors. We
think the percentage is higher. So by refining CMS's process,
we think they could save over $1 billion, up to $3 billion, and
that is cumulative going forward every year.
Also, there is an area of where the Federal Government does
not have enough information to offset pensions for Social
Security, particularly spousal benefits from people who don't
participate in the Social Security program, like State and
local employees. The CBO has estimated that could be between $2
and $3 billion in that arena as well.
So those are a couple of really good examples that I think
could yield very significant savings.
Mr. DesJarlais. In addition to cost savings, what are the
most important advantages to reducing duplication in
government?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I think there are many. I think you save
administrative costs, you save program dollars, you can target
more efficiently to help people. I think it also, from a
citizens perspective, makes it easier to figure out where to go
to get services, to get help, and improve the image and
confidence in Government that it is operating as efficiently
and effectively, and are in the best interest of the American
taxpayers as people believe and deserve the right that it does.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay, thank you.
I would like to yield the balance of my time to the
gentleman from Utah, Mr. Chaffetz.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. I appreciate it.
I appreciate all the work that you are doing. A question
for you about the Inspectors General. I have some concern about
the lack of appointments from the administration. We have
vacancies at State Department, DOD, USAID, SIGAR.
For a moment, talk about the role that they play. One of
the questions I have is long-term, organizationally, how should
we move forward? Are they in the best position to actually
achieve what they are supposed to achieve, or should we perhaps
consider a reorganization? I wonder if maybe they should be
part of your organization. Give me your perspective, if you
would, general.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, I will do that. I also would like Patricia
Dalton to comment on it. She was Deputy Inspector General at
the Labor Department and Acting IG there for a year, so she has
a unique perspective as well.
First, I too am concerned about the vacancies in those
areas. It is very important to have somebody there. I know
first-hand. I was acting for 2\1/2\ years in this position
before I was confirmed. It makes a difference and it is
important to have somebody in there that can provide the right
type of leadership. The IGs are well positioned with proper
leadership, and they have the tools and they have the legal
authorities to be effective, and many of them carry out
important areas.
I think it is important for each department and agency to
have their own audit investigation shop there. It is hard for
us to cover the entire Federal Government, but there are many
more resources in the IG community than there is in the GAO
across Government, so we try to focus on cross-governmental,
cross-agency type of issues, which are very important.
So I think that if the proper leadership is there and the
proper staffing, they can be effective, and that needs to be
the case across government as well.
We work with them very carefully doing financial audits.
They arrange for them at the departments and agencies; we do
the consolidative financial statement. So I try to work
effectively with them, but I haven't really thought about
reorganization options. I will give that some additional
thought.
Pat.
Ms. Dalton. One thing I would add is just where they are
positioned in their cabinet agencies. I think it is an
important and valuable position in that they are within the
departments so that they can see close-up what is going on.
But the protection for them is that they also report to the
Congress, so they do have dual reporting responsibilities, and
it is very important that the Inspector Generals take to heart
those responsibilities and recognize that they report to the
Congress, as well as to working within the department. So I
think it is very important.
There are some protections the way they are positioned, for
example, for their budgets. The Congress is told exactly what
they requested, it is not just what the administration passed
through and requested for them. So those are important
protections that provide some valuable insights to the Congress
just by their position in the agencies, that they can see what
is going on within it.
Mr. Dodaro. I might point out also, Congressman Chaffetz,
they have far more investigators to do criminal investigations
than we do at the GAO. That is another important difference
between our two organizations.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
My time has expired but, Mr. Chairman, I would hope that
these vacancies be a priority for this administration because
to have four of these major departments without an IG, one of
them the State Department for more than 3 years, I think is
totally unacceptable. It is vital to us to have the proper
oversight within these departments.
I yield back.
Chairman Issa. I share with the gentleman that feeling. I
would note that your very clever question of should $2 billion
worth of funding and 12,000 employees be added to the GAO was
an excellent question. The general seemed to have ducked the
answer of increasing his organization by that size.
With that, we go to the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
Cooper.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If every politician were here who denounced waste, fraud,
and abuse, this hearing room would be packed. If the lobbying
community took our efforts seriously, the audience would be
packed. But I am afraid what we are seeing here is a lot of
political theater, and it is not even very good theater.
The GAO has put together an excellent report. We all know
in our hearts that very few members of this committee will read
it. We may or may not have a new Hoover commission. But the
title of this committee is the Government Oversight and Reform
Committee. It is our job to do this. I wish our colleague from
the Senate, Senator Coburn, had been able to testify first,
because his testimony highlights very clearly this is primarily
a congressional responsibility that we have bungled. He also is
very useful in reciting the history of almost 100 years of
congressional lip service to this problem and very little
action.
So how do we solve this? There are a lot of excellent
examples that have been brought forward in this committee,
specific examples dealing with the details of government which,
unless people are personally affected back home, they really
don't care much about; they just want the problem solved, and
they wonder why we take so long to solve it.
So I would like this committee to consider some procedural
forums to encourage us to tackle these problems and take them
more seriously, because today the political reward system is
such that we are primarily benefited if we have good news
speech material that excites voters back home, something new
and improved.
And to be honest with you, most of us don't really care if
it is a duplicative program as long as it sounds good to kids
or seniors or veterans or whatever constituency we are
appealing to. And it has worked this way in American politics
for a long, long time.
So how do we change that equation? How do we incent to this
committee or this body to read the report, to take it to heart,
to enact legislation, to curb duplicative programs? What is the
reward system in that?
In general, you know, the phrase in politics is friends
come and go, enemies accumulate. And most folks are worried
that there is going to be some group out there, and the pimento
lobby was against me at one point. Yes, the little red thing in
the olive has its own lobby, and somehow I was labeled as being
anti-pimento. I had no idea. I didn't mean to be anti-pimento,
but they care deeply about my pimento track record. So there
are pimento lobbies all over the country and they have a
constitutional right to lobby. Free speech is a great thing.
But we also have to manage this Government and we are doing
a terrible job today. So how do we clean house? How do we get
rid of obsolete laws? How do we stop duplicative programs? The
same old, same old isn't going to do it. We can have all the
commissions in the world and won't read that new report just
like we won't read this report.
So, Mr. Chairman, we need to think of ways to get this
committee to do its work.
I look forward to Senator Coburn's remarks because he has
been one of the national leaders on this topic. Many people in
both parties have tried to lead on this, but the same old
approach will not do it. So let's put our heads together and
think in some bipartisan way of not just blaming the
administration, not just thinking that the cure-all for all of
Congress's problems will be switching party leadership, because
both parties are in cahoots on this and we have both bungled
it.
So I would ask the GAO, at least in your spare time, and
you already do an excellent job, we need help in creating a
different system so that we are not always seeking new speech
material, not always new and improved, without caring what is
duplicative. In some State legislatures they have proposed that
you can't pass a new law until you get rid of two old ones.
That is an interesting approach to it.
Maybe if the media paid more attention to our overall
record of cosponsorships, how many folks have sponsored
billions, trillions of new ideas without looking at how much
could be reduced, because Government is obese and we have to
figure out a better solution than the current same old, same
old or the blame game.
We are great at blaming the administration, we are great at
blaming the other party, but that is not getting the job done.
That is not solving the problem for folks back home.
So I look forward to talking with you, Mr. Chairman, about
this and the ranking member. There has to be a better approach
than what we are doing right now.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Cooper. I would be delighted.
Chairman Issa. I couldn't agree with you more that we do
have a long history of having hearings and then having a
similar hearing a year later. One question you might ask the
general, though, is what is he doing to reduce costs at the GAO
in light of an 11 percent cutback in his funding.
Mr. Cooper. Well, the gentleman has already asked the
question.
Would the gentleman like to respond?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, we have taken an approach to look at a
line-by-line item of our budget and scrubbed it to be more
efficient in terms of cutting back on our administrative
operations and really making sure that they are operating
effectively. We are experimenting with more telework in the
field to reduce our rental cost by 40 percent.
Unfortunately, all the actions that we have taken in order
to improve the efficiency of our operations hasn't been enough
to absorb the cuts. Since we are an agency of 80 percent
personnel costs, we have had to reduce the number of people at
the GAO. This year we will be 11 percent smaller, which is
about 365 people, which will be the lowest level in GAO
staffing since 1935. So I have been concerned about this.
I have testified before the House Appropriations Committee,
asked for a partial restoration of the staff support. I believe
we have good justification. Our recommendations, many of them
are adopted; many are not, they are still in process. But those
that have been adopted have returned $81 to the American
taxpayer for every dollar invested in GAO. So I look forward to
continuing to work with the Congress on this issue.
Chairman Issa. Great question, Mr. Cooper.
With that, we go to Mr. Chaffetz for 5 minutes.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
I want to go to one of the sections in here that talks
about the lost revenue, if you will, from the IRS failing to
collect some $385 billion. Can you expand on that a little bit?
You know, a lot of discussion we have here in Congress is about
should we increase taxes, should we cut taxes, and here we have
$385 billion? That is an annual number from 2006, correct?
Mr. Dodaro. Right. One of the things, Congressman, I am
glad you asked this question. First of all, IRS had not been
doing regular estimates of the tax gaps, so we had made
recommendations to that issue. We had placed administration of
the tax laws on our high risk list many years ago, starting out
with fraud in the earned income tax credit, but we expanded it
more broadly. There is a lot of under-reporting of income in
this area, but the first part was to figure out how much and
then where is it occurring.
So the IRS is continuing now to do active research in all
those areas and GAO is doing a lot of research. Some of the
things that we have recommended, for example, have been to have
IRS use third-party information more to check against the
records. For most wage earners, the taxes are deducted, but for
many others they are not. So that is an area.
In real estate, for example, real estate owners, for
services that are provided to corporations there could be
third-party reporting. The Joint Committee on Taxation, just
from implementing those two recommendations alone, estimates
$5.9 billion that could be collected over a 10 year period of
time.
We have also recommended that they could perhaps do a
better job providing assistance to taxpayers to ensure greater
voluntary compliance through automating some of their responses
as well. We have recommended in the past, and now it is being
implemented, that paid tax preparers, who many people use, have
to have certification and ongoing education requirements as
well.
So it is really a multifaceted strategy that we have
recommended, and we continue to do work in this area to try to
do it. We shouldn't ask people to pay more if the people
currently aren't carrying their share of the burden.
Mr. Chaffetz. And I guess that is the point, Mr. Chairman,
that while there is talk about raising taxes again, here we
have $385 billion not collected in just one 12-month period,
and then you combine that with the tens of billions of dollars
in waste, fraud, and abuse. If we want to have an economic
impact upon the financial books of this country and our ability
to have a government that is limited, but also funded in a
proper way, these are two things that we cannot ignore, and
that is why I am so excited about this committee and the work
that we are doing here.
I have just less than 2 minutes here. I want to talk about
the border security, point number 47 in the report. We had
spent an unbelievable amount of money on SBInet, which
basically doesn't work, but the Arizona Border of Surveillance
Technology plan, you are somewhat critical of that plan. Can
you expand verbally on the concerns that you have with the
border security initiative that Homeland Security is putting
forward?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. We have concerns that it is unclear as to
what the benefits are going to achieve and how they are going
to measure performance under the program, and also estimating
the life cycle costs of these activities.
Continually, when we look at these technology investments,
it is always not quite clear up front exactly what the benefit
is that is going to be achieved, how it is going to be
achieved, how you are going to measure whether you know that
there is success there, and do you have a realistic estimate of
how much it is going to cost before you start proceeding down
the path and have well defined requirements.
If you don't have those things up front, it is a recipe for
disaster later on, and a lot of wasted resources and time and
energy, so in this case we are saying that those things ought
to be well defined up front. The Department agrees, I believe,
with our recommendations and hopefully they will be able to
provide these type of clarifications and additional analysis.
Mr. Chaffetz. And one thing that I would hope that the GAO
would look at is how the statistics are gathered on the border.
There is some concern that there has been an adjustment or a
change in how those statistics have initially come about. How
are we tracking the turn-back souths or the getaway categories?
Here we are trying to quantify things which, as you say, having
the metrics in place is imperative to coming to a proper
decision, so I would just encourage you look at that.
My time has expired. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro. We are looking at that issue right now. We will
have a report soon.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now go to the gentlelady from New York, Mrs. Maloney,
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you so much.
Congratulations, Mr. Dodaro and your team, on this really
excellent report. I would like to be associated with the
comments of my friend, Mr. Cooper. I am going to take this
home, I am going to put it by my bed, and I am going to read it
every night before I go to bed, because let me tell you, I
think that saving taxpayers money and making government work
better is a really exciting goal and something that we can both
work together on all sides of the aisle to make happen.
I understand before I got here there was an agreement on
one of your areas that you have highlighted for many years, the
loophole for oil and gas companies, that they are literally
leases to extract oil and gas from land owned by the American
taxpayer and absolutely nothing is coming in from it. You
estimated $21 to $53 billion.
I believe the chairman or the Republican report had $80
billion, so certainly whether it is $80 or $53 billion, it is a
lot of money, and I am thrilled that we are going to work
together to close that loophole and move forward; that could
help our economy and help pay down our deficit.
You also talked about management and improving management
of oil and gas resources as really an area we need to focus on.
Based on your report, you said we are not getting a fair return
from the leasing of Federal land that belongs to U.S.
taxpayers. In fact, you said we were absolutely 93rd in the
world, to be exact, in collecting revenue from oil and gas
leases, and the only countries doing worse than we are are Peru
and Pakistan in collecting greater. That is not a very good
record, is it? So we are going to have to work on that.
In your report, you indicate that over the last year
improved management by the Interior of Federal oil and gas
resources could result in an additional revenue of $1.8 billion
over 10 years. Can you elaborate on what the Interior is doing,
what steps we need to take, and could you just point out more
information in that area?
Mr. Dodaro. Sure. I am going to ask Ms. Dalton to address
that issue; she was responsible for that work.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay, great.
Ms. Dalton. Thank you.
There are a number of things that Interior can do, and in
fact they are starting to do that we have pointed out in our
report. One is to gather good data on what actually is coming
out of the wells to determine how much is being owed to the
Federal Government. It is important to have third-party
information and not self-reported information.
It is also important to have quality information coming in
so that it is verified, again, so that we know exactly what is
being owed. I think those are two important things that will
help in the Federal Government receiving exactly what it----
Mrs. Maloney. And Interior is working on this now?
Ms. Dalton. They are working on it. They have made some
progress, but there is more to be done. Interior is also
working at hiring additional people. They have gone through a
reorganization. They need to have the right people and the
right skills to do the important work that they are charged to
do.
One thing Interior has done recently, which we pointed out
in your report and you mentioned in terms of where the Federal
Government is as a resource owner in the amounts that we are
charging, Interior has just completed a study of our royalty
rates and has made adjustments in those. There is one area that
you allude to in terms of non-producing lands. There is a
request by the administration to provide an annual rental fee
if a lease is not producing, that the lessor would be required
to make a payment based on the acreage leased, to which many
resource owners do in fact charge.
When we did our study, what we were doing was comparing
what we in the Federal Government do and the Department of
Interior does with other resource owners, whether it is States,
other countries, private citizens that own valuable oil and gas
resources and other minerals.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, my time is almost up. I would like to
ask each of you, you have worked hard on this report, if you
could recommend one area, just one simple area that is not
divisive, that every American could agree on, that even
Congress could agree on and work together on to help
improvement management that would help the bottom line of our
country, what would it be? Do you want to start, Ms. Dalton?
Ms. Dalton. I think one of the things that I think is most
important that crosses all of the areas is having good
information on what exactly are we getting. Are we matching the
outcomes that we are receiving? Because then we can start
making decisions on how we can be more efficient and more
effective.
Mrs. Maloney. Mr. Dodaro.
Mr. Dodaro. I just would like to underline Pat's comments,
because the one thing that has really surprised me out of this
whole exercise that we have been doing for the past 2 years is
how much we do not know about the effectiveness of many of
these programs. They may have overlapping responsibilities, but
in trying to figure out how to handle this, you really don't
have a lot of good information about what we are getting for
the value of many of these programs and activities, and I think
unless you have that it is very important.
The other thing is I think we have to get better organized
to deal with the problems according to the comments that were
made earlier by the chairman on this area. I don't think we are
organized properly to be able to tackle these problems with the
administration or within the Congress, so I think innovative
approaches are required.
Mrs. Maloney. And Ms. St. Laurent.
Ms. St. Laurent. Thank you. I think both of our reports
highlight a number of areas where just better attention to good
management practices and good business practices would yield
significant benefits.
Mrs. Maloney. Such as?
Ms. St. Laurent. For example, we have several suggestions
from last year's report regarding contracting, the need to get
better competition in contracting, better manage the use of
multiple award contracts, etc., or interagency contracts. Also,
the efforts that are going on now to consolidate data centers I
think are very important and have potential for saving
significant costs as well. So those are a couple of examples.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentlelady.
With that, we go to the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Kelly, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, good seeing you again.
My concern is more when we go to the auto bailouts. There
was $62 billion spent, and when we talk about the Auto Recovery
Office, part of the Department of Labor, I noticed in item 39
we are talking about an office that spent, I think, roughly
last year $1.2 million in travel expenses going to communities
that were hardest hit by plant closings and the effect that it
is going to have. Can you see any positive results from that?
I read your report. There seems to me that there is a great
deal of overlap with that Department, and maybe they have
missed their mark as far as what they were initially set to do.
Mr. Dodaro. Basically, our fundamental point is right on
your question. We have asked them to provide justification for
what they think they have done in order to promote
effectiveness, because when we went out and talked to
communities, many of them got help, but pointed to other parts
of the Federal Government that they got assistance from.
So our fundamental question is either for the office to
produce some tangible concrete examples of exactly how they
have improved their effectiveness or those funds could be
better spent perhaps going to departments that are providing
direct assistance to the communities.
Mr. Kelly. Yes, because it seems to me there is an awful
lot of duplication there and a lot of just back and forth on
things that didn't really accomplish anything. And I am greatly
concerned now because as we talk about the auto bailout
somewhere, and I don't think this is a time to take a victory
lap, I know and you know.
And after being in the automobile business all my life, I
do know that the cost of gasoline does kind of effect what the
market is and who can afford to buy a car and what they are
going to continue to do. So while we may think we have made
some type of a dramatic recovery, and I just looked to this
past weekend, if you add all the manufacturers' numbers
together, you know what they are projecting, the czar is, for
this year? That is the annual sales rate; $16.5 million. Now,
that is their projection if you take each one individually.
I am a little skeptical of that ever coming to a reality,
but the dramatic impact of that is all of these projections go
forward as to what you are going to do as far as production is
concerned; how you are going to use your suppliers, what they
are going to be asked to provide for you. And we know from that
last downturn, and I went through it personally at the time, I
was an automobile dealer solely, I was not a Member of
Congress. The market dropped 35 to 40 percent over a weekend.
Now, that also affected especially trucks and SUVs. When
the price of fuel goes up, those just fall off a cliff; I mean,
they absolutely fall. The problem you have is that people owe
so much more on that vehicle, they can't even trade it in;
there is no way you can bring it back.
Now, people say what the heck is he talking about, what
does that have to do with anything? If you are in a community
that builds trucks and SUVs, that has a dramatic effect and I
am more concerned. I know we have done a lot of things that we
think are going to ensure somehow a safe landing or some type
of a parachute that is going to make it a little bit easier. I
see what is going on right now as absolutely a harbinger of
what is to come. As much as we may talk about it and have all
kinds of studies about what is best for those communities,
there is nothing like a strong market and a strong economy.
So no matter how many studies we do, and I know that people
talk about we need to have a better ROI on the studies that we
do, but the truth of the matter is the shareholders don't have
a vote in this, the stakeholders don't have a vote in this. We
just tax them and take their revenue; we decide where to spend
it, as much as we would like to see it spent better.
And I am not one that will stay up all night reading the
report, I read some parts of it that really affect me, but I
tell you what, you have done a wonderful job on it. I
appreciate what you are doing and I wish we could incorporate
much more quickly those ideas that you have and those fixes to
it; it would certainly bode well for the stakeholders and
shareholders of this business, which are the hardworking
American taxpayers.
So I thank you for your time. I know that there is a lot of
duplication in this office. While it doesn't really hit high on
the amount of expenses, this is one of those times where $1.2
million sounds like chump change, but when it comes out of your
pocket after working all week, it is a great deal of money. So
thanks, keep up the good work, and we will try to work with you
and get to some answers. But thank you for your time.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentleman yield?
General Dodaro, specifically on the auto bailout
effectiveness, I think you have weighed in previously on that.
Would you like to give us an update on how successful those
funds relocation, the effort has been?
Mr. Dodaro. There are, and I comment on it both in terms of
the automakers, but also other parts of the TARP, there are
still a couple of key issues where the story isn't completely
written yet, and one is whether or not Treasury decides when to
divest in some of these investments that have been made in the
auto companies.
AIG, for example, we have made recommendations to make sure
that they have the right type of expertise to decide when to
divest and how to do it in order to make sure that the
taxpayers are best protected in that area. And I might also
take the opportunity to comment that another large part of the
bailout activities is resolving the issues with Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, and that is a big issue. That will end up being
one of the major costs incurred through this financial bailout
process.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
Mrs. Maloney. Would the gentleman yield? May I ask a
question? Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Kelly. My time has expired.
Mrs. Maloney. On this particular issue, on the TARP. I ask
unanimous consent to ask a question on TARP.
Chairman Issa. If the gentlelady from Washington, DC, will
forego, I would ask unanimous consent the gentlelady have 30
seconds for a question. Without objection.
Mrs. Maloney. This is a critical point and we really need
more information on it. We had a bill, a bipartisan bill passed
in the last Congress that would track everything TARP passed
our House, overwhelmingly died in the Senate.
I think I would like to request the chairman to request,
since I know I don't have the power to request, a report on
where we are in TARP from the GAO. Where did all that money go?
What is still out there? What are these questions that you sort
of lightly touched that we could look at in a better way to
figure out how to make smart decisions on what is remaining to
be done.
I still am fuzzy on where it was paid back, what time, in
what form, and I think that that would be a really helpful
thing for the economy and ways to manage in the future and
manage what is right before us right now.
I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentlelady and I will take your
request as an order to work with the GAO on bringing that to
the full committee.
With that, we recognize the gentlelady from the District of
Columbia for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Dodaro, for this report. Actually, I
want to suggest one doesn't have to stay up all night reading
the report because that is not how it is organized. It is
really organized so that you can go in agency by agency and
look at and extract the particular areas where you could really
get some bang for whatever buck it is you are looking for.
If you believe the Government does a great deal of good, as
I think the American people really do, you want it managed very
well, and every time something comes out, it is being poorly
managed. There are those who will take advantage of that to say
that the whole thing ought to be sent up in smoke.
But essentially, Mr. Dodaro, this is a management
responsibility. When I chaired the EEOC, I reorganized the
agency, but I didn't do it just to pull the programs from one
place to another, enabled me to go to a settlement strategy,
for example, instead of litigating everything. I can see the
value of eliminating duplication. In order to do it, I had to
reorganize the entire agency.
Now, the closest thing we have to eliminating duplication,
overlap, etc., is the President's proposal on reorganization,
so I have to ask you about that, because we can talk about it
as much as we want to, but it is the administration, it is
management that runs the agency. So just to take one of the
functions, the President wants to do this in a way just like
you have done it. He doesn't do the whole elephant and say
throw it up and let's get it all done; he focuses in on
agencies which suggest reorganization would save money.
The trade functions, for example, where he says over 10
years you could save over $3 billion. You would think Congress
would be all over that as much as we want to save funds, but in
light of your own report on duplication, I would be most
interested in your opinion of the President's reorganization
proposal.
Mr. Dodaro. First, I would say there are a couple issues.
One is the request for the sort of fast-tracked authority for
the Congress. I think that the real policy decision that the
Congress is going to have to wrestle with----
Ms. Norton. Why do you think the President did that?
Congress will always have problems with that; that is the only
way we have to get into the struggle in the first place.
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I am not sure, to be honest with you. I
think the Congress worked with the administration in the
reorganization for the Department of Homeland Security.
Presidents have requested but we really haven't had that fast-
track authority since President Reagan was given the authority
for a brief period of time many years ago.
Ms. Norton. Did it work for President Reagan?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I don't think that he made any proposals
through it because it was only given to him for a couple of
weeks, so there was a short window of opportunity there. But I
think there is a real deliberative process, and the question is
one of the things I think needs to be thought about is how the
Congress needs to engage the administration in the development
of these proposals so that there is consensus so that they work
effectively over time; and that applies to any sort of
proposal, because if you don't have that consensus, then people
start trying to undo the----
Ms. Norton. Mr. Dodaro, let me ask you this, then, because
I am not here to make the case for fast-track. I am much more
interested in his reorganization proposals.
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I think there are a couple of issues
there that need to be taken into consideration. One would be
exactly what problem they are trying to address. I think the
issue about the U.S. Trade Representative being included in the
Department is one that has to carefully be considered because
of the prominence of that position in dealing internationally
and also its special relationship with the Congress and
Congress's authorities in the trade areas.
Some of the other opportunities for coordination I think
have merit and should be considered. There are different ways
to get coordination, but I think they also have to go into this
with the recognition that however they are reorganized in the
trade areas, because of the wide areas of responsibility,
coordination with other departments and agencies will still be
important over time. I think there needs to be a good
transition plan that has to be talked about up front. I don't
think that was given enough consideration for the Department of
Homeland Security. So there are a lot of facets of that
activity. I think any reorganization proposal has merit to be
discussed and deliberated on, and to really take careful
deliberative action is appropriate.
Ms. Norton. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentlelady.
We are now joined by Senator Coburn. Pursuant to our rules,
active Members of the House and Senate are not sworn in, so I
now take great pleasure in recognizing the gentleman for
roughly 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. TOM COBURN, M.D.

Senator Coburn. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Cummings, and members of the committee. First of all,
let me applaud you for having this hearing. What is
disappointing is so few Members of your body are here, which
identifies what the real problem is in Congress. I also want to
thank Gene Dodaro for being here.
Chairman Issa. Too many committee assignments like a markup
next door, I am afraid.
Senator Coburn. Sure. But the fact is that calls a lack of
leadership in organization of Congress so that we pay attention
to the things that are really important. I don't know what the
markup is, but the fact is that the country is drowning in
debt. We have a $1.3 trillion deficit.
We have totally vanquished opportunity for our kids in the
future, and we have brought to us by GAO some things that we as
Members of Congress on both sides of the aisle can do, and yet
not one major thing was done off their report last year, except
what Virginia Fox did in terms of consolidating some 35 work
and job training programs, which were recommended in last
year's study.
I would tell the delegate from D.C. that I applaud the
administration's proposal. I am supportive and I am working
with them to try to do it. But I would take issue with the
point that we created 82 teacher training programs, the
administration didn't. We created 47 different job training
programs. We created 56 different financial literacy programs.
We created 100-plus transportation programs through seven
different agencies. We created 209 different science,
technology, engineering, and mathematic education programs.
So it is true that the administration is leading in trying
to consolidate this, and I applaud them and I am going to help
them try to move it through the Senate, but the responsibility
lies on us because we in fact have created the mess. We have
one department in this Government that knows all their
programs, only one. The rest of them have no idea all their
programs. We can't even get a bill through the Senate that says
that agencies should give a list of all their programs every
year. Nobody on that panel knows all the programs for all those
different agencies.
Well, if nobody knows, how are we ever going to solve the
problem? And we are not unless we as Members of Congress take
the initiative to start solving it.
What I would tell you today is this is a good first start.
What Gene Dodaro and his group have done has given us some
areas where we can make major changes that not only address the
needs that are out there that are not being met now, but can do
it in an economical and efficient way, and eliminate
significant duplication that by their own report, both last
year and this year, says that sometimes actually harms those
people that we are trying to help.
So I think we have a great opportunity to try to fix
things. They put it on a platter for us and, unfortunately, we
have done nothing with it. And given the fact that our country
is bankrupt, not going bankrupt, we are bankrupt. If you add
all the total unfunded liabilities, we are over $130 trillion,
if you add $15, $16 trillion worth of debt, there is no way we
can fix our country unless we as Members of Congress start
looking at what we are already doing.
The other thing that I would propose that you all ought to
pass, we have attempted it twice in the Senate; we got 64 votes
once and 60 the second, is have CRS look at every bill before
it goes through for a vote to make sure it is not duplicating
another program; in other words, to give us the knowledge to
say before you pass another bill, are you duplicating something
that is already out there so that we don't keep digging the
hole deeper. I think those are things that we can do.
We put forward what we have done the last 7 years in a book
called Back in the Black. A lot of people won't agree with all
that is in it, I understand that, but there is $9 trillion
worth of savings in this. If we could come to consensus on $3
or $4 trillion, we could make a significant difference in the
outlook and future for our country and our kids.
So I would hope that you would look at that at some point
in the future and critique it. But we have to come together. I
think we have well earned our 15 percent approval rating for
the American people.
With that, I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Senator Coburn follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.071

Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
With that, we go to, oddly enough, the gentleman from
Oklahoma, Mr. Lankford, next.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks all of you for being here. Appreciated the
testimonies of both of you. I had to slip out for a moment to
be able to come back in, but I appreciate that.
Let's talk about the why. Dr. Coburn, obviously, you know,
as a physician, very well, you can treat the symptoms all day
long, but you have to figure out what is causing it. What is
causing all of this duplication? While the GAO report is a
terrific report of here are the duplications, are there areas
we can back up and fix and let's prevent it?
One of them you have already identified, the CRS reporting,
to get the possibility that in advance of a vote there is
already a report out there that says this already exists. Do
either of you have ideas to say here is the why this is
occurring?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I think that basically many of these
programs start out as well-intentioned perceptions of need,
that there is always not a well documented case for that in the
first place and there is an accumulation over time. I mean, the
100 programs in surface transportation developed over decades,
and there is really not a regular process, other than
congressional oversight, to look at whether or not these
programs are working effectively.
I think in some cases part of our recommendations are to
really tie funding to outcomes, and not just there is a
perception that providing money fixes problems, and that
perception is not always----
Mr. Lankford. So you are saying just year after year
Congress has this perception we have a problem, we need to do
something; we didn't necessarily evaluate what we did last
year, we are really not going to evaluate what we are going to
do this year, but we need to go back to the voters and say we
did something?
Mr. Dodaro. That is definitely part of the issue.
Mr. Lankford. Okay.
Dr. Coburn, any other ideas you have on that?
Senator Coburn. I think careerism has a lot to do with it.
Elections have a lot to do with it. I will just give you a
little anecdotal example. Two years ago, in one of my
committees, at two different times in a 3-month period bills
were brought before the committees that identically duplicated
programs that were already running. In private, I suggested to
the Members bringing forth those bills that maybe they ought to
look at what was already being done and, of course, when they
did, they withdrew the bills. The fact is that is an
accumulation of poor staff work.
But what it really reflects, and if you look at, we have
actually documented the amount of oversight hearings. It has
gone precipitously down in Congress over the last 20 years. The
number of oversight hearings has gone precipitously down.
We, as Members of Congress, don't know what is going on,
and in our desire to please and to meet compassionately a need,
we do try to act, but we act without knowledge because we
haven't done the oversight. Treating pneumonia by treating the
fever and the cough, and not ever giving an antibiotic, doesn't
cure pneumonia. Matter of fact, it leads ultimately to sepsis
and death. But that is what we do all the time.
So what I think we lack is leadership both in the Senate on
both sides of the aisle and in the House on both sides of the
aisle, because if we are to get out of this, leadership ought
to say every committee is going to do the oversight of every
program over the next 2 years; you are going to look at what
they are doing, how they are doing it, how effective it is,
which ones you can measure.
The one key thing, we don't have any metrics on any of
this. We are looking at all the job training programs in
Oklahoma. I have had eight field reps doing this for a year,
until they finally discovered we were looking at it; now the
administration won't cooperate. And we are going to be issuing
a report, and here is what the summary of the report is on job
training programs in Oklahoma: job training money from
Washington is spent to keep the people employed in job training
working, not training people for new jobs in Oklahoma.
That is my consensus of what is happening in job training.
It is the most fragmented, illogical, stupid system I have ever
seen in my life. Some areas work well. On one program, the same
program doesn't work well in another county. And the fact is
that we have created that mess, and in the background of that
what we have done is created a constituency of those that work
in the job training program that value it, but have no metrics
to prove that they are effective in what they were assigned to
do.
Mr. Lankford. The Taxpayer Right to Know Act that you
mentioned in the Senate, basically asking every agency to
define all the programs, why is that stalling? What was the key
thing that we can get out of that, when it is said and done?
And not blaming the Senate, but saying just simply identifying
here are the agencies, identify all of your programs that you
have.
Senator Coburn. The Department of Education puts out every
year a list of all their programs. They are the only one that
knows all their programs. And the book is this thick. It is
difficult for them to keep up with it. But the fact is is
before you can fix anything, you have to know what the problem
is and you have to know the extent of it. We have great help
from GAO, but not to the extent that we need.
Just a little history for a second. Gene's predecessor
didn't want to do what I asked to do in terms of bringing these
studies forward. When I asked the GAO to give me every program
in the Federal Government, they said it is impossible. I went
to CRS and they said it is impossible. So we made a mandate. We
are two-thirds through that, is that right, Gene? So we are
two-thirds through this. This is a 3-year program. By the end
of next year the GAO will have looked at all of the Federal
Government.
The fact is even for GAO this has been a humongous task to
get their hands around it, and they still don't really have
their hands around it; what they are doing is identifying
components of it. We have the power as Members of Congress to
do the oversight to do the oversight on each one of these
programs if in fact we will invest the time in it to find out.
Because if our goal is really to help American people with
these programs, we ought to be making sure that they are
actually doing what they are intended to do. And I would put
forth that 50 to 60 percent of them don't come close to any of
the marks that we intended when we wrote the legislation that
set them up in the first place.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now go to the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr .Chairman. And thank you,
Senator Coburn and other panelists for being here today. And I
want to thank the chairman for having this hearing.
Let me begin with the piggy-back question of the chairman
to our friend, Mr. Cooper, from Tennessee, the inference of
which, if I draw it correctly, I actually agree with the
chairman. Mr. Dodaro, you were asked how you are doing in
implementing an 11 percent cut to your agency, and one of the
things you cited in response to the chairman's question was, if
I heard you correctly, an 81 to 1 ratio of savings for dollar
invested. Could you expand just a little bit on that? I
particularly want Senator Coburn to be able to hear that as
well.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. What we do is we track implementation of
our recommendations by the agencies and by the Congress and we
get third-party estimates of what the financial benefits were
as a result of implementing our recommendations, and we
regularly report that over time. But the concern that I have
had is that, on average, over the past 4 years, we have been
averaging $91 for every $1 invested in GAO, and this past year
was 81, and the 11 percent reduction is of concern to me
because I think that we are missing opportunities to identify
additional areas for the Congress to take even more actions on
our recommendations.
Mr. Connolly. I was listening to Senator Coburn, and as
somebody who helped run a big local government, it was music to
my ears what you were enumerating in terms of let's move beyond
the aspirational when we pass legislation and look at efficacy.
And can we do that in a nonideological context? Because if we
could remove sort of the incendiary agendas on each side and
actually just look at the merits, there would be a lot of
common ground around here if we could get that done.
But I would suggest to the Senator that the problem is
trust is so badly broken here and so often we yield to the
temptation actively for trying to get somebody politically that
you burn trust on one side or the other on the actual task at
hand. And if we could somehow detoxify some of the oversight we
do in this Congress, I think we could find a lot more common
ground.
And you made the point, and so did you, general, that here
we are a year later and, frankly, we haven't done much with the
earlier report. And a lot of the recommendations you reported
to us a year ago are recommendations you are reporting to us
again, and it is Congress that hasn't acted.
Senator.
Senator Coburn. Well, I think the problem is not
partisanship; I think the problem is elections. And I think it
is the lack of courage and character in Members of Congress.
They look more toward fixing their party and themselves--and I
am talking both sides of the aisle--for the next election than
they do the long-term interests of the country.
I don't think we have had a problem here; all you have to
do is look at our spending. Republicans and Democrats, whether
Democrats have been in control or Republicans have been in
control, doesn't matter who the President is, we doubled the
size of the Federal Government in the last 11 years. So the
problem is we get along too well when it comes to spending
money we don't have on things we don't absolutely need.
I would also like to comment I think what the budget
ramifications for the GAO were obscene. When we cut them more
than we cut ourselves, when they are the number one tool, if
you want to find out something important in this Government and
you want the facts to back it up, the last place you ought to
be cutting is the GAO.
And yet our appropriators on both sides of the aisle really
was payback. I will make that claim. It was payback. They were
embarrassed because they haven't done their job on oversight,
and here GAO actually shows what is going on and the lack of
effectiveness of appropriation, whether it is Democrat or
Republican running it. They failed to do their job in terms of
oversight and they are embarrassing them.
So what happens is their budget gets cut because they are
actually showing things that they should have discovered with
their own oversight hearings.
Mr. Connolly. And in the 39 seconds I have left, Senator,
and I agree with you, I just think it is very important that we
move beyond the mindless narrative that government is just big,
bloated, and fat, and we should cut it all, and differentiate
between an invested dollar that has a return on it, such as a
dollar invested at GAO.
If we really are serious about debt reduction, here is a
vehicle for trying to get at savings. I mean, if it is 91 to 1,
there aren't many other Federal programs where we can claim
that kind of return, and it just seems to me I completely agree
with the Senator; it is penny wise and pound foolish to
disinvest in the GAO.
With that, of course, I yield back. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now go to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Farenthold, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I am sitting
here, we have pretty much knocked half the deficit off the
board just in our conversations with Senator Coburn's $100
million estimate in duplication and the IRS not collecting
almost well over $300 billion a year. Of course, we can get
around you can't get blood from a turnip with the IRS, but we
are about halfway there already. So we talk about what a
struggle it is to get it under control. I am not sure it is
that big a trouble if we just do our job.
I did want to follow up on a question Mr. Lankford had
about what did you think the causes for this were, and I am
wondering if part of it also isn't the committee structure
within Congress in that everybody, I think, will agree jobs are
the biggest issue, so every committee wants to create a program
to create jobs or to create training for jobs. I do think we
have a unique opportunity with the broad jurisdiction of this
committee to come up with overviewing all of these programs and
coming up with recommendations that go through even the
existing committee structure to do away with that.
Senator Coburn, would you like to comment on that?
Senator Coburn. Well, I am probably not still familiar
enough with the House's committee structure to be able to
comment on it. I think this is a nature problem of politicians;
you want to be liked, you want to do the right thing. But it
also has to do with an underlying tenant is we are on too many
committees, we are not really good at any one thing; we are
fair at a lot of things. Most of us don't go to doctors that
are that way; we want to go to a doctor that is really good.
So I just think this report, whether you agree with it or
not, is based on 47 oversight hearings that I did in the Senate
in 2 years. Forty-seven. That was more than the whole Senate
did combined with every other committee. And the
recommendations of this are based on facts from GAO, IG, OMB,
and CRS. So you can agree with it or not, but the fact is if
you agreed with a third of it we could be $3 trillion over the
next 10 years less.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, Senator. I want to go back to
the GAO report. One of my colleagues suggested setting it by
her bedside table for reading. I am going to take it with me to
my town halls, get everybody to scan the QR code on here and
actually have access to the report, because I think it is
something the American people need to know and they need to
pressure us----
Chairman Issa. If the gentleman would yield.
Mr. Farenthold. Yes.
Chairman Issa. Knowing how tech savvy you are, we have now
received the digital version of that for you to take on the
plane.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. I will download it to my iPad.
I did want to touch real quickly in the short time
remaining, one of the big issues in South Texas is issues with
the VA, and I think section 15 of the report deals with the VA
and some of the problems they have both communicating within
their own organization and with the DOD for veterans coming
out.
I know there is one instance mentioned in the report where
there were five case managers working on the same life
insurance plan for one single individual, and one of the
complaints I hear both from veterans who are trying to get the
services that we promised them and that we owed them is that it
takes the VA forever to get anything done. The VA in my neck of
the woods is months behind in paying doctors who have treated
our veterans, in some cases close to a year behind in paying.
With respect to the VA, can you comment? Is it a technology
problem? Is it just a tech phobia where they need to deal with
technology? Is it a cultural issue? How do we fix what I think
one of the most critical problems we have?
Mr. Dodaro. I think there are a number of facets to it. One
is, it is a large decentralized department and it needs more
centralized direction and management. We have looked at their
applications of technology over time and have had a lot of
critiques that they need to improve their ability to be able to
do it. Some of the procedures need to be streamlined. I mean,
one of the classic cases where they have difficulties is in
handling disability claims.
And then there is an appeal process beyond that that could
go on for a period of time. The coordination issues between DOD
and VA can be greatly improved in electronic records and how
they purchase drugs. There are a lot of opportunities for
savings, but some of the fundamental problems I think are
cultural, not having applications of technology and to have
more centralized leadership.
Mr. Farenthold. I look forward to working with you all on
that. I see my time has expired. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now go to my friend and colleague from Cleveland, Ohio,
Mr. Kucinich, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you very much. I want to thank the
panel and welcome Senator Coburn, who I had the privilege of
serving with in the House.
Senator, you published what you called a waste book, I
think it was in December, where you listed what you believe are
the 100 most wasteful and low priority government spending
programs in 2011, and in light of developments in this country
with respect to oil and gas, where they are making record
profits, do you think that these industries should continue to
be rewarded with tax breaks and other benefits?
There has been an argument that if you take away some of
the breaks, it would affect gas prices, contradicted by these
tremendous profits these companies are making, and the top five
companies earned alone over $30 billion in profits in one
quarter, and the American people are wondering how can this be
and what about these breaks that they are getting. They
certainly seem to qualify as a prosperous industry, and I would
just like your comments on that.
Senator Coburn. First of all, it is important to note that
they get no tax credits; they get accelerated depreciation
through intangible drilling costs. I think you have to look at
it in two different groups: the very large oil companies
integrated. They could probably do fine without the intangible
drilling costs. What happens with those programs is they
actually pay the same amount of taxes; it is just delayed, so
the cost to the government is the time value of money, which is
zero right now. So it really doesn't cost us anything.
I would also note that their average income tax that they
pay is 41 percent. That is the big five. That is what they paid
last year, which is a good source for us and far above what the
average tax increase is.
I would be amenable to working on that. I think tax reform
is something that we need to do. I think we need to have a tax
program that we quit picking winners and losers in.
Mr. Kucinich. The Department of Energy had a report called
Cuts, oil and gas company tax preferences. There were eight
proposals, one which has to do with repealing the expensing of
the intangible drilling costs. And it seems that there would be
a considerable amount of money that would be recovered by the
Federal Government if they repealed that particular benefit,
which I think is----
Senator Coburn. Congressman, that is true in the short
term, but that is not true over a 7-year period. There would be
exactly the same amount of revenues going to the Federal
Government.
Mr. Kucinich. Well, on this one I would be happy to provide
you with what I am looking at here. It says that from 2013 to
2022, the expensing of the intangible drilling costs would be
worth about $13.9 billion. I would be happy to show this to
you.
Senator Coburn. And, again, that is the Department of
Energy's numbers. If you go and look at CBO's numbers or OMB's
records or CRS's numbers, I think they will show you something
different. The fact is that the average life of most of these
wells is about----
Mr. Kucinich. Well, I want to make sure that I----
Senator Coburn. I would be happy to look at it.
Mr. Kucinich [continuing]. Correctly. This is the
President's budget that I'm citing under the Department of
Energy. So in the President's budget it also says that the
percentage of depletion for oil and natural gas wells would be
another $11.4 billion if you repeal it from 2013 to 2022, and
repealing the domestic manufacturing tax deduction for oil and
natural gas companies over that same period of time would be
worth $11.6 billion. I wanted to point that out to----
Senator Coburn. The third one, though, is you are going to
treat oil and gas different than you do every other
manufacturer if you decide to do that. So I don't have any
problem with a philosophical difference.
What I will tell you, over a 10 year period of time, if in
fact, as an accountant--that is my first degree--as an
accountant, if you amortize an expense over a period of time
versus taking it all up front, the only thing that is going to
happen is we will collect more dollars up front, I agree with
you. Over the long period of time we won't collect more
dollars, but what you will do is for the lower capitalized oil
and gas industry, the ones that are actually finding all the
natural gas now, the smaller companies, what you will do is you
will limit their capital availability and you will limit our
exploration for oil and gas in this----
Mr. Kucinich. Well, I could understand the sympathy that
you have; you represent the smaller developers very well, but
my question is back home in Cleveland I have people who are
looking at $4 or $5 a gallon for gas and are wondering why are
these oil companies getting these breaks, and the biggest
breaks go to the biggest companies.
Senator Coburn. Well, I think you would be better off
addressing the speculation in the commodity markets, rather
than try to--right now there is greater supply than there is
demand for oil. What is happening? There is an international
worry about Iran, which is a significant factor. We can
eliminate speculation in this country, but you can't eliminate
speculation worldwide.
So the most important thing we can do if we want to address
that $4 to $5 a gallon gasoline is make sure we have a domestic
supply of energy, which we are capable of doing over the next
10 to 12 years in this country, that will make us impervious to
the impression and vulnerability of Middle Eastern oil.
Mr. Kucinich. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired, but could
I ask the witness, with unanimous consent, just ask the witness
a followup question? I appreciate that. Thank you, for the
members of the panel here.
Could you tell us how much the speculation in commodity
markets, do you have any idea what kind of a factor that would
be in driving up the price of oil domestically?
Senator Coburn. It would be a guess. It is an educated
guess, but I would imagine we have $15 to $18 worth of
speculation in the price of oil.
Mr. Kucinich. Per barrel you are saying?
Senator Coburn. Per barrel right now.
Mr. Kucinich. Mr. Chairman, I know Senator Coburn is one of
the most fluent people on these issues and I appreciate your
presence here for that reason. This may be something that we
want to look a little bit more closely at.
I want to thank you for that, because $15 to $18 a barrel,
what are we at right now? It is over $100 a barrel.
Senator Coburn. It is $109.
Mr. Kucinich. So that is quite significant. That is
something worth looking at.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your indulgence.
Thank you, Senator Coburn.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
I will quickly recognize myself for a number of things.
Senator, first of all, we have had a rash of your
colleagues coming over here and not only giving testimony, but
taking questions, so please tell your colleagues that it
actually is a good thing.
I am just going to quickly go through some numbers. Number
of hearings held by this committee, starting with Mr. Davis:
2003, 145, these happen to be the first year of each Congress,
2005, 135, downward trend. Waxman, his 2-year period, the first
year, 112; Towns, his 2-year period first year, 93; Issa, his
first year, 122. I am not back to where we were under Chairman
Davis, but we are heading in the right direction.
Number of letters, which are minor hearings, if you will,
under Mr. Towns, 122; last year under this committee, 748. We
take seriously your point that we haven't been doing enough
oversight. It has been a downward trend.
Senator Coburn. Mr. Chairman, if I may?
Chairman Issa. Of course.
Senator Coburn. I think this committee does a great job,
whether it is led by a Democrat or Republican. It has a great
history, just like the permanent Subcommittee on Investigation
in the Senate.
The problem is not the Oversight Committee; the problem is
every other committee in Congress that isn't doing their job,
that doesn't know what they are doing, is not looking at what
the agencies are doing and is not looking to see if what they
planned in terms of legislation is actually being carried out.
So it is not the oversight committees that I have a problem
with, it is the fact that every other committee is failing to
live up to what is required of them, which is to know what they
are doing, and they don't.
Chairman Issa. I appreciate that. Certainly, this committee
has begun looking at the permanent Select Committee over in the
Senate under McClelland, under both Republicans and Democrats
for the work that they have done back in the 1950's.
General Dodaro, a couple of quick things. First of all,
thank you for delivering this in advance in paper, but
digitally.
In your estimation from audits that you have done, wouldn't
it be reasonable to assume that every cabinet position should
be able to deliver the vast majority of discovery or requests
for FOIA in digital format, meaning is there any longer a
reason for either a FOIA request or a congressional request,
subpoena or not, to expect boxes of paper to arrive? I know
Senator Coburn sees them arrive in his committee, just as I do.
In other words, we paid for a lot of computers, and it
seems like we get paper that was printed out of computers in
response to discovery, and so to FOIA requests by the press.
Mr. Dodaro. In consulting with our expert in this area, he
informs me there is no reason that you shouldn't be able to
receive virtually everything electronically.
Chairman Issa. Which would save money because, both on the
sending and, of course, on the receiving, the data mining
afterwards.
Mr. Dodaro. That is correct.
Senator Coburn. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Yes, Senator.
Senator Coburn. Just a note. We spend $38 billion a year on
IT, of which $20 billion is wasted every year. Where is our
oversight of that? The number one programs at risk that they
have, the vast majority of them, other than some Defense
contracting, are IT programs. That is where we ought to be. If
you want to save money, let's start buying some off-the-shelf
programs and make us adjust to them, rather than us design
every new program, just like CMS just spent $77 million on a
program that is not effective in terms of predictive payment.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Dodaro, you also referenced, I think indirectly, the
work of the Recovery Board when you were talking about the
potentials for recovery if we changed our systems, if you will,
for how we tracked payments by both the payor and the
recipient, and also the kind of predictive modeling that I
think pretty much you are looking at the Recovery Board as the
model for what we should be doing in Medicare, Medicaid fraud
and mispayments.
Mr. Dodaro. Earlier, I was talking about recovery auditing
that is done after the fact, but as it relates to the Recovery
Board, I think that their operations are very good. I was over
there recently for an update on their Recovery Operations
Center. I think there are additional data bases that they could
get access to. I am going to try to do what I can to help them.
Chairman Issa. And if you give us a list, we will do what
we can to open those up.
Mr. Dodaro. And some of that may need some legislation, Mr.
Chairman. But I think that they have done a marvelous job and I
hope that there are ways to find out how to make their
operations more permanent once their temporary authority
expires. I know you have legislation to do ,that and we are
supportive of that.
Chairman Issa. I am going to submit this one for the
record. We have a series of whistleblowers who came in
essentially making a claim that the Department of Defense
routinely hires contractors and/or uniformed personnel, while
not getting rid of or reassigning DOD civilians simply because
the DOD civilians tend to be inflexible and they can grab a
contractor or some uniform personnel to get something done
quickly, rather than later.
So I am submitting that for the record because I don't want
a full study, but I would like your observations calling on
personnel that are particularly familiar with that, because it
seems like an area that we may want to follow up on, but I
don't want to do it without your comments.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Let me ask Janet to comment on it; she is
in charge of our Defense work.
Ms. St. Laurent. The one comment I would make initially is
that the number of contractors, of course, associated with
headquarters functions and money, entities of the Department of
Defense, has increased and DOD does not have a very good handle
on that data. So then it makes it very difficult for them to
make informed decisions that also understand and reflect the
cost implications of those decisions as they are deciding
whether or not to staff positions with a government employee or
a contractor. So it is an area we have done a lot of work on
and we would be happy to provide additional information.
Chairman Issa. I appreciate that. I am just going to ask
one more because the Senator is here. This committee has
continued to sort of have this nagging proposal of simply
scrapping the Department of Veterans Affairs, making it
effectively part of DOD, making the uniformed relationship,
from the day you raise your right hand to the day you are
buried at a military funeral, a single responsibility.
Obviously, a major portion is health care, a situation in
which I know you have done many reports showing us that
essentially we still keeping talking about having a single
interoperable data base and never get there so that a veteran
might be treated or an active duty person may be treated
without knowledge of other work done or other susceptibilities
or problems. I know the Senator also has unique expertise in
that, so any comments you would have on that.
Senator Coburn. I am not sure I want to add anything to the
Defense Department, with the significant problems that it has
today. It does not deny the fact that the VA has problems.
What we ought to be doing for our veterans, we promised
them health care. Give them a card. They want to go the VA
hospital, let them go to the VA hospital. But give them a card
to go wherever they want. That is real health care. Give them
the ability to seek the health care they want, rather than
limit what they can have.
You can do that in a very cost-effective way that would
give them better outcomes, better availability, and better
timeliness for their care. That is what we should be doing for
our veterans. Let them decide where they want to go, don't
funnel them in to someplace that we say they are going to go.
Give them the freedom that they fought for.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
And, by the way, when I say scrap and consolidate, you can
go either direction; you can take all of health care in DOD and
make it a single system that is led by VA, which is actually
some of the suggestions we have had.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. I share the Senator's concern about adding
anything to the Department. I think there is much more that
could be done with the current relationship if there was proper
leadership and a will to make it happen, particularly in the
electronic records area, in looking at joint purchases for
pharmacy issues, and dealing with health care issues.
There may be organizational ways to get there differently,
and we should be open to those; we should look for better ways.
But I just think that there are many opportunities that could
be focused on right now that we could get quicker action on, as
well as looking for longer term reforms and of an
organizational nature.
Chairman Issa. Thank you. And I will not open up TriCare
for Life, because that would take longer than even two
sessions.
Mr. Cummings, do you have another round?
Mr. Cummings. I want to thank you, Senator, for being here.
As I listened to your testimony, I concluded that there is not
one syllable that you stated that I disagree with. I think the
frustrating part about all of this is there was a song that
said, you got me going in circles, and it seems as if we are
going in circles, and I am trying to figure out how we get off
the merry-go-round.
To your credit, you have asked Mr. Dodaro and GAO to look
at all of this information and gather this information, and I
am just wondering where you see that leading. I guess what you
are doing is saying, okay, let me present the information and
it would be so glaring that maybe it will cause the Congress to
get away from the privacy share, wherever we are in this
circle, to do something.
But where do you see that leading? Because I just have this
thing about time and how you can go and do things over and over
and over again, and you can be talking about the same things 10
years from now; and we have a very limited amount of time to be
here. I don't give a damn if it is 30 years or if it is 5
years. So how do you see us getting off of that merry-go-round?
Senator Coburn. Well, first of all, I think if we don't get
off the merry-go-round in the next couple of years, we are
going to get off the merry-go-round because the international
financial community is going to make us do it. And I would much
rather negotiate with you, Congressman Cummings, than I would
the Chinese. I would rather work with you to solve these
problems rather than us working with the Chinese when they
start telling us what we will do and how we will do it, because
that is where we are going.
If Willie Sutton were here, he would rob the bank, and the
bank is in duplication. And what has disappointed me, I am less
disappointed with the House than I am the Senate. We have not
done one thing in the Senate based on last year's report, not
one single substantive thing. At least the House has brought
out of committee a reform of job training program. That is
$18.6 billion a year, which we know we can get better job
training, match skills better to the needs of both the job
offerers and those being trained for about half as much money.
Well, that is $9 billion. Over 10 years it is 90. And what
Mr. Dodaro and his staff have done is give us another 50 banks
to rob, in other words, if we just do it.
So the real key is leadership, whether it is Speaker
Boehner or Leader Reid. If we want to solve it, we can solve
these problems; we don't have to have a fight with the
President. We can actually solve these problems among ourselves
if we decide that we are going to solve the fiscal issues of
our country. Not talking about it in big terms, but talk about
it in the detail terms.
Mr. Cummings. I saw this when, on the Transportation
Committee, I chaired the Subcommittee on the Coast Guard and
Maritime Transportation, and I am sure you are familiar with
the Deepwater Project, where we were literally buying boats
that did not float. As a matter of fact, they are sitting over
in Baltimore right now, in the harbor, and we were buying
surveillance systems that covered 180 degrees instead of 360,
and buying radios that if they got wet they didn't work. I
mean, I could go on and on.
But in a bipartisan way we were able to straighten that
stuff out in about 2 years, with no dissenting votes, because
folks came together and worked together and resolved it. Now, I
must admit the Coast Guard came kicking and screaming, but in
the end I think they are a better organization because of it. A
lot of it had to do with acquisitions. They didn't have people
who were qualified to even write the contract.
And I think the reason why we were able to do that is
because everybody kind of came together and said, you know
what, we are not going to have this. We are not going to be
buying things that we didn't bargain for. We are not going to
have equipment that is going to hurt our people; we are going
to buy equipment that our people need to do their job.
Everybody came together in a very patriotic way and said
let's do it. How do we get there, though?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, again, I really think it is leadership.
If you and the chairman of this committee would take six or
seven areas which are real obvious, I mean, when I go around
the country or in Oklahoma and I say, there are 82 Federal
programs designed for teacher training, and they say what?
Nobody with any common sense would think we need 82 different
teacher training programs. Eighty-two run by 12 different
agencies, not even out of the Department of Education.
So if you all would target seven or eight areas and have
subcommittees and this committee say, okay, we want you all to
become experts of this, how do we do it, and then send that
information to the actual authorizing committees and then hold
them accountable publicly for not fixing it, I think we can do
it.
The problem is we are fast approaching a time we are passed
the tipping point, and we have a couple of years with which we
can make critical decisions that we can come together and clean
up a lot of this. All of it is well intentioned; none of this
was not well intentioned. The fact is we just didn't know what
we were doing when we were doing it.
The other two things I think we ought to do is I think we
ought to put metrics on anything we pass, that as a requirement
of any program you have to have a metric associated with it to
measure its effectiveness; and number two is you ought to
sunset everything so that it forces you into reauthorizing, and
when you reauthorize you are going to have the hearings which,
in effect, will be oversight hearings, to say whether it ought
to be authorized. Did it work?
We have tons of programs in this country that are well-
meaning that don't help people, and some of them actually hurt
people, and yet we haven't come together bipartisan to solve
it.
Going back to leadership, we are all Americans. We are in
deep trouble financially. We have a significant problem with
jobs. There are 600,000 jobs out there right now waiting in
manufacturing and our job training programs haven't educated
the people for them. Six hundred thousand that could be hired
tomorrow. We have 47 job training programs spending almost $19
billion a year and we didn't meet that need? That tells you
there is some real problem.
So we can do it as Americans, and that is what we need to
focus on because, quite frankly, our survival, our economic
survival depends on us getting together.
Mr. Cummings. Just one last question, Mr. Chairman.
You mentioned the Oklahoma job programs and I know we could
cite all kinds of programs like what you just cited. Does that
call for micro-managing, Senator? In other words, if you are
going to have the leadership making sure that each program was
doing what it is supposed to do, I guess there has to be a
network of communication, too, so that if you do have any kind
of duplication, it makes, not duplication. But if you have
programs doing similar things, that it makes sense that people
are communicating and saying, okay, you are doing this piece,
you are doing that piece. But it seems like that that takes
some real not only leadership, but some getting down in the
weeds type leadership.
Senator Coburn. Well, I think one of the defects with
Congress is too often we write bills with very good intentions
that actually are pretty good plans, and then we don't instruct
the bureaucracy exactly what we intended, and then we let it
flower from there. Oftentimes we know enough to get really
specific about what we intend, and yet we fail to do that.
I don't think we need to micro-manage anything, but you
won't have to micro-manage if you take 47 job training programs
and convert it to 6, and you say there is going to be a one-
stop shop, Federal programs, then you can go to one place in
your State in every county and find every job training
capability there. You shouldn't have to be bounced from program
to program to program, and that is exactly what is happening
now. Some programs are highly effective in some States and some
programs, the same program, doesn't work at all.
So it is not about micro-managing, it is about having a
clear vision of what we intend, with clear instructions to the
bureaucracy, and consolidating programs that do work and taking
the best of those that do and making sure everywhere across the
country, if it is Federal dollars and it is really our roll, if
it is our roll, then making sure those dollars are spent well.
That is oversight and putting the parameters on so you have a
metric of how many people did you get trained actually got
trained in the job they got.
We found people being trained in Oklahoma for jobs that
don't exist so they can collect the Federal bucks for the job
training. Well, that doesn't help anybody.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
We had intended on quitting at 11:30, but if there are any
additional brief questions.
Ms. Norton. Yes, there is an additional brief question.
Chairman Issa. Ms. Norton.
Ms. Norton. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Perhaps for you, Senator, and for Mr. Dodaro, it is rare
that you have the kind of agreement you have seen certainly in
this committee. My own interest in issues like this is far more
on how than what, because when you say words like duplication,
it is pretty hard for people to raise their hands and be on the
side of duplication, and yet it continues.
I was intrigued by the candor of the Senator when he said
Congress did it, so essentially Congress should undo the
damage. And I am wondering the symmetry of that, though,
Senator. The chairman cites lots of hearings and exposure is
very important; that is one of the tools that Congress does
have. When Senator Coburn, though mentions that it is not
partisanship, it is elections, wow. That does suggest that
there are structural problems here.
And let me just cite the record. When Congress has found
something important enough to have to meet it, look what it has
done for trade and military matters. We have this notion that
any Member of Congress hates where you vote up or down. We have
military BRAC Base Realignment Closure Commissions and now we
have two bills. Two committees here in the House have
considered civilian BRAC. One is going to the floor and we are
about to take to the floor the civilian BRAC bill of this
committee, which tries to get rid of failure to sell or
consolidate Federal properties.
What else? Here is another example. When we created, and
you can have your issues with this creation, the Department of
Homeland Security, where we did something really quite
extraordinary, which is bring a lot of agencies together, and
look what you had something that was unprecedented; you had a
strike on our soil by foreign parties.
There are over 500 Members of Congress. Once they get their
hands on an issue, they act like their constituents expect them
to act, and sometimes that is to protect programs that in fact
are included in this duplication. I am trying to get out of the
quagmire and I would like you to speak more deeply on how we
could, the administration has thought of something to do; it
comes up with these up or down votes.
Congress hasn't thought of anything like that to do. And if
we are to get from the what to the how, it does seem to me that
Senator Coburn's notion of we did it, we should undo it has to
face the notion that Congress seems unwilling to do it unless
somehow we were to do something structural ourself. Just like
the administration did something structural to get this done,
the Congress has not done anything structural and it continues
not to be done.
So I would just like to press you on, I accept entirely
what you say about oversight. I even believe that exposure
works, certainly on many issues. But I would like to press you
on whether or not there is something more structural Congress
could do that would grab hold of some of this duplication that
we all agree is excessive and get rid of it.
Senator Coburn. Well, this may shock you. I think we can
all quit and they can send real Americans up here to actually
do what common sense people----
Ms. Norton. Short of that, Senator. Short of that, Senator.
Senator Coburn. Well, but the fact is that is what the
American people are repulsed by. Eighty-five percent of them
know we are not doing our job, and the fact is we make a
political calculation rather than a character calculation about
the future of our country.
Mr. Dodaro has given 176 recommendations, specific
recommendations Congress can do. What did we do? We did two or
three little bitty ones, nothing major. We didn't make any
significant impact on the budget last year.
Had we just reformed job training programs, one, we would
have met a need in our economy right now that we did not meet;
we would have saved $9 billion. How would that have added to
your numbers, Mr. Dodaro, in terms of the for every dollar
spent if we actually did that $9 billion revision and actually
got a streamlined program?
The fact is, it is not hard. What is hard is every program
has a constituency.
Ms. Norton. Right.
Senator Coburn. And that constituency, as I have testified
here today in job training programs, is too often those in the
program, not those being trained by the program. So what we
have to do is pay attention to what our goal was originally.
And when we are more interested in the constituency of a
program rather than the benefactors of the program, we are the
ones that got it wrong, the American people don't. And what I
think is we lack courage and we lack leadership to do what is
in the best long-term interest.
The final point I will make is we are short-term thinkers,
not long-term, and we have created tons of problems because of
that, and that goes to the political side of it as well as the
policy side of it.
And if we will start thinking in the long term about what
is the best, right thing we can do for the country right now,
what we will do is we will be Willie Suttons, we will go to the
bank. He has given us 176 banks to rob, and we can come back on
and actually make a big difference which will actually benefit
the very constituencies that the programs were designed to
benefit, rather than protect the program, which has no right to
be here if in fact it is not effective in helping the
constituency, the ultimate benefactor.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly, are you finished? The gentleman is
recognized.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again I find myself in agreement with Senator Coburn. As
somebody who ran one of the largest local governments in the
United States, to me, metrics are everything. Why do it if you
can't measure it? And I go back to this difference between the
aspirational and the efficacious. As somebody coming from a
local government background here to Congress, what I find is
that many people who have spent their entire careers in the
legislative branch either at the State level or here often
think that by passing a bill, they have solved the problem, and
it is as you say, often with the best of intentions.
I will give you two examples of bills on a bipartisan basis
that passed that nonetheless were almost impossible to
implement at the local level. One was No Child Left Behind,
full of good intentions, full of high aspirations, but very
difficult to implement at the local level, and in some cases
unintentionally actually do harm.
And the other was the immigration reform bill that the
previous president, President Bush, actually endorsed, and Ted
Kennedy, on our side of the aisle, actively worked on with the
President. Again, full of good intentions, but had it passed, I
believe it would have been impossible to comply with; it was so
complicated. I don't know how anyone thought that was going to
solve the immigration problem, or even be easily implementable.
So if we don't have metrics, I think all we can say it is
good intentions, but they may or may not be working. And I
completely applaud your point of view. Everything we do should
be subject to metrics so that we know whether we are making the
effect desired or not.
Senator Coburn. Just a little point on that. When you put
metrics into a bill without teeth, let me tell you what you
get: no metrics. And my experience both in the House and the
Senate is when you want to put metrics in and put some teeth
with it so that they have to come about, you never get it. So I
agree with you, but unless you put a consequence to not
developing the metrics on the bureaucracy, you will not get the
metrics, because they don't want to be measured.
Mr. Connolly. Well, just a final observation. This
committee has had a hearing, for example, take cybersecurity.
The metrics we encouraged unwittingly in the legislation was
training and awareness of the work force. So we had a series of
hearings where agency after agency said we met the metrics; 80
percent, 85 percent of our work force has been trained in the
threat of cybersecurity.
Well, the object is to deter cybersecurity attacks. That is
a means to an end. So we allowed sort of an easy out in that
metric because we picked the wrong metric.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
General Dodaro, Ms. Dalton, Ms. St. Laurent, you have done
a wonderful job. We haven't asked you nearly enough questions,
but we have taken a great deal of your time.
Senator Coburn, I enjoyed the CPA exchange with the former
mayor of Cleveland. I might add for the record that I was in
the private sector when, in order to get NAFTA to meet some
arithmetic need, they found some current revenue, which was
that every small business in America that used to send a check
in quarterly or periodically for their taxes was forced to wire
transfer in every payroll period their taxes so the Government
would get it that few weeks faster one time at a cost of
hundreds of millions of dollars forever, since the 1990's.
And yet, just like taking away depreciation until the end,
when you can write off the whole end of the business cycle, we
could score a one-time event, and it would be countless
billions of dollars, no question at all.
But as you said so rightfully, when the cost of money to
the Federal Government is a fraction of 1 percent right now,
taking that money out of the pockets by accelerating a little
bit of contribution to the Federal Treasury isn't just penny-
wise and pound-foolish, it is trillions of dollars foolish to
the people who need to amass capital in order to do the kind of
work that they don't just do in oil; they do it in oil, they do
it in manufacturing. And I would hate to see us do further harm
to the legitimate depreciation schedules of everyone who brings
wealth to America.
So I join with you in the frustration that I don't think
you have successfully explained that. I think that some will
not yet know that depreciation is in fact real; it is money
that is put out today and you only get a small part of it back
over time. And unless you leverage that with debt, which is
another problem in business that we encourage, you just don't
get the kind of result you want for tax purposes. So hopefully
on the Senate side you can continue to try to educate your
colleagues. I will try to do the same.
I thank you again. We stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[The prepared statement of Hon. Gerald E. Connolly
follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74037.073


