- ASSESSMENT OF THE TRANSITION FROM A MILITARY TO A CIVILIAN-LED MISSION IN IRAQ

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ASSESSMENT OF THE TRANSITION FROM A MILITARY TO A CIVILIAN-LED MISSION
IN IRAQ

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY,
HOMELAND DEFENSE AND FOREIGN OPERATIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 28, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-162

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

75-464 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on National Security, Homeland Defense and Foreign
Operations

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho, Vice        JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Minority Member
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                PETER WELCH, Vermont
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on June 28, 2012....................................     1

WITNESSES

The Honorable Patrick F. Kennedy, Under Secretary for Management,
U.S. Department of State
Oral Statement...............................................     4
Written Statement............................................     6
Mr. Peter F. Verga, Chief of Staff for The Under Secretary for
Policy, U.S. Department of Defense
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    17
The Honorable Mara Rudman, Assistant Administrator, Bureau for
The Middle East, U.S. Agency for International Development
Oral Statement...............................................    21
Written Statement............................................    23
Mr. Michael J. Courts, Acting Director, International Affairs and
Trade, U.S. Department Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    33
Written Statement............................................    35
The Honorable Harold W., Geisel, Deputy Inspector General, U.S.
Department of State
Oral Statement...............................................    42
Written Statement............................................    44
Mr. Joseph T. McDermott, Special Deputy Inspector General for
Southwest Asia, U.S. Department of Defense
Oral Statement...............................................    53
Written Statement............................................    55
Mr. Michael G. Carroll, Deputy Inspector General, U.S. Agency for
International Development
Oral Statement...............................................    64
Written Statement............................................    66
Mr. Stuart W. Bowen, Jr., Special Inspector General for Iraq
Reconstruction
Oral Statement...............................................    80
Written Statement............................................    82

ASSESSMENT OF THE TRANSITION FROM A MILITARY TO A CIVILIAN-LED MISSION
IN IRAQ

----------

Thursday, June 28, 2012,

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on National Security, Homeland
Defense, and Foreign Operations,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:29 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the subcommittee] Presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Farenthold, Tierney, and
Lynch.
Staff Present: Ali Ahmad, Majority Communications Advisor;
Thomas A. Alexander, Majority Senior Counsel; Sharon Casey,
Majority Senior Assistant Clerk; Mitchell S. Kominsky, Majority
Counsel; Scott Schmidt, Majority Deputy; Jaron Bourke, Minority
Director of Administration; Devon Hill, Minority Staff
Assistant; Carla Hultberg, Minority Chief Clerk; Carlos
Uriarte, Minority Counsel; and Ellen Zeng, Minority Counsel.
Mr. Chaffetz. The Committee will come to order. I would
like to begin this hearing by stating the Oversight Committee
mission statement.
We exist to secure two fundamental principles: First,
Americans have the right to know that the money Washington
takes from them is well spent and, second, Americans deserve an
efficient, effective government that works for them. Our duty
on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee is to protect
these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to hold government
accountable to taxpayers, because taxpayers have a right to
know what they get from their government. We will work
tirelessly in partnership with citizen watchdogs to deliver the
facts to the American people and bring genuine reform to the
federal bureaucracy. This is the mission of the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee.
Let me start at the outset here. I appreciate you all being
here. The Country has invested a lot of time, money, blood, and
resources to the mission in Iraq. This is an interesting day on
Capitol Hill given everything that has happened at the Supreme
Court and their decisions, what is happening on the Floor with
the contempt vote that directly involves this Committee.
You will see a limited number of members participating
today. We do believe it is vital, though, to get all of the
testimony that will be shared here today. The questions today
will be probably somewhat limited, with the understanding of
everything that is happening on Capitol Hill. We were faced
with the decision as to whether or not to delay this hearing.
We were concerned that that would push us back to the latter
part of July, perhaps even August. We would like to be fairly
close to a quarterly type of update and hearing given this, so
we do appreciate all your testimony and hope you have an
understanding of the complexity that is this day.
Today's hearing is entitled Assessment of the Transition
from the Military to a Civilian-Led Mission in Iraq, and I want
to again thank you all for participating.
We are going to focus today on our efforts in Iraq since
the military withdrew on December 31st, 2011. We assess the
Administration's progress, its prospects for success, and
whether this strategy should be used as a model for Afghanistan
in 2014. And I cannot emphasize this enough: We need to learn
from the experiences that we have so that, as we go through
this in another situation, we can make the most of it.
On November 17, 2008, the Bush Administration and the
Government of Iraq agreed that the United States would withdraw
its troops by December 31, 2011. Keeping with that agreement,
the Defense Department has removed all but approximately 275
uniformed personnel. The remaining troops work under the Chief
of Mission authority of the Office of Security Cooperation.
The State Department has greatly expanded its footprint in
Iraq. There are approximately 2,000 direct-hire personnel and
14,000 support contractors, roughly a 7 to 1 ratio. This
includes 7,000 private security contractors to guard our
facilities and move personnel throughout Iraq.
Leading up to the withdrawal, the State Department's
mission seemed clear. Ambassador Patrick Kennedy testified the
diplomatic mission was ``designed to maximize influence in key
locations'' and later said ``State will continue the Police
Development Programs, moving beyond basic policing skills to
provide police forces with the capabilities to uphold the rule
of law. The Office of Security Cooperation will help close gaps
in Iraq Security Force's capabilities through security
assistance and cooperation.''
This is an unprecedented mission for the State Department.
Nonetheless, our diplomatic corps has functioned without the
protections of a typical host nation. It has also carried on
without troop support that many believed that it would have. As
a result, the embassy spends roughly 93 percent of its budget
on security alone.
Without a doubt, this is an enormously complex and
difficult mission. Six months into the transition, the Congress
must assess whether the Administration is accomplishing its
mission. While the State Department has made progress, it
appears to be facing difficult challenges in a number of areas.
The Oversight Committee has offered some criticism based on
their testimony today, including the Government Accountability
Office noting that the State and Defense Departments' security
capabilities are not finalized. The Special Inspector General
for Iraq Reconstruction states that ``thousands of projects
completed by the United States and transferred to the
Government of Iraq will not be sustained and, thus, will fail
to meet their intended purposes.''
The Defense Department Inspector General's Office explains
that the lack of status of forces agreement has impacted land
use agreements, force protection, passport visa requirements,
air and ground movement, and our foreign military sales
program. And the USAID Inspector General's Office testifies
that ``According to the USAID mission, the security situation
has hampered its ability to monitor programs. Mission personnel
are only occasionally able to travel to the field for site
visits.''
Embassy personnel have also told Committee staff that the
United States Government has difficulty registering its
vehicles with the Iraqi government and Iraqis have stood up
checkpoints along supply lines. According to one official, the
embassy must dispatch a liaison ``to have tea and figure out
how we are going to get our trucks through.''
These are just some of the challenges the State Department
is facing in Iraq today. Perhaps as a result of these
conditions Mission Iraq appears to be evolving. In an effort to
be more efficient, the State Department is evaluating its
footprint, reducing personnel, and identifying possible
reductions. This rapid change in strategy, however, raises a
number of questions. Are we on the right track? Are we
redefining the mission? What should we expect in the coming
months? And, in hindsight, was this a well managed withdrawal?
The purpose of this hearing, therefore, is to gain some
clarity about our efforts in Iraq. Moreover, we need to examine
whether such transition is possible in how we execute in
Afghanistan. Our Nation's down-draw is only two years away and
will likely present a greater challenge than Iraq. We need to
have answers before we commit billions in taxpayers dollars.
We continue to look at these issues over the coming months
and we look forward to hearing the testimony from the panel, as
I said before.
I would like to now recognize the distinguished Ranking
Member, the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Tierney, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You were talking
about whether or not this is a well managed withdrawal. It
basically was an ill-conceived venture in the beginning and
flawed implementation for much of the time that we were there,
so I think the withdrawal concept is particularly difficult to
do, and we have to keep that in mind.
I am going to ask unanimous consent that my prepared
remarks be placed on the record so that we can sort of expedite
the hearing and move forward and hear from the witnesses.
Mr. Chaffetz. So ordered.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Tierney follows:]
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. I really do appreciate it.
Members may have seven days to submit opening statements
for the record.
We will now recognize our first panel.
Ambassador Patrick Kennedy is the Under Secretary for
Management at the United States Department of State; Mr. Peter
Verga is the Chief of Staff of the Under Secretary for Policy
at the United States Department of Defense; and the Honorable
Mara Rudman is the Assistant Administrator for the Middle East
Bureau at the U.S. Agency for International Development.
Pursuant to Committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn
before they testify. Please rise and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. You may be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses all answered in
the affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, please limit your
verbal testimony to five minutes. Your entire written statement
will be part of the record.
We would now like to recognize Ambassador Kennedy for five
minutes.

WITNESSES STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE PATRICK F. KENNEDY

Mr. Kennedy. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Tierney,
distinguished members, thank you for inviting me to discuss the
State Department's operations in Iraq after the military to
civilian-led transition.
U.S. Forces completed their withdrawal from Iraq in
December 2011, marking a significant milestone in our bilateral
relationship. Our strategic goal continues to be a united,
unified, democratic, and stable Iraq.
While security has improved overall, the situation on the
ground remains challenging. Nonetheless, our diplomatic
engagements are robust. Our embassy meets regularly with
President Talabani, Prime Minister Maliki, cabinet members,
parliamentarians, and civil society leaders.
The State Department has always planned to align our
presence in Iraq with other comparable U.S. Missions, but
transition planning called for a robust structure that could
handle multiple situations. Now that we have successfully
transitioned, we are methodically streamlining our operations
in a phased approach which we call the glide path. This
recognizes that security did not deteriorate when U.S. Forces
departed and that the Government of Iraq also recognizes the
value of a streamlined U.S. Mission.
We have been evaluating our presence and reducing
personnel, sites, and agency programs under Chief of Mission
authority. We expect to reduce direct hire staffing 25 to 30
percent by the end of 2013. This is not arbitrary. Rather, we
examined our operations and determined how they could be made
more efficient. We have hired more Iraqis, with 240 of the 400
planned direct hires now on board. We have also emphasized to
our contractors the need to hire Iraqis as well.
Over the next 18 months we will consolidate onto the
embassy compound and relinquish three facilities in Baghdad:
The Baghdad Police College Annex, OSC-I Headquarters, and the
Prosperity Support Annex. We will continue to make adjustments
to support a robust and secure, yet appropriately sized
platform.
I would like to provide an update touching on a few key
elements of our support platform.
Our Iraqi planning began in late 2009 and involved an
interdisciplinary team from within the Department working
closely with our DOD and AID colleagues. Since the follow-on
negotiations to the 2008 U.S.-Iraq Security Agreement were not
completed, our predicate was that we had to be self-sufficient.
On October 1st of 2011, the embassy and our consulates were
fully operational and mission capable, as we had long planned.
While the term mission capable comes from DOD lexicon and has
not been previously applied to State operations, we were fully
engaged in all diplomatic, consulate, and support activities,
even though some of our facilities were not fully complete. We
have continued to complete our facilities and, despite the
challenging environment, we have been and will continue to
carry out our diplomatic mission.
Task orders for static and movement security were awarded
under the Worldwide Protective Services contract for all State
Department sites. The Bureau of Diplomatic Security is
performing its increased oversight to ensure the
professionalism of security contractor personnel.
State Department requested that DOD continue to provide
life support services through 2013 under the competitively
awarded LOGCAP and via the Defense Logistics Agency. Our
partnership with the Department of Defense remains highly
effective. A post-transition working group meets twice a month
to discuss life support. We are working on local sourcing of
more food and fuel. Looking forward, State plans to award a
life support contract to replace LOGCAP by the end of 2013.
Under an existing competitively awarded contract, our
aviation operations support all U.S. Government elements in
Iraq, using five dedicated fixed-wing and 31 helicopters.
Missions include medical evacuation, movement of security
support, personnel, transportation of personnel within Iraq,
and movement of personnel into and out of Iraq. We plan to
downsize that program under the glide path.
In conclusion, the scope of the Department's diplomatic
activities in Iraq remains larger than any of our past efforts.
As Secretary Clinton said during remarks at the Virginia
Military Academy in April, in Iraq, we have completed the
largest transition from military to civilian leadership since
the Marshall Plan. Civilians are leading our lasting
partnership with a free and democratic Iraq.
Mr. Chairman, we are committed to assisting Iraq in
securing the gains it made with U.S. Assistance towards
becoming a secure, stable, and self-reliant country as
efficiently and effectively as possible. Thank you again for
inviting me here today and for your ongoing support of the
Department of State. I welcome any questions you might have.
Thank you, sir.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Kennedy follows:]

Mr. Farenthold. [Presiding.] Thank you very much,
Ambassador Kennedy.
We will now recognize Mr. Peter Verga, the Chief of Staff
for the Under Secretary for Policy for the U.S. Department of
Defense. You are recognized for five minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF PETER F. VERGA

Mr. Verga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Member Tierney, distinguished Committee members, I do
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today, along
with my Department of State colleagues, to provide you an
update on the United States' transition from a military to
civilian-led presence in Iraq.
Given Iraq's importance, situated strategically in the
Middle East, it remains profoundly in the United States'
national interest that Iraq emerge as a strategic partner with
the United States, a sovereign, stable, self-reliant nation,
and a positive force for moderation and stability in the
region. In the time since we last appeared before this
Committee, the United States has upheld its commitments in the
2008 U.S.-Iraq Security Agreement by withdrawing all U.S.
Forces by the end of December 2011.
The Department of Defense has worked closely with
Department of State to help ensure a successful transition to a
civilian-led presence in Iraq. Before, during, and after the
transition, DOD provided all possible support to posture State
for success as U.S. Forces withdrew from Iraq. Today, the
Department of Defense continues to work with Department of
State to help meet its needs through assignment of DOD
personnel, extensions of equipment loans, and contracting
assistance.
The focus is now on cementing a normalized presence in Iraq
with Department of State in the lead. That means building on
years of working with the Iraqis to create a lasting, long-term
security relationship, including a robust foreign military
sales program. Currently, our FMS program with Iraq is the
fourth largest in the region and the ninth largest in the
world, with a total value of approximately $11.6 billion.
Of all the FMS cases with Iraq, the F-16 case stands out as
the cornerstone of the long-term U.S.-Iraq strategic
relationship. Iraq has requested the sale of 36 F-16s and
associated training, at a value of approximately $6 billion. To
date, Iraq has deposited approximately $2.5 billion towards
that sale and deliveries of the first aircraft are scheduled in
September of 2014.
We are now at a point where the strategic dividends of our
efforts are within reach. DOD has worked closely with
Department of State to help ensure a successful transition to
the civilian-led presence in Iraq. That successful transition
enables us to concentrate on building that long-term strategic
partnership based on mutual interests and mutual respect.
Finally, Iraq, through its substantial FMS program, is
demonstrating its desire for long-term strategic partnership
and its commitment to this program is a testimony to the future
of the U.S.-Iraq partnership.
I thank you for your attention and look forward to your
questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Verga follows:]

Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
We will now recognize the Honorable Mara Rudman, the
Assistant Administrator for the Middle East Bureau at the U.S.
Agency for International Development. Ms. Rudman, you are
recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARA RUDMAN

Ms. Rudman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Tierney. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss USAID's work
in the context of the transition from a military-led to a
civilian-led mission in Iraq.
Our goal is a stable, self-reliant, unified Iraq. This is
critical to U.S. Interests in the Middle East. It is a goal
made possible through enormous sacrifice by Americans and
Iraqis alike.
USAID is adjusting its footprint in Iraq in align with its
development strategy and programmatic needs. We are focused on
Iraq's sustainable development under the terms of the U.S.-Iraq
Strategic Framework Agreement.
Over the past 10 years, USAID's role in Iraq progressed
through three distinct stages:
Immediately after the invasion, USAID's emphasis was on
restoring essential infrastructure and services, and supporting
transitional democratic processes.
Then, as part of the military and civilian
counterinsurgency campaign, we concentrated on stabilizing
Iraqi communities and strengthening governmental institutions.
Now, with the completion of the transition to civilian
leadership of the U.S.'s effort in Iraq, USAID's focus is on
helping Iraqis improve how they manage their own resources for
development.
Our ability to adapt and work closely with the Iraqi
government and people has provided critical continuity to our
work. Our current efforts reflect lessons learned over these
years, particularly in the need for greater oversight and
prioritization of sustainability.
Today, USAID provides technical assistance to Iraqis to
improve their abilities to finance and implement their own
development projects. We are also working with Iraqis to
strengthen civil society and increase civic participation,
implement reforms that will encourage private sector-led
economic growth, support development of good governments and
democratic institutions, support ethnic and religious
minorities, and provide durable solutions for the reintegration
of internally displaced persons.
All of our efforts are designed with sustainability in mind
so that, as an end goal, Iraqis will manage every one of these
projects without U.S. Assistance.
In addition to the considerable human capital of the Iraqi
people themselves, Iraq has great oil wealth. Revenues from the
oil industry, which has yet to reach its full potential, supply
nearly all of the Iraqi government's budget. Sadly, the
country's institutions and ability to deliver services has been
degraded by decades of war, misrule, and other factors.
Rebuilding the structure, resiliency, and effectiveness of the
state, the private sector, and civil society is where Iraq
still needs help. Thus, our current programs are focused
primarily on improving the capacity of Iraqi government
institutions and consist largely of technical assistance that
requires the Iraqis to match USAID contributions on a dollar-
for-dollar basis. These efforts stand in stark contrast to the
much larger relief, infrastructure, or stabilization projects
in which we were earlier engaged.
We work with the Government of Iraq to first establish
common objectives for new activities. We then come to an
agreement with the GOI on its required matching contributions
and plans for transitioning ultimate responsibility for
projects to the government. Throughout implementation, we
monitor and measure the GOI's progress and require cost-sharing
contributions. These steps help ensure long-term Iraqi
investment and commitment to the sustainability of USAID
activities that specifically benefit their governing
institutions.
This focus on sustainability is not simply good development
practice; it also reflects congressional guidance. In early
2009, the State Department and USAID, in consultation with
Congress, adapted a set of policy guidelines on Iraqi
Government matching for U.S. Assistance funds which require
financial or in-kind Iraqi Government counterpart contributions
for most U.S.-funded foreign assistance programs and projects
that directly benefit or involve the Iraqi central government.
Ensuring that the resource provided for American taxpayers
are used effectively and that our contributions to Iraq's
progress yields sustainable results requires both careful and
consistent monitoring on our part and engagement of the Iraqi
Government and our other partners. Thus, in addition to
standard USAID protections against waste, fraud, and abuse,
including checks on terrorist financing, we have designed an
extensive and effective oversight system that is tailored for
the unique operating environment in Iraq.
USAID also contracts with a third-party monitoring and
evaluation implementer that conducts independent evaluations of
all of our projects.
There are multiple independent oversight bodies that also
review our programs and, collectively, these entities have
conducted more than 300 financial and performance audits since
2003.
Finally, our focus on sustainability extends to the very
staffing of our effort in Iraq. In fiscal year 2012 and beyond,
we will reduce the number of foreign service offices at our
mission and we will hire and train more locally employed Iraqis
to perform the functions that have previously been handled by
third-country nationals.
In summary, our programs in Iraq are designed to help
Iraqis use their own resources to foster self-reliance,
maintain stability, and increase their well-being. Our
continued commitment to Iraq demonstrates the importance we
place on the mutual interests and benefits of this long-term
partnership.
I too appreciate the opportunity to appear before you
today, and I am happy to answer your questions. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Rudman follows:]

Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much, Ms. Rudman.
I now recognize myself for five minutes.
Ambassador Kennedy, how many personnel, contractors, and
U.S. Government employees does Mission Iraq currently have at
its various sites?
Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Chairman, we have approximately 16,000
personnel at this time, representing the State Department and
all associated agencies, including the Department of Defense
and the USAID.
Mr. Farenthold. Do you know how those are broken out versus
government employees versus contractors?
Mr. Kennedy. Yes, sir. It is approximately 1900 employees,
American and Iraqis who are government employees, and
approximately 14,000 contractors. So relatively 2,000 to
14,000.
Mr. Farenthold. And how does that break down? Do you have
the breakdown of U.S. Personnel versus Iraqi nationals?
Mr. Kennedy. Yes, sir. There are 1640, plus or minus,
American U.S. Government employees; 240 Iraqi employees; and
14,000 contractors.
Mr. Farenthold. And you don't have the breakdown of how the
contractors are broken down as far as U.S. Versus Iraqi.
Mr. Kennedy. Most of the contractors are either Americans
or third-country nationals. We are increasing every day the
number of Iraqi contract employees as part of our program. We
have informed our contractors that in certain categories we
believe, and they are engaging and they are acting on our
instructions, they are replacing the third-country national
contractors with Iraqi contractors.
Mr. Farenthold. And how safe are our operations in Iraq
now? At one point you were seeing a reluctance of certainly
U.S. Personnel to operate outside of the Green Zone. What is
happening now?
Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Chairman, our personnel have been
operating outside the Green Zone since I was in Iraq in 2003
and 2004. We go outside the Green Zone every day. In the last
quarter of 2011, calendar 2011, there were 3,000 missions,
security missions that our personnel executed outside the Green
Zone, and I believe in the first quarter of this calendar year
the number is almost up to 4,000.
Mr. Farenthold. Ms. Rudman, it is my understanding that
USAID has hired 25 Iraqis to oversee projects because USAID
employees are reluctant to leave the embassy because of
security concerns. Is that accurate?
Ms. Rudman. The 25 field monitors that were hired, who are
Iraqi field monitors, are not overseeing the projects, they are
monitoring the work, so it is an added staff for monitoring and
evaluation work, so it was augmenting our staff to be able to
be out on the field on a regular basis to help with our
monitoring and evaluation work.
Mr. Farenthold. So why can't our personnel be out there? Is
it accurate that they have security concerns?
Ms. Rudman. It is accurate that there are security
concerns. The way that we would describe it would be that the
security environment in Iraq is improving. It is still not a
normal security environment in the sense of what we would have
at embassies elsewhere. So in terms of having the best possible
monitoring and evaluation work for our projects, it is seen as
a good thing for our monitoring and evaluation work to have
Iraqis doing that work. As well, it is also part of, frankly,
the sustainable development effort to have Iraqis have that
capacity to do that work so that these projects could
eventually be handed over.
Mr. Farenthold. I would like to ask, just to ponder, is
what needs to be done to create a level of security and
confidence for our personnel to get out there, but I am running
out of time. What I did also want to ask you, ma'am, was the
GAO has reported that Iraq has accumulated a budget surplus of
over $50 billion, of which $10 billion was available for future
spending. Why are we pouring a lot of money into Iraq when
their budget is certainly in better shape than ours?
Ms. Rudman. Sir, we have been on a glide-path, in fact, to
reducing the amount of program money that we are putting into
Iraq on a fairly consistent basis. That is something that we
are reviewing year to year, how much money we are putting into
Iraq for program assistance.
In addition to that, as I described in my testimony, we
have, working out with Congress, been working on that cost-
sharing arrangements with Iraq so that since 2009 Iraq has
contributed directly on a dollar-for-dollar basis. They match
funds, essentially. For everything that we do with them for any
capacity building, any assistance to the Iraqi Government, they
match those funds. So we provide purely technical assistance to
them and they match everything that we do, with the idea that
any development assistance they are learning how to do and will
eventually take over and do on their own.
Mr. Farenthold. America has certainly invested a lot in
blood and treasure in Iraq.
I see my time has expired. I will recognize the Ranking
Member for five minutes.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
Ambassador Kennedy, how are you?
Mr. Kennedy. [Remarks made off microphone.]
Mr. Tierney. Good, thanks. I was beginning to think from
time to time you are on this Committee.
Mr. Kennedy. [Remarks made off microphone.]
Mr. Tierney. I am sure. Would you put your microphone on
for us, or pull it closer, one or the other? Thanks.
So you have 14,000 United States personnel in Iraq. What
was what you said, right.
Mr. Kennedy. No, sir. There are 16,000.
Mr. Tierney. Sixteen thousand.
Mr. Kennedy. Sixteen thousand total, of which 1600 are U.S.
Government employees, plus another about 240, 250 Iraqi
nationals who are directly employed by the U.S. Government, and
about 14,000 contractors, both American, Iraqi, and third-
country national.
Mr. Tierney. So what are the 14,000 contractors doing?
Mr. Kennedy. They do movement security; they do static
security; they do operations and maintenance of our properties
all over Iraq; they do life support such as feeding our
personnel; medical; aviation; and a small number that are
involved in other activities.
Mr. Tierney. So about 14,000 people to take care of 2,000
people.
Mr. Kennedy. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Tierney. What does the embassy in Egypt look like in
terms of those same types of considerations.
Mr. Kennedy. Certainly, the embassy in Egypt does not have
the security concerns that we face in Iraq. Of that number,
approximately 6500 of that 14,000 are security personnel. That
is a presence that we have in Iraq, it is a presence we have in
Afghanistan. We have nowhere else in the world and it is
directly related to the security conditions, which are
improving, but are certainly not at the point where we can not
rely on our own inherent security personnel.
Mr. Tierney. How many sites in Iraq are those security
personnel responsible for?
Mr. Kennedy. They are responsible for about 13 or 14,
depending upon how you count one site, whether it is one or
two.
Mr. Tierney. And what is the nature of those sites?
Mr. Kennedy. There is the embassy compound itself; there is
a logistics annex across the street; there is the Office of
Security Cooperation Annex, which is also across the street
from the embassy; there is the police training site; there is a
support operation we have adjacent to the Baghdad Airport;
there is our consulate in Erbil and a support site at the Erbil
Airport in the north; there is our consulate in Basrah; there
is a joint OSC-I State Department site in Kirkuk; and then
there are four exclusively DOD Office of Security Cooperation
sites in Taji, Tikrit, Umm Qasr, and Besmaya, where they carry
out the foreign military sales development that my colleague
referred to in his testimony, sir.
Mr. Tierney. This is for all of you. What lessons are we
learning in Iraq that we should take heed to learn from when we
go into the Afghan withdrawal situation? What are the major
principles?
I will start with you, Ms. Rudman. What have we learned
that we ought to make sure that we are well prepared for as we
start withdrawing in Afghanistan?
Ms. Rudman. Well, I would say that the way that we have
approached our work with the Government of Iraq since 2009 has
been quite informative. When we look at our switch to the
sustainable development approach with the Government of Iraq so
that the working in partnership with them and the scope of our
programs being ones that we ensure that we have their buy-in
for at the front-end.
The cost-sharing aspect of it has been a very smart aspect,
frankly, that you required of us and we worked with you on, so
that when you literally have their buy-in, it is not just
theoretical, they have to pay for stuff; they have to make it
work. There is much less waste involved at the front end so the
scoping of the programs and the design of the programs makes
sense for us, makes sense for them. And I think we have seen a
real shift in our programming and the workability of our
programming from their end and from ours since that time. I
would say that is the single most important lesson for us.
Mr. Tierney. Mr. Verga?
Mr. Verga. From our perspective, the most important lessons
that we are learning is the requirement for both advanced
planning and essentially a continuous cooperation and
monitoring process as we move through a transitional period. We
can't drop any of the balls that are going on, and I think it
was a good lessons in interagency cooperation and information
sharing that made this transition successful.
Mr. Tierney. Ambassador, you had more of a broad view. It
would be tougher for you to pick one.
Mr. Kennedy. I think my colleagues have touched on it. I
would say there are three points: Plan, plan, plan. Second, a
change management vision that, like in football, you go to the
line of scrimmage and you have a plan, and sometimes you have
to call an audible, but you have to be prepared to call that
audible. So I think that we have done that.
And, third, just as in Iraq we have a glide-path. We
anticipate that there will be problems; we scope to make sure
that we are safe and secure and can carry out our mission, but
depending, as we hope, on the situation beginning to
continually be more and more stable, we have a glide-path in
place so that we can reduce our staffing, just as we are now
doing in Iraq.
Mr. Farenthold. Are you done?
I just have one more question, so we will just do a quick
second round of questions.
Ambassador Kennedy, you mentioned the Baghdad Police
College Annex facility as one of the facilities. It is my
understanding that the United States taxpayers have invested
more than $100 million in improvements on that site. It was
intended to house the police department program, a multibillion
dollar effort that is currently being downsized. As a result of
the State Department's failure to secure land use rights, the
entire facility is being turned over to the Iraqis at no cost.
The GAO reports Mission Iraq has land use agreements or
leases for only five out of all of the sites that it operates.
Can you say with confidence that those sites now operating
without leases or agreements will not be turned over to Iraq
for free, as was the case with the Police Development Program?
And what would the cost to the U.S. Taxpayers be if they were
to lose without compensation all of those facilities?
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, the
statement that you were reading from about we are closing the
Baghdad Police development site because of a failure to have
land use rights is simply factually incorrect. We have a land
use agreement for that site. As part of the program of the
Police Development Program, there are periodic reviews that are
underway and my colleagues who do that--it is not part of my
general responsibility--on the operating side of the house
engage in reviews on a six-month basis, both internally and
with the Government of Iraq.
It was always our plan to make adjustments to the Police
Development Program over time, but the statement that somehow
we have wasted or had everything pulled out from under us
because of a lack of a land use agreement, sir, is simply
false.
For our other properties in Iraq we have agreements, for
every single property we have in Iraq except for one, which is
our interim facility in Basrah, which is simply a reincarnation
of a former U.S. Military facility there. But even in that
regard we have a long-term agreement that was signed with the
Government of Iraq by Ambassador Negroponte in 2005 in which we
swapped properties with the Government of Iraq and they are
committed to provide us with a 10-acre facility in Basrah of
our mutual choosing. So we are covered, sir.
Mr. Farenthold. We will be hearing from the GAO in the next
panel. I am basing my information on their report, and I think
it is an important responsibility of this Committee to be
watchdogs over the taxpayers' dollars. Again, as I questioned
Ms. Rudman about and mentioned in that questioning, we spent a
lot of money and a lot of blood in Iraq, and we just need to be
careful that we are not wasting any more money, or spending any
more money I guess would be a more polite way to put it, than
is necessary and that we are carefully guarding the assets of
the United States Government.
One of the chief roles, I think, of this Committee is to be
the watchdog over the purse strings. Please be aware that this
is something we are going to continue to keep an eye on in all
of your purviews.
I realize, as Chairman Chaffetz said earlier, this is a
very busy legislative day. It is important that we get your
testimony and other information in, so I will yield back the
remainder of my time and offer Mr. Tierney five minutes if he
has any additional questions.
Mr. Tierney. No, I will go to the next panel.
I do want to thank the witnesses for their written
testimony, their comments today, and their accessibility. I
know that we can follow up on all of this directly with them,
so in order to expedite it and move forward, I will take care
and yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Farenthold. I too would like to thank the panel for
their appearance and cooperation with this Committee and
Congress. It is admirable that you are here, took the time, and
are committed to being open and transparent with this Committee
and the American taxpayers.
At this point we will take a short recess to seat the other
panel and we will resume as soon as they are seated, probably
less than 10 minutes. So we stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Farenthold. The Committee is called back to order as we
end our recess and prepare to recognize our second panel.
First we have Dr. Michael Courts, the Acting Director of
International Affairs and Trade at the U.S. Government
Accountability Office. Next we have Ambassador Harold W.
Geisel. He is the Acting Inspector General at the U.S.
Department of State. Mr. Micky McDermott is a Special Deputy
Inspector General for Southwest Asia at the U.S. Department of
Defense; Mr. Michael G. Carroll is Deputy Inspector General at
the U.S. Agency for International Development; and the
Honorable Stuart W. Bowen is a Special Inspector General for
Iraq Reconstruction.
Pursuant to the Committee rules, all witnesses will be
sworn before they testify, so, gentlemen, would you please rise
and raise your right hands?
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Mr. Farenthold. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Please be seated.
As you know, we have a busy day on Capitol Hill today, and
in order to allow time for questioning and discussion, we would
ask that you limit your testimony to five minutes. Your entire
written statement will be made part of the record. We invite
you to summarize and hit the high points of your remarks.
So we will start off with Mr. Courts. You are recognized
for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. COURTS

Mr. Courts. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Tierney. I am pleased to be here this morning to discuss the
transition from a predominantly U.S. Military presence in Iraq
to a civilian presence led by the Department of State. This
work is a continuation of GAO's efforts to review the planning
and execution of the drawdown of U.S. Forces from Iraq and the
buildup of the U.S. Civilian-led presence there.
GAO was asked to testify this morning on U.S. Plans for the
diplomatic presence and Iraqi commitment to that presence, the
support capabilities for our sites and personnel in Iraq, and
our capabilities to provide security for those sites and
personnel.
The primary message of my testimony this morning is that
the State Department and DOD planned for a very large civilian-
led presence in Iraq, but Iraqi commitment to that presence
remains unclear. Further, the support and security capabilities
for the presence have not yet been finalized and, most
importantly, efforts to identify security vulnerabilities and
progress toward mitigating them are not being fully tracked.
My first point is that State and DOD planned for a robust
presence in Iraq. For fiscal year 2012, they allocated an
estimated $4 billion for the presence and planned to have over
16,000 personnel at 14 different sites across the country. Most
of these personnel were to be contractors primarily responsible
for security and logistical support. As of last month, State
and DOD were reassessing the presence and developing a plan to
reduce the number of sites and personnel in Iraq. However, the
Mission would still comprise, by far, the largest overseas U.S.
Diplomatic presence in the world.
My second point is that Mission Iraq has encountered delays
in establishing basic infrastructure and life support
capabilities such as housing and water supply. Construction
projects are behind schedule; Mission Iraq is still revising
emergency evacuation plans to reflect the absence of an in-
country combat force; and the Mission and its contractors have
encountered delays and challenges in dealing with the Iraqi
bureaucracy.
My final point is that State and DOD have not yet finalized
security capabilities in Iraq. As you know, Mission Iraq
personnel and facilities face numerous threats, including
routine rocket and mortar attacks, roadside bombs, small arms
firing, and kidnapping. As of last month, the State Department
had conducted security assessments of the sites that it manages
and had taken a number of mitigating steps to address
vulnerabilities. However, while DOD has reported some efforts
to address vulnerabilities of the sites that they manage, they
have not fully tracked those efforts.
In summary, State and DOD planned for the largest
diplomatic presence in the world, but Iraqi commitment to that
presence remains unclear. Mission Iraq support functions are
still very much a work in progress and, most importantly, while
operational, its security capabilities are not yet fully
mission capable. Further, DOD's efforts to mitigate security
vulnerabilities at its sites are not being fully tracked and,
therefore, it is unclear if and to what extent U.S. Personnel
and facilities at these locations may be at risk.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Tierney, this concludes my
prepared remarks. I would be happy to address any questions
that you may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Courts follows:]

Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much. We will get to the
questions after we have heard testimony from the entire panel.
Mr. Geisel, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE HAROLD W. GEISEL

Mr. Geisel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Tierney, and members of the Subcommittee for the opportunity to
discuss our assessment of the transition to a civilian-led
mission in Iraq.
Since 2008, the Department of State Office of Inspector
General has conducted 35 investigations and 27 audits,
inspections, and evaluations in Iraq. The Department has been
responsive to OIG recommendations. In May 2011, OIG reported
that the U.S. Military was managing more than 370 civilian
police and advisers. The Department has now assumed
responsibility for the Police Development Program and is
consulting with Iraqi officials to evaluate security needs and
downsize efforts accordingly.
Pending audit reports from the Special Inspector General
for Iraq Reconstruction and final funding decisions, OIG will
audit the Department's oversight of related civilian assistance
programs in March 2013. In response to State OIG
recommendations to create an Office of Security Cooperation in
Iraq sufficient to support Iraqi security forces and manage
U.S.-Iraqi defense relations, DOD IG found that OSC-I met full
operating capability in October 2011. We will coordinate to
monitor OSC-I progress in coordination with DOD IG.
In May 2011, OIG reported that the Department continued to
face challenges in establishing provincial posts due to
questions regarding land use agreements, staffing,
construction, and life support operations. While security
threats prevented construction in Mosul, consulates in Basrah,
Erbil, and Kirkuk opened in 2011 and continuing presence posts
in Tikrit, Taji, Besmaya, and Umm Qasr currently serve as OSC-I
operation sites.
OIG remains concerned about the safety of U.S. Government
personnel and contractors in Iraq. In May 2011, OIG reported
that security risks could be mitigated through closer working
relationships with the Government of Iraq and its security
forces. During field work for an ongoing audit of private
security contractors in Baghdad, OIG found that Iraqi security
forces are routinely detaining private security contractors at
checkpoints and the Government of Iraq is restricting airspace,
jeopardizing potential evacuation routes. In April 2013, OIG
will audit the effectiveness of private security contractors in
Kirkuk and Mosul.
The Department procured aircraft and obtained flight
approval from the Government of Iraq and other foreign
authorities to establish Embassy Air Iraq, currently operating
routes between Amman and Baghdad with fares of $2400 and
between Kuwait City and Baghdad for $1600 round-trip. In
comparison, as of May 31, 2012, commercial round-trip fares
between Amman and Baghdad were available for approximately $600
to $800. OIG will audit the Department's Air Wing Program in
August 2012 and consider the cost efficiency versus security
concerns of commercial air travel.
In May 2011, OIG reported that the cost to provide medical
care for U.S. Personnel and contractors in Iraq would be
considerable. A Department contractor now operates nine health
units. OIG will audit the Department's management of medical
operations in October 2012.
In May 2011, OIG reported that Embassy Baghdad lacked
adequate response plans for a mass casualty event. In January
2012, OIG reported that Embassy Baghdad and Consulates General
Basrah and Erbil had created emergency action plans in
compliance with Department guidelines and had conducted regular
emergency response briefings and mandated drills.
Also, in May 2011, OIG reported that embassy facilities
were near capacity due to addition and relocation of civilian
staff and contractors. OIG will audit the Department's
implementation of the Baghdad master plan in July 2012 and
consider the effects of a proposed 20 to 25 percent presence
downsizing. We have scheduled a full inspection of the mission
early in 2013 to include further evaluation of staffing and
security needs. State OIG is uniquely qualified to provide
mission-specific oversight in a volatile post-transition
environment.
We currently have 19 open investigations related to
programs and to operations in Iraq, and intend to assign 6
additional personnel to monitor progress in Iraq. We remain
committed to providing the Department and Congress a
comprehensive spectrum of audits, inspections, and
investigations on the enduring U.S. Presence in Iraq.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Tierney, and members of the Subcommittee,
thank you once again for this opportunity, and I am pleased to
answer any questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Geisel follows:]

Mr. Farenthold. Thank you for your testimony, sir.
We will now recognize Mr. McDermott for five minutes. You
are recognized.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH T. MCDERMOTT

Mr. McDermott. Thank you. Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member Tierney, distinguished members of the
Subcommittee. Thank you for this opportunity to appear before
you today to discuss our assessment of the transition from a
military to a civilian-led mission in Iraq.
The Office of Security Cooperation - Iraq, referred to as
the OSC-I, operates under the Chief of Mission authority. OSC-I
is charged with managing the bilateral security cooperation and
security systems functions, and maintaining a long-term
strategic partnership between the U.S. Government and the
Government of Iraq.
In recognizing the importance of the challenges concerning
OSC-I and the fact that the scope of the Security Systems
Program is one of the largest in the world, we started a series
of oversight efforts focused on the planning and the
establishment of OSC-I.
In 2010, we assessed the planning effort for transitioning
the security assistance mission. We determined that the OSC-I
planning was progressing with a significant contribution made
by an ad hoc cadre of strategic planners operating from within
U.S. Forces-Iraq. We also identified several planning
shortcomings and recommended that the U.S. Central Command
issue Iraq-specific country planning details, assess the
procedures and resources applied to development of the Iraq-
specific security cooperation related planning guidance, and
capture lessons learned regarding the experiences of organizing
the OSC-I.
In 2011, we assessed the establishment of OSC-I and the DOD
efforts to provide for its sustained, effective operation in
post-2011 in Iraq. We found that the establishment of OSC-I was
on track, but identified some shortfalls in the planning
efforts. We again determined the shortfalls were due to
incomplete Iraq-specific plans. We also reported the need for
planning capability within the Office of Security Cooperation.
In addition, we observed the need to improve communications
between both the OSC-I and, externally, to the key officials at
the Iraq Ministries of Defense and Interior about the OSC-I's
enduring role regarding U.S. Security Cooperation and
Assistance Programs.
In response to our assessment, OSC-I made improvements in
the flow of information to its personnel and with key senior
Iraqi officials. The Central Command also responded by issuing
a completed Iraq Country Plan with necessary security
cooperation and assistant details.
On April 16, 2012, we issued a third report, which is
classified, related to the transition on the management of
private security contractors in Iraq, including private
security contractors guarding the OSC-I locations. While the
OSC-I was generally successful in its transition from DOD to
the Department of State, the U.S. And Iraq Governments did not
finalize certain agreements that were envisioned as necessary
to enable OSC-I's ability to become fully functional within
Iraq's dynamic post-2011 operating environment.
Responding to our report in March 2012, senior OSC-I
officials indicated that the absence of a post-2011 Security
Agreement or Status of Forces Agreement was affecting aspects
of its operations. Some of the challenges cited by these
officials included obtaining or extending land use agreements,
force protection, passport and visa requirements, and air and
ground movement.
The precise impact of these command concerns with respect
to achieving short- and long-term OSC-I goals is unclear.
However, having a formal, follow-on Security and Status of
Forces Agreements was perceived to have value in clarifying and
stabilizing Iraqi government support for the day-to-day
operations of OSC-I, and would benefit longer-term relationship
building.
In closing, let me emphasize that the DOD IG remains
committed to providing oversight concerning OSC-I and reporting
on the progress and challenges of maintaining a long-term
strategic partnership with the Government of Iraq. We plan to
return to Iraq early next fiscal year to continue our
assessment on the operations of the OSC-I.
Thank you again for this opportunity to discuss the work of
DOD IG and I look forward to answering any questions you may
have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. McDermott follows:]

Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much, Mr. McDermott.
We will now recognize Mr. Carroll for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL G. CARROLL

Mr. Carroll. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Tierney, distinguished members of the Subcommittee. I
appreciate the invitation and the opportunity that you have
given me to brief the Committee on the USAID IG's activities in
Iraq currently and what we see for the challenges for the
future.
AID was not part of the massive transition planning
process, so I will just restrict my remarks to AID's programs.
As the Committee might know, we started our oversight in
Iraq in 2003 with long-term TDYs and opened the office of seven
auditors and two investigators in 2004, so we have a
substantial body of work over that period of time, and if I
could just give you some stats quickly.
We have done over 60 performance audits during that time,
conducted 153 cost-incurred financial audits covering $5
billion of USAID expenditures over that period of time, opened
105 investigations, 45 referrals for prosecution, 13
indictments, 10 convictions, 40 administrative actions, and 10
suspension and debarments. So we have done a substantial amount
of work over time.
But in the post-transition environment, clearly AID's
funding has been coming down, as Mara Rudman mentioned, and in
2013 it is only going to be--well, I shouldn't say only--it is
going to be $231 million, which is a substantial amount of
money, but relative to previous years it is on a downward
trajectory.
So with State being in a complete cost recovery mode now
that the State Department is gone and we are not getting
supplemental funding or essential funding for ICAS and that
sort of thing, it has become, for us, prohibitively expensive
to be there.
So what we are going to do is maintain an office of two
auditors, one investigator, transfer the other staff to Egypt,
because when you consider the amount of money being spent by
AID in Iraq, it ranks third in the region, behind Jordan and
West Bank-Gaza. So we will continue to provide a robust
oversight package in Iraq; it just won't be to the extent that
it has been in the past.
And our plan for 2013 would be to do three performance
audits; two major program reviews, one of those being a
retrospective look back using some of the work that Mr. Bowen
has done or will do on sustainability, because we see two
primary challenges for the agency going forward, and Mara
Rudman discussed them. One is monitoring and evaluation.
Historically, it has been problematic for AID in Iraq. They
have relied to a degree on the implementers to provide
performance data.
We found the performance data to be suspect at times, and
the ability to get out and monitor and evaluate the programs,
get legitimate, accurate performance data has been problematic.
So without the military, with State Department providing
security, we will have to see how that goes. So we are going to
be on that pretty substantially.
The other challenge that I see, and, again, Mara talked
about it, was sustainability. Now, AID has transitioned from--
there has been a natural progression from infrastructure and
reconstruction that AID was doing there for a while to more of
a traditional development assistance in, like she said,
technical assistance, democracy and governance, civil society,
those sorts of things.
So retrospectively, one of our audits we just issued on the
IT sustainability, IT systems, it was a pretty bleak story as
far as the effectiveness of some of the programs that were
implemented, or not implemented but paid for. So I think the
lesson learned from that, and I think the agency has gotten it,
is Iraqi buy-in and, to the extent that they can based on
guidance from Congress, get a cost-sharing kind of agreement,
because if they have money in it and it is in their best
interest, then it will be sustainable; if not, then it is not
going to be, based on our previous experience.
So, for us, the one challenge I see as we move forward, and
it has been a disappointment over time, has been our ability to
work with the Iraq law enforcement to get local prosecutions.
We have had some success in Pakistan, we have had success in
Afghanistan, but, for whatever reason, we have not had success
in Iraq. We are working with our IG counterparts; we are
working with the LDAT at the embassy to try and identify law
enforcement entity in the Iraqi Government. Because as AID
moves forward and implements more locally with local entities
and more Iraqis involved, as Ambassador Kennedy said, the fraud
that is going to take place, if it takes place, is going to be
perpetrated primarily by Iraqis, and our ability to investigate
is not a problem, but our ability to take that probable cause,
find a willing partner in the Iraqi Government so we can do
local prosecutions, that is what we would like to do, but so
far problematic. So that is our one major challenge going
forward.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to taking any
questions you might have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Carroll follows:]

Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, Mr. Carroll.
Mr. Bowen, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF STUART W. BOWEN, JR.

Mr. Bowen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Tierney,
members of the Committee, for the opportunity to appear before
you and present SIGIR's assessment of the transition from a
military to civilian-led mission in Iraq. My statement examines
this question in light of five issues: The Police Development
Program, the security situation, the Office of Security
Cooperation, Iraq, the transfer and sustainment of
reconstruction assets, and the increase in criminal
investigative activity that we have seen this year. I will
briefly summarize each of my points in my oral statement.
The Police Development Program is the single largest
program to transition from DOD management to State management
over the last eight months. Interestingly, it transitioned from
State management to DOD management eight years ago. The initial
contract was led to the State department, but eventually
challenges in Iraq and the size and security mission required
the formation of something called the Multinational Security
Transition Command-Iraq, which operated the police training
program for in excess of six years and expended significant
amount of money.
The Police Development Program, however, was not well
planned or well agreed to, or a sufficient agreement wasn't
secured from the Iraqis, as our audit of last October revealed.
We have another review coming out this July that will follow up
on that audit and look at progress made with regard to those
recommendations, but the most significant events that have
occurred since then has been the reduction in the size of the
program; I think a wise reduction, a recognition that the
Iraqis haven't fully bought into it and that the security
challenges that continue in Iraq have limited the capacity to
execute the initial ambitious range of the program.
Second point, security situation. We saw today again bombs
across Baghdad killing 15, punctuating what has been a very
violent June. The year began violently in January. March saw
the least violent month since 2003. So it is a very volatile
situation, that is what these stats tell you, in Iraq.
Notwithstanding whatever those numbers are, the requirements
for personnel to move about the country are the same as they
were, essentially, in 2006, 2007. So it is expensive, and that
is why the largest single expense in Iraq right now for the
embassy is security. As Ambassador Kennedy pointed out, in
excess of 6,000 contractors are security contractors, and most
of the money is going to pay their salaries.
The Office of Security Cooperation, Iraq is spending about
$1.5 billion and Iraq security forces fund the money that
Congress appropriated for training and equipping the Iraqi army
and the Iraqi police. We issued an audit in April about the
progress they are making in using that money in the FMS
program, raised some concerns about the obligation rate, but my
meetings with General Caslen, who runs the program, assuaged
our concerns. We will have a follow-up report in July that
gives concrete points on the progress made regarding the use of
that money.
A continuing issue that SIGIR has addressed over the years
is the transfer and sustainment of projects that we spent $51
billion producing, and it is not a good story. The audits
reveal that there was no consensus upon how to transfer these
projects. Our audit program did stimulate the development of a
sustainment program and sustainment requirements in contracts,
but it was, for the most part, too little, too late. Frankly,
Iraqis have not bought into investing significant sums into
what we have provided, in part because they are not sure what
we have provided. That is what I hear over and over again from
Iraqis, and that is understandable given the weaknesses in the
database that we developed. Indeed, our audits of the Iraq
Reconstruction Management System found that it captures maybe
70 percent of what we provided. That is certainly unacceptable.
Lastly, we have seen an uptick in criminal investigative
activity simply because as the program has drawn down, for
whatever reason, people have been more willing to come forward
and provide us with leads and, second, some of our technical
examinations of what happened to that money have produced more
cases. So we have in excess of 100 investigations going on. We
just convicted our 71st person this week and our SIGIR
prosecution initiative continues to produce good fruit.
So, with that, I will conclude my statement and look
forward to your questions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Bowen follows:]

Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
I will now recognize myself for five minutes.
Mr. Courts, Ambassador Kennedy and I got into a discussion
about the absence or presence of land use agreements for the
facilities we have in Iraq. Do you have the current status of
that, or at least the information from your latest report as to
what facilities we do and do not have land use agreements for?
Mr. Courts. Yes. What Ambassador Kennedy may have been
referring to is that for 13 of the 14 facilities the Iraqis
have acknowledged a presence through diplomatic notes, but
there is still only five of the 14 for which we actually have
explicit title land use agreements or leases.
Mr. Farenthold. All right, so I am not a diplomat, so what
does that mean? They say, all right, you can use it until we
change our minds? Is that basically what those are, or is there
some force of law to those notes?
Mr. Courts. Well, the notes are definitely not the same
thing as having an explicit agreement. As a matter of fact,
there has already been one case where the Iraqis required us to
reconfigure, downsize one of our sites, and that was one of the
sites where we did not have a land use agreement. So,
obviously, we are in a much more vulnerable position when there
is not an explicit agreement.
Mr. Farenthold. All right, Mr. Carroll, I would also like
to follow up with a question I had on the last panel about the
use of Iraqi nationals in overseeing some of our
investigations. What is your opinion on that? Does that strike
you as a good idea, a bad idea, or something we are stuck with
because there is no alternative? It seems like Americans would
be a little bit more concerned about how their tax dollars were
spent than the Iraqi nationals who are the recipients of those
tax dollars. It is kind of a fox guarding the hen house, it
looks like.
Mr. Carroll. Well, personally, I think it is, like Ms.
Rudman said, it is an additive sort of step. We would do the
same thing. For example, in some of the places where it is
absolutely prohibited because of security, what we will do is
contract with a local CPA firm, primarily out of Egypt, and do
a very comprehensive agreed upon procedures document that they
will go out and they will take pictures, they will ask
questions. They would do what we would do if we could get
there. So I think that is what Mara was talking about as well.
I don't see it as a problem. In fact, I see it as an
adjunct to, and it is not a replacement for, USAID contracting
representatives and technical representatives actually getting
out and ensuring that the work is being done. That is not what
these people are doing. What these people are doing is going
out, just doing some monitoring and evaluation, but it does not
replace what the responsibilities are for the Americans.
Mr. Farenthold. All right, thank you very much.
I am not sure if I want to address this to Mr. Courts or
Mr. Bowen. Whichever one of you seems the most eager to answer
can take this. I haven't been to Iraq; my information in the
field of what it is like on the ground there is based on things
that I have read and reports that I have seen on television.
But a good many of our facilities are in metropolitan areas,
including the capital, Baghdad, and I am concerned that we are
struggling getting food and water to these folks in a safe
manner. I mean, what is the procedure? Is the food delivered?
How is that handled and why is it a problem in a metropolitan
area? There are hundreds of thousands of people in these
cities, Iraqi nationals that need to be fed. Obviously, it is
more complicated than just going down to the Safeway, but how
is that handled and why is it such a problem?
Mr. Bowen. The State Department, as Ambassador Kennedy
indicated, continued the LOGCAP contract after the military
withdrew in December and, thus, the process for bringing food
into the country continued as well, and that is via convoys
that come up from Kuwait. There have been challenges: That
checkpoint has occasionally been closed, there have been
security challenges with regard to those convoys, and other
reasons that the shipments have been intermittent and has led
to an occasional shortage of certain foodstuffs at the
embassies.
Ambassador Jeffrey emphasized repeatedly this spring his
desire to move towards local purchase, but that has been slow.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. There is also a lot of concern
about the amount of security that is necessary and how much we
are spending on it. Could you take a moment, just a typical day
in the life of an embassy employee? Do they sleep on the
compound? Do we have security where they are living? Do we
escort them home.
It looks like the ratio of contractors to employees is
almost 7 to 1. I don't know how many of those are security
personnel. I mean, is it like the President, where everybody
has a security detail that travels with them everywhere they
go?
Mr. Bowen. Yes.
Mr. Farenthold. How much do they get out and how does that
work?
Mr. Bowen. It is, as I said in my statement, very much the
process that existed in 2007. So the drop in the number of
attacks has not led to a relaxation in the security
requirements, and those security requirements are dictated by
the regional security officer at the embassy.
In Baghdad, the situation, as a general matter, has
improved greatly, but still to make a movement outside the
embassy grounds requires 48 hours of notice, three hardened
vehicles and a couple of shooters in each vehicle, and limited
time onsite to carry out your mission. So it is a restrictive
environment from a security perspective.
By the way, it is still quite dangerous up at Kirkuk. While
there haven't been very many duck-and-covers, as we say at the
embassy this year, that is not the case up at the Kirkuk
facility. Basrah similarly has a much more difficult security
situation than those who operate in Baghdad.
Mr. Farenthold. And do our personnel live near or onsite?
Mr. Bowen. They live at the embassy in Baghdad, yes.
Mr. Farenthold. Okay. So we are not sending dozens of
people home with somebody.
Mr. Bowen. No.
Mr. Farenthold. Okay.
I see my time is way expired. I would recognize the
gentleman from Massachusetts and we will give him six minutes
as well.
Mr. Lynch. You are very kind. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Like it or not, I have been to Iraq, I think, 13 or 14
times now. A couple of things in the testimony raised some
concerns for me.
Mr. Carroll, on USAID, I understand the security situation
there is very, very difficult, but it seems to me that it is
probably the worst situation we could have where our inspectors
can't get out to the sites to review the projects that the
American taxpayer is paying for. That is just a very tough
situation. I am very uncomfortable with that. I know I have
been out many times with Mr. Bowen and his inspectors onsite in
Iraq.
There is a certain value in having U.S. Personnel go out
there, engineers, if possible, to review some of these
projects. We have had widespread corruption at various levels
in Iraq, so there has been an experience there that should
cause us to be very, very cautious about where our money is
going and whether these projects are being built to proper
standards, number one, and whether they are being built at all
and whether some of our money is being diverted.
Is there any hope here? Is there any way that we could
enhance the cooperation that we are getting from the Iraqi
Government by withholding funds for these projects unless we
get access to those sites and have the ability to do proper
oversight.
Mr. Carroll. Well, it is not the Iraqi Government that is I
don't want to say creating the problem, but it is not the Iraqi
Government; it is the RSO, as Mr. Bowen said. During the
transition period, which was a very difficult period, I think
we would all agree with that, we were turned down on three of
our seven movement requests.
But, again, that was a very difficult time. Since then we
have been able to make site visits and, like Mr. Bowen said and
you have been there too, it takes a lot of planning. So you
can't just drop in, which sometimes we would like to do,
particularly on the investigative side. The way it is going
now, everybody knows we are coming, so that creates some
problems for us. But so far we have been able to do our work.
Now, as AID has moved from what is not their traditional
kind of work, and that is reconstruction--they were doing that
quite a bit in the early days--and now it is a lot of technical
assistance and it is a lot of the meat and potatoes of, like I
said, democracy and governance and civil society and education
and health, and those sorts of things, most of that is located
in and around Baghdad, so it is not like we have to go to
Basrah, Kirkuk, or something like that. So we are confident
that if we are smart about it, and we work with the RSO, that
we can do our job. Like I said earlier, it is extraordinarily
expensive for us to be there, so we are going to change our
sort of footprint a little bit, but I want to assure you that
we are still going to provide substantial oversight of the AID
programs.
Mr. Lynch. Okay, thank you.
Stuart, if I ask you, in terms of the deployment of our--we
have 6,000 private contractors there. Are these all DynCorp?
Are they U.S. Nationals? What is the makeup of that security
force?
Mr. Bowen. They are not all DynCorp; it is under the
Worldwide Protective Services contract that the State
Department manages. Triple Canopy is there and others. The
guards themselves are third-country nationals as I have
observed.
Mr. Lynch. Okay.
Mr. Bowen. And then there are a variety of other companies
that are working there. I should say the static guards are
third-country nationals; those that are running the convoys
themselves, that are doing the driving of the shooters in the
Suburbans, are Americans, contractors.
Mr. Lynch. Okay.
What is the security--I know we have several sites there
and you mentioned the difficulty in Kirkuk.
Mr. Bowen. Yes.
Mr. Lynch. Give me the worst situations that we have there
right now for our facilities that Mr. Courts was talking about,
as well. What is the worst situation we have, is it Basrah?
Mr. Bowen. It is a close call between Basrah and Kirkuk,
but Kirkuk is subject to indirect fire quite regularly, and
that is----
Mr. Lynch. Are we still getting rocket attacks out of Sadr
City into Baghdad?
Mr. Bowen. Very, very infrequently. And the duck-and-covers
have been minimal at the embassy in Baghdad. Contrarywise, in
Kirkuk, it is a weekly, if not daily, experience.
Mr. Lynch. What about Umm Qasr, down at the port there, are
we having a bad situation down there as well.
Mr. Bowen. In Basrah, the size of the consulate down there
is limited and their capacity to move about is limited, and
because of that the Police Development Program office that was
going to operate there has been withdrawn.
Mr. Lynch. Now, is that our decision or was that the Iraqi
decision?
Mr. Bowen. Our decision. But the Iraqis, when I was in Iraq
at the end of April and met with active Minister Asaby, he said
that he needed maybe 15 or 20 advisors, in his view, from the
program. The program, as you know, started out at about 200,
dropped down to 115, now down to about 70 to 80. The plans are
to bring it down to 30 to 40, and then it will continue to
evolve and devolve, as it were.
Mr. Lynch. Mr. Courts, can I address you for a second?
Where do you see the flashpoints in terms of our facilities.
You had a whole list of sites that you had identified in your
testimony. What are the bottom three? What do you worry about
at night in terms of your facilities there.
Mr. Courts. Congressman, the State Department and the DOD
agreed together that they would meet three overarching criteria
in the area of security to be considered fully mission capable.
The three criteria that they identified were that they
would have secure and protected facilities, that they would
have the ability to achieve the secure movement of their
people, and that they would have emergency response capability
in place. They didn't meet those criteria in October and in
many cases they still don't meet them today. I can't go into
the details of what the exact vulnerabilities are because that
is sensitive information; however, I can say that they intended
to have certain security features in place at sites in October.
Some of those features are still not in place today. Some of
them are not slated to be in place until sometime in 2013.
In addition to that, the State Department intended to have
the use of MRAPs to help achieve the secure movement of their
people, the mine resistant ambush protected vehicles. The DOD
provided, I think, something close to 60 of those vehicles, but
our understanding is that the Iraqi Government will not allow
their use, so they are essentially sitting unused right now.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Well, that is important for the Committee
to know. And, again, I am trying to get you to tell me about
site-specific concerns that you have. Are there some areas that
you think desperately need security attention right now?
Mr. Courts. Again, I can't get specific about the sites;
however----
Mr. Lynch. Oh, okay. All right. I will let you go on that.
Okay, we can talk later.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, sir.
We will now recognize the other gentleman from
Massachusetts for five minutes.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you. Does Texas get the sense we are
ganging up on you.
Mr. Farenthold. No.
Mr. Tierney. Which, if any, of you gentleman has been
looking into the planned work being done on the embassy that
was reported by Walter Pincus in the Post this morning? Mr.
Geisel, what kind of work are you doing in terms of evaluating
the expense there and the purpose?
Mr. Geisel. Well, we started actually, oh, I guess it was
about more than three years ago, with an audit of the building
of the embassy itself and, as you know, we recommended to the
Department that they recover I believe it was over $200 million
from the contractor for what was really slipshod, and worse
than slipshod, construction.
Mr. Tierney. Did they recover it?
Mr. Geisel. Not to my knowledge. It would probably take
court action, and we, in all candor, we understand that asking
for the money is one thing, and finally getting it after
battles is another, but we really believe the Department should
be trying to get it back.
We, on a continuing basis, audit the Department and
construction. Now, for instance, let's take the $100 million
that was mentioned in the article. I don't know if that is an
absolutely accurate figure, but what I do know is the
Department does have plans. First of all, you have to remember
the Department doesn't have that money yet, it is asking the
Congress for the money. But where we come in is we want to know
what is the Department going to get for that money. Do they
have provable savings of $200 million or is it a matter of
security? Or is it a matter of something nice to have? And we
will be looking at that. But we can't look too far until and
unless the Congress decides to give them that money that he
spoke about.
Mr. Tierney. Well, I would hope Congress would find the
answers to those questions before it gave him the money,
frankly. I mean, it is a $700 million facility before we have
even started; $700 million, slipshod work, incredible
expenditure. We went all through those hearings under Henry
Waxman and others on that, and now they want to be spend $60
million to $80 million supposedly over the next two years for a
central utility power plant, underground fuel storage facility,
wide-fire water distribution, domestic water system, sanitary
sewer system, stormwater system, and telecommunication system.
So can you tell us whether or not $700 million just didn't
address any of those issues in a compound of that size?
Mr. Geisel. I think the answer is that obviously the way
the $700 million was spent didn't, and that was in our report.
And the question now is are you throwing in good money after
bad or is this something that is going to save us money?
Mr. Tierney. Has anybody looked at evaluating their
proposed purpose for using this facility, the number of people
who are ostensibly going to occupy it and how that may be
different than at other embassies of similar size and purpose?
Mr. Geisel. That is really going to be done under our
Baghdad master plan audit, which begins literally in a matter
of days. And what we are going to do is review whether the
infrastructure that is already in place and the proposed new
construction align with the short-term and long-term diplomatic
presence. So the answer is we are looking and we will let you
know.
Mr. Tierney. I mean, obviously, that should be conditioned
on that. We also look at part of what they are proposing is a
classified embassy annex extension, some considerable work,
maybe $20 million to $35 million on that. It looks to me like
they are talking about a sniff and some other things in that
base, some classified stuff. Are you going to be able to see
what you need to see to make an evaluation of that, or should
this Committee and others in Congress be looking to make sure
it is evaluated by some other appropriate entity?
Mr. Geisel. We have all the clearances we need to look at
that work, and we certainly will.
Mr. Tierney. Okay. I mean, having sat through the hearings
on the original embassy construction and failures or whatever,
it is something that we definitely have to do. And I also
question $700 million, none of the seventh of that hundred
million plus for things that look like they would be intricate
to any building of that nature out there. How they could have
left them out is sort of surprising on that.
I am also very interested that we take a look at how many
people they plan to have in that facility, what their purposes
are and how that purpose aligns to what the diplomatic mission
is. Are we doing diplomacy on that building? Are we doing
something else? Do we need those people for that particular
mission? Where does it line up. One mention in this article is
it going to consolidate other things so we will be taking a
presence out of other parts of the country and putting them in
there, only to find out that later mobility and security
improves and you are going to be kicking them back out. All
those questions are yours hopefully to give us some advice and
direction on.
Mr. Geisel. I would love to have you lead the team. I think
you are asking the very questions we will be asking.
Mr. Tierney. Well, I am comforted to know that you are
going to ask them because I think all of us up here just sit
here with our mouths gaping open when we look at the amount of
money for such basic things on that and we look at the
staggering number of people that they are going to put in an
embassy that I have not seen in any of the embassies anywhere
else in comparably sized countries.
I understand the security issue, but if a country doesn't
want our people to be moving around, we have to take a look at
how we limit our presence there and just work with that. This
idea of having private security people running around getting
paid what they are getting paid, to then tell us that they just
can't move and their security advice is to stay put is kind of
crazy on that. So thank you for your help with that.
I yield back.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
I would like to thank our witnesses for taking time to be
with us. As I think the testimony today has made clear, this is
an ongoing issue, so I suspect we will be seeing many, if not
all, of you in front of this Committee again, and again I thank
you for your participation.
The Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:06 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


