- THE JOBS ACT IN ACTION PART II: OVERSEEING EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION THAT CAN GROW AMERICAN JOBS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE JOBS ACT IN ACTION PART II: OVERSEEING EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION
THAT CAN GROW AMERICAN JOBS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TARP, FINANCIAL SERVICES
AND BAILOUTS OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROGRAMS

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 28, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-169

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

75-590 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services and Bailouts of Public and
Private Programs

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire,      MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Minority Member
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               PETER WELCH, Vermont
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JACKIE SPEIER, California
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on June 28, 2012....................................     1

WITNESSES

The Honorable Mary Schapiro, Chairman, U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission
Oral Statement...............................................     4
Written Statement............................................     7

APPENDIX

The Honorable Patrick McHenry, a Member of Congress from the
State of North Carolina, Opening Statement.....................    40

THE JOBS ACT IN ACTION PART II: OVERSEEING EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION
THAT CAN GROW AMERICAN JOBS

----------

Wednesday, June 28, 2012

House of Representatives
Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services, and
Bailouts of Public and Private Programs,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:35 a.m., in
Room 2247, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick T.
McHenry [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives McHenry, and Quigley.
Staff Present: Ali Ahmad, Majority Deputy Press Secretary;
Will L. Boyington, Majority Staff Assistant; Drew Colliatie,
Majority Staff Assistant; Brian Danes, Majority Professional
Staff Member; Peter Haller, Majority Senior Counsel;
Christopher Hixon, Majority Deputy Chief Counsel, Oversight;
Jeff Wease, Majority Deputy CIO; Jaron Bourke, Minority
Director of Administration; Kevin Corbin, Minority Deputy
Clerk; Jason Powell, Minority Senior Counsel; Brian Quinn,
Minority Counsel; and Davida Walsh, Minority Counsel.
Mr. McHenry. The Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services
and Bailouts of Public and Private Programs will come to order.
In today's hearing, we are going to hear from the Chairman
of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and, as we know from
all the headlines in the newspapers today, this is the largest
news in the world. But in all seriousness, we are very grateful
for Chairman Schapiro's presence here today. She has always
been forthcoming and forthright.
As is the tradition of the Oversight and Government Reform
Committee, we are going to read the mission statement of this
Committee so we can keep that in mind for today's proceedings.
The Oversight Committee mission statement: We exist to
secure two fundamental principles: first, Americans have the
right to know that the money Washington takes from them is well
spent and, second, Americans deserve an efficient, effective
government that works for them. Our duty on the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee is to protect these rights. Our
solemn responsibility is to hold government accountable to
taxpayers, because taxpayers have a right to know what they get
from their government. We will work tirelessly in partnership
with citizen watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American
people and bring genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy.
I will now recognize myself for five minutes for the
purposes of an opening statement.
Approximately three years into an economic recovery,
America's labor and capital markets continue to face
unprecedented challenges. The U.S. unemployment rate has now
been above 8 percent for 40 consecutive months and nearly 24
million Americans are either unemployed or underemployed.
Since the beginning of the 112th Congress, the Oversight
Committee has remained committed to identifying and modernizing
outdated securities regulations that limit job growth and
access to capital, which, as we know, is a lifeblood of our
economy.
Today's hearing advances our efforts as we welcome the
Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Mary Schapiro to
address these major Commission reforms urged by this
Commission, such as the SEC's new policy on cost-benefit
analysis, which we welcome, and implementation of the JOBS Act,
which we want to remain vigorously committed to exercising
oversight so we know what is happening with Commission
proceedings. As I said at the opening, I certainly appreciate
Chairman Schapiro's willingness to engage in this oversight, as
well as being forthright on her views on all of this. We know
it is a Commission with five members, but the Chairman
obviously has significant sway.
During the Subcommittee hearing in April of this year,
Chairman Schapiro committed to the policies and principles of a
staff guidance document and the use of cost-benefit analysis in
the Commission's rulemaking. As I said, we welcome that. I
think that is a significant step and we certainly appreciate
that.
Chairman Schapiro's dedication to vigorous cost-benefit
analysis, particularly after former SEC Inspector General David
Kotz issued a critical report on cost-benefit analysis
procedures at the Commission, as well as a number of other
lawsuits. We appreciate the fact that the Commission acted
swiftly and that Chairman Schapiro went even further and
published this document and made it public to market
participants and those that care about what the SEC does.
We want to talk about that today and we want to give you an
opportunity to explain where things stand with the cost-benefit
analysis memo and how that is moving forward. But also we want
to make sure that the American people know what is happening
with the SEC's actions when it comes to the JOBS Act, portions
of which were built around the efforts of this Subcommittee and
a letter from Chairman Issa to Chairman Schapiro in March of
last year. That was a very positive exchange and the type of
reforms the American people can be proud of.
In particular, Title III of the JOBS Act I have a personal
interest in, as well as millions of small businesses around the
Country, and it is based off of legislation I sponsored here in
the House which is, in essence, crowdfunding, and it creates a
new federal securities exemption to permit equity-based
crowdfunding. After I introduced the crowdfunding bill in the
House, we went through the Financial Services Committee.
My colleague on this Subcommittee, Carolyn Maloney, who
also serves on the Financial Services Committee, raised a
number of concerns in our first hearing. We tried to work
together to craft an addition to deal with this fraud question
and to put in place what we thought was finely crafted
legislative language that would protect against fraudsters and,
at the same time, give the SEC the power to make those rules
and do it in a cost-effective way. It was a bipartisan bill. I
was very proud to work with Carolyn Maloney on that
legislation, and I think, based on that collaboration, that is
a big reason why we were able to get over 400 votes for this
bill coming out of the House. I think that is also why the
President endorsed this idea not just in his jobs speech, but
in the legislation we crafted in the House.
Well, unfortunately, I think a few Senators, with some
final changes that they made to the JOBS Act, were misinformed
and misunderstood the opportunity the crowdfunding allows for
and the nature of crowdfunding and, as such, there was an
eleventh hour change to the JOBS Act, in Title III of the JOBS
Act that deals with crowdfunding, that causes some concerns. We
had a hearing earlier this week, and I am sure, Chairman
Schapiro, you and your staff saw some of what came out of that
hearing, and there were concerns about the legislative
language, but there was broad consensus that the SEC can create
rules and do so in a cost-effective way to allow crowdfunding
to take place so that small issuances don't have the heavy
regulatory burden that the large issuances in our markets bear.
Now, the large issuances certainly have a greater capacity
to bear those costs than the smaller issuances. That is just
economic reality. So I will have a number of questions about
this crowdfunding piece of the JOBS Act. I am very concerned
about that implementation and making sure that it is done in a
cost-effective way so that small issuances can actually occur
and do so in a way that is economically feasible.
I certainly appreciate your willingness to be here. I thank
you for your public service very sincerely. You have had a very
long career in public service and have done so in a very
honorable way, and I certainly appreciate that.
With that, I recognize Mr. Quigley, the Ranking Member.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Despite its
importance, good morning, I do predict we will have a ratings
dip in about 15 minutes.
I also want to thank Chairman Schapiro, who has been a
regular witness at this Committee and has been exceptionally
generous with her time. It is a great benefit to the Committee
to hear your testimony and we especially appreciate it during
this very busy time at the SEC.
As you know, Congress passed two major reforms of security
laws and regulations over the last two years: in 2010, Congress
passed, and the President signed into law, the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and, of course,
earlier this year Congress passed, and the President signed,
the JOBS Act, and, again, I appreciate the Chairman of this
Committee's role in that legislation, the Subcommittee.
But the Acts are two sides of the same coin and will both
be important to job creation and our economic recovery. The SEC
has significant responsibilities under each Act to promulgate
new rules. This process is necessarily careful and deliberate.
Congress has made it clear that rules should be evaluated
according to their cost and their benefits. With regard to the
JOBS Act in particular, I hope the SEC carefully considers how
best to protect investors while achieving our goals in passing
that law.
Going forward, I am confident in Chairman Schapiro and the
SEC, even as they deal with short time lines. However, I think
it is important that Congress keep in mind the SEC's
substantial responsibilities when considering its budget and
resources.
So I want to thank the Chairman and thank our witness for
her testimony.
Mr. McHenry. It is the policy of the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee to swear in all witnesses, so the
Chairman has risen.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
[Witness responds in the affirmative.]
Mr. McHenry. Let the record reflect that Chairman Schapiro
answered in the affirmative.
We will now recognize the Chairman of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, Mary Schapiro.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARY SCHAPIRO, CHAIRMAN, U.S.
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

Ms. Schapiro. Thank you, Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Quigley. I appreciate the opportunity to testify regarding our
implementation of the JOBS Act, as well as economic analysis in
SEC rulemaking.
In the two months since my last testimony on these issues,
we have continued to work hard to implement the new statutory
provisions and to ensure that our rulemaking fully incorporates
appropriate and rigorous economic analysis.
As you know, the JOBS Act makes significant changes to the
federal securities laws. It changes the IPO process for
emerging growth companies; requires the Commission to modify
the ban on general solicitation in advertising; directs the
Commission to implement exemptions for crowdfunding offerings
and unregistered public offerings of up to $50 million; and
increases the number of holders of record that trigger public
reporting. The JOBS Act also requires that the Commission
conduct several studies and prepare reports for Congress.
The Commission's commitment to the successful
implementation of the JOBS Act is evident from our actions to
date. Where provisions of the law were effective upon
enactment, we have already provided information and guidance to
the public to assure those provisions are put in place in an
orderly and effective manner. For example, on the day of
enactment we posted on the Commission's website procedures for
submitting draft registration statements for confidential
review, and that very day we received the first confidential
registration statement from an emerging growth company using
those procedures.
We set up email boxes on the SEC website through which the
public can submit comments on JOBS Act provisions before we
even issue any proposed rules. Already we have received
substantial constructive feedback from a wide range of
interested parties.
And soon after enactment the staff prepared and posted on
the Commission's website several sets of frequently asked
questions about matters ranging from the law's IPO on-ramp to
its new registration and de-registration requirements. The
extensive information the staff has made available is easily
and clearly accessible on the SEC's website and feedback from
companies and their advisors has been extremely positive.
Where provisions of the law required rulemaking, we formed
intra-agency rule writing teams which are meeting with
interested parties, considering public comments, and preparing
recommendations for the Commission.
As I have mentioned previously, some of the rulemakings
have unrealistically short deadlines. For example, the 90-day
deadline for revising Rule 506 and Rule 144(a) to allow for
general solicitation with the statutory requirement for
reasonable steps to verify accredited investor status for Rule
506 offerings simply does not provide time for drafting a new
rule with a rigorous economic analysis, considering public
input, and reviewing a proposed final rule at the Commission
level. We have, however, made significant progress on a
recommendation and economic analysis, and hope that the
Commission will be in a position to act in the near future.
With respect to the crowdfunding provisions, the staff is
already crafting the many rules required by the Act, has
published frequently asked questions, and is evaluating the
more than 80 public comments already received. We are doing our
best to meet the ambitious JOBS Act deadline of 270 days to
complete the required rulemaking.
As I mentioned in earlier testimony, economic analysis is
an integral part of all rulemakings, including JOBS Act
rulemaking. The staff guidance for March is being followed for
both rule recommendations already in process and those at the
earliest stages of development. Since the guidance was
implemented, the Commission has approved three final rules.
Each of these rules included economic analyses consistent with
the guidance.
In addition to implementing the guidance, we are
strengthening our rule writing teams by hiring additional
economists. In the near future, 16 Ph.D. economists will be
joining the Commission to assist in rule writing, and we have
requested an additional 20 economist positions as part of our
2013 budget request. And, of course, this supplements the
already 23 economists we have who are devoted exclusively to
rule writing. Our ability, of course, to fill future positions
will depend on the resources provided by Congress.
In conclusion, we are making significant progress in
implementing the JOBS Act and are providing significant
guidance to the public to ensure its provisions are workable
and comprehensible. Further, the economic analysis guidance is
informing our rulemaking and will continue to do so going
forward.
And I would, of course, be pleased to answer any questions
you have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Schapiro follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Chairman Schapiro. Thank you for
your testimony.
Members may have seven days to submit opening statements
for the record.
I will now recognize myself for five minutes.
In your written statement, Chairman Schapiro, you said
something very encouraging: On the same day the President
signed the JOBS Act into law, the staff received a
confidentially submitted registration statement from an
emerging growth company that used the new procedures the staff
had posted earlier. That was fast action, right? That is
positive.
And by its nature you have entrepreneurs who are waiting;
they want to act; they want to use this. You outline in your
opening statement that one of the things you have done on
crowdfunding is to inform market participants that it is not
yet available; the rules have not yet been crafted. Clearly,
entrepreneurs want to participate, want to be active.
So, to that end, there is another provision within the JOBS
Act, which is the lifting of the general solicitation ban. As
you outline in your statement, you believe that the July 4th
deadline will not be met. Is that correct?
Ms. Schapiro. That is correct, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McHenry. When do you foresee this happening?
Ms. Schapiro. I expect that in the next two days we will
actually publically publish the timeline for the Commission
consideration of lifting the general solicitation ban, and I
expect that it will be done this summer.
I think it is important to note that if it were as simple
as just eliminating the general solicitation ban, and I read
the transcript from the prior hearing, so I understand that
there was some discussion about this, that would be a
relatively straightforward thing to do. But, of course, the
statute actually requires that we require issuers to take
steps, reasonable steps to verify that purchasers of the
securities are in fact accredited investors, using whatever
means the Commission determines appropriate.
Taking steps to verify means there are probably lots of
alternatives for doing that. Under our cost-benefit analysis
guidance, we have to actually look at the different
alternatives and weigh the costs and benefits of different
alternatives for verification of accredited investor status. So
we want to create something that is workable and usable. That
is absolutely our goal. But it is a bit more challenging a
rulemaking than it might seem on the surface because of that
extra statutory requirement.
With that said, the staff is significantly along in both
the economic analysis and the rule drafting, and will come
before the Commission this summer.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Well, in context of this, entrepreneurs
are waiting, and we would urge you to move forward with that.
Now, there is also a deadline of December 31st for the
Section III of the JOBS Act, which is the crowdfunding portion.
Do you foresee meeting this deadline?
Ms. Schapiro. I don't foresee not meeting the deadline. The
staff is working very hard on it. There are lots of rules, as
you know. I know that you weren't happy about all of the rules
that were added, the requirements, but we are working already
on the issuer disclosure requirements, which are fairly
straightforward, but also the intermediary and funding portal
requirements of the statutory provisions. So I think it is
challenging, but I don't have a reason to tell you at this
point that we won't make that deadline.
Mr. McHenry. When will you issue a timeline for this
rulemaking?
Ms. Schapiro. We haven't formally issued a timeline. We
don't normally formally issue specific timelines. We did, under
Dodd-Frank, give general ranges of three-month periods during
which we hoped to get certain rules across the finish line or
proposed. Because this one has a pretty short time frame, we
need to get proposals to the Commission in the next several
months so we can have a comment period and then take it to
final.
I will say we have benefitted enormously in this one in
particular from the advanced comment period that we had. I
believe we have gotten close to 80, if I am remembering the
correct rule, comment letters about how we ought to implement
these rules. We have had multiple meetings with funding
portals, with associations that represent the crowdfunding
industry, and with individuals. So that is really helping to
short-circuit some of the process in the sense that we are
building up a base of knowledge very quickly at the SEC for
handling this.
Mr. McHenry. So due to the potential costs associated with
the layers of lawyers and accountants and financial
intermediaries, and on and on and on, on crowdfunding, we had
testimony earlier this week that one expert believes that,
because of that layering on of the Senate provisions inserted
on crowdfunding, that if the rules are not implemented
correctly at the SEC, the crowdfunding could be ``stillborn.''
That is a pretty strong statement.
But after conducting a rigorous cost-benefit analysis on
crowdfunding rules under the JOBS Act, if you believe that
these costs would render impracticable some or all of the uses
of crowdfunding, basically price out small issuances, will you
commit to telling this Committee immediately that that is the
case?
Ms. Schapiro. I absolutely would. But our goal is to create
a workable exemption. This exemption exists under statute. Our
approach is going to be to follow the language of the statute,
but to create exemptions that actually can make crowdfunding
work. And my personal belief is that the requirement to using
intermediary can be enormously helpful here because it can
routinize a lot of the things that people might be concerned
that they need to have lawyers to do for them or accountants to
do for them.
So I think it will be both an investor confidence issue to
use an intermediary, will give people some confidence that
there is a regulated entity in this process somewhere; but I
think it will also make it much easier for entrepreneurs to
navigate the exemption and its requirements.
So we will be very sensitive to these issues about cost and
I will, of course, come back to Congress if we think there are
things that are statutorily required that make it unworkable,
but I am optimistic that we can write the rules that satisfy
both the needs of small businesses to be able to use this
effectively and efficiently, but also have basic investor
protections in place.
Mr. McHenry. Even small issuances?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, even small issuances.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Thank you.
I will now recognize Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To the other side of that coin, Ms. Schapiro, I supported
the JOBS Act and the crowdfunding provisions in it, but all the
questions I asked are still what we are concerned about today,
because many of the investors in crowdfunding are going to be
comparatively unsophisticated, and there is information
asymmetry or disparity there. How do you take that into
consideration on the SEC side, because they are perhaps
particularly vulnerable for the lack of sophistication or
expertise of practice and investing in this sort of project?
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman, I think it is a very fair
question and I want to say that the version of the bill as
passed did build in a number of investor protections, including
disclosure requirements for issuers, the use of intermediaries
who are subject to oversight of the SEC or a self-regulatory
organization.
But also there are requirements for intermediaries to take
measures to reduce the risks of fraud in these transactions, so
those requirements will obviously be built out in the rules,
but they include background checks, for example, on people who
are associated with the issuer. And then I can tell you that we
will monitor very closely how the exemptions are used, and if
problems arise we will address those very quickly.
It is our goal, obviously, to protect investors and I think
everybody clearly shares the goal of having this be a useful
exemption, and if it is fraught with fraud, it won't be useful
for anybody. So we understand that balance. We will work very
hard to get it right, but I do think the statutory provisions
build in some basic investor protections that will be very
helpful.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. You are have often asked about
cost-benefit analysis. It is hard to quantify everything, put
everything we might need into the issue of investor confidence,
but earlier this week we had a hearing on this matter and
Professor John Coffee of Columbia University Law School
testified, he said the greatest enemy of job creation today is
not over-regulation, but the loss of investor confidence. In
particular, ``American investors have lost confidence in the
initial public offerings process and the integrity of the
mechanisms for capital raising.'' I want to get his quote
right.
As this process went on, I think it was March 13th, you
wrote a letter to Senate Banking Committee Chairman Tim
Johnson, and the Ranking Member, Senator Shelby. You said
something similar: We must balance our responsibility to
facilitate capital formation with our obligation to protect
investors and our markets. I am concerned that we lack a clear
understanding of the impact that the legislation's exemptions
would have on investor protection.
If your concerns and the point that Professor Coffee made
are as accurate as they seem, how does the SEC take into
consideration in this cost-benefit analysis, how do you put a
dollar figure on lost investor confidence?
Ms. Schapiro. It is notoriously hard to quantify the
benefits of any regulation. How do you quantify the benefits of
preventing a fraud? How do you quantify the benefits of
somebody who is burned----
Mr. Quigley. Because it is not just the dollars they lost,
which some people----
Ms. Schapiro. No. It is their unwillingness to ever engage
with the markets again----
Mr. Quigley. And people that are out there are just not
putting their dollars in.
Ms. Schapiro. Exactly. It is a concern about the integrity
of the marketplace, whether they are placed at a competitive
disadvantage vis-a-vis institutions; whether they are getting
accurate and honest information from issuers; whether the
market structure itself is tilted against the individual
investor and in favor of the institutional investor. And those
are all things we worry about all the time because, at the end
of the day, investor confidence is the oxygen that the markets
survive on, and if we lose it, it is extraordinarily hard to
regain it.
And if you look at one very specific example I like to use,
after the flash crash of May 6, when the markets plummeted very
quickly and companies traded $40 a share to $0.02 a share, we
saw net outflows from equity mutual funds every single week for
about eight or nine months because people just said this is not
a marketplace for me; I don't have confidence in its integrity.
That was a market structure issue, not an information
disclosure issue, but, nonetheless, we know market confidence
matters enormously, and investor confidence.
It is hard to quantify and the GAO, in a recent study,
recognized how difficult it is to quantify the benefits of
investor confidence. Where we can't quantify it, we will talk
about it qualitatively and we will talk about why it matters,
and we will talk about the larger economic crisis and what that
has done to investor confidence and use that as part of our
analysis.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. I recognize myself for a second round of
questions.
My colleague referenced your letter of March 13th to
Chairman Tim Johnson and the Ranking Member of the Senate
Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, Richard Shelby.
You outlined a number of concerns you have with the
legislation, the JOBS Act that we passed, and in particular you
have a number of concerns with the legislation that I wrote
that was inserted into the JOBS Act on crowdfunding. Was this
letter in response to a letter sent to you?
Ms. Schapiro. No, Mr. Chairman, it was not.
Mr. McHenry. So it was unsolicited?
Ms. Schapiro. It was unsolicited. These were my views that
I thought were important for me personally to express to the
Senate Banking Committee.
Mr. McHenry. Do you have my address? And I only say this in
a joking fashion because I have seen you a number of times. You
have been before this Committee a number of times. I appreciate
you being forthright with me. And as the Chairman of the
Securities and Exchange Commission, or if you were just a
citizen, I would respond to your letter. I would read your
letter. In fact, I read your letter at the time, and had you
raised these objections to me or--I don't want to speak for my
colleague from New York, Carolyn Maloney, but we would have
addressed these provisions in the bill that we passed out of
the House with over 400 votes. I think the President would have
liked to have heard that before he issued a statement of
administrative policy on my crowdfunding bill. And, finally,
this is right before the Senate takes this issue up and you
outline these concerns.
Chairman Schapiro, I would welcome your input to my
legislation in an effort for me to fix it, and I would welcome
your engagement in this process, but when I see this, I view
that as being sideswiped by a regulatory body at the eleventh
hour. This caused me great concern, and I don't think that was
the most responsible action for you to take. The more
responsible thing I would encourage you to do is to communicate
so we can fix it coming out of the House and address these
concerns.
I amended half of my bill, over half of my bill because of
a concern that a colleague of mine across the aisle had. If the
Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission came to me
with concerns about legislation I was writing that the
Securities and Exchange Commission was going to write rules
based upon, I would absolutely, absolutely take that into
account.
So I just want to express to you my deep regret that you
didn't address this earlier or to me. And to send an
unsolicited letter to the Senate at the eleventh hour is, I
don't think, the best way to go. If you were responding to some
letter, I think that would maybe be more valid, but in the
future I would like you to address that, especially if I have
anything to do with the legislation. I would certainly welcome
it.
Ms. Schapiro. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that and I will
absolutely make sure that, with future bills, that I talk to
you or to the sponsors of those bills in advance. I did testify
about some concerns we had with respect to a number of
provisions. I don't know whether they were directly
incorporated in legislation at the time, but with respect to
the capital raising process and the small business capital
raising process in particular, but I hear your point.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
Now, earlier this week, Mr. Cartwright testified before the
Subcommittee and he said, ``After all, the SEC had sufficient
authority to do almost everything the JOBS Act did without any
legislation at all. Unfortunately, the JOBS Act was necessary
precisely because the SEC did not believe in the need for what
the JOBS Act seeks to accomplish.''
The reason why I say this in context with your letter
earlier is you have testified since the JOBS Act became law
that you would abide by the law. But your letter to Tim Johnson
and Richard Shelby exhibits that you didn't like the law as it
was written. So do you believe that the SEC had the authority
to make these changes that are within the JOBS Act?
Ms. Schapiro. Mr. Chairman, my letter raised some specific
issues and concerns I had that I thought should be addressed in
final legislation that I believe were important for investor
protection and, frankly, important for successful capital
raising so that we could avoid the potential for fraud or
misconduct. But I have also, as you rightly point out, said
many times that it is the law of the land; we will implement it
faithfully; and I think every action we have taken to date
demonstrates exactly that.
The positive feedback we are getting from the small
business community, from our small business advisory committee,
and even some of the witnesses last week, Mr. Cartwright in
particular, who made the point of saying the SEC seems to be
doing this with fervor and with--those weren't his words, but
with real commitment. So I think everything we are doing
demonstrates our fidelity to the statute and to accomplishing
the goals of the statute.
I would have to go through. I think there are some things
the SEC could have done on its own, certainly could have even
done when Mr. Cartwright was general counsel of the SEC, but I
couldn't tell you, off the top of my head, whether every single
thing that is in the JOBS Act could have been done without a
legislative change. We would be happy to do that analysis and
provide it for the record.
Mr. McHenry. I am more interested in you doing the
rulemaking that is currently obligated.
Ms. Schapiro. I am too. I would like to make this work.
Mr. McHenry. So, again, to this crowdfunding piece. Now,
the structure of crowdfunding is different in many respects. We
have great experience with charitable crowdfunding, gift-based
crowdfunding. The nature of somebody investing $20 in the local
coffee shop that they go to every day, they want to own a piece
of it, is structurally and motivationally different than
somebody investing $10,000 in the Facebook IPO. Do you agree
with that?
Ms. Schapiro. Absolutely.
Mr. McHenry. So sort of the lower dollar issuances
structurally are very different; the motivation is different by
investors. Is that something that you would foresee the SEC
incorporating, that structural difference?
Ms. Schapiro. Well, I think certainly there will be many
structural differences between offerings done through a
crowdfunding exemption and a full-blown public offering that is
done like Facebook or another large company, so we will see
that play out in disclosure requirements, with respect to sales
practices. In all sorts of ways there will be many structural
differences.
Mr. McHenry. The regulation of portals, as opposed to
broker-dealers, you will take that into account as well?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes. The statute accounts for funding portals
to be--a funding portal could be a broker-dealer, and we know
of broker-dealers who are interested in doing this. But we also
know of entities that are doing funding for charitable and
other endeavors, as you point out, that are also interested in
expanding into being crowdfunding portals under the JOBS Act,
and we would expect them to be regulated differently. There are
some limitations on their business, but the statute is quite
clear that they should be regulated differently.
Mr. McHenry. Okay, so the SEC will take that into account.
Ms. Schapiro. We absolutely will, and we will obviously
also put all of this out for comment. And the portals have been
in to see us, a number of them, already, to talk about the
things that they think are actually important to include,
because I think they believe that they can perform a real
service here and support entrepreneurs who want to utilize the
crowdfunding exemption to do it successfully; and they want
repeat business, so they want it to be successful, and we hear
that from them over and over again, that they want this to
work.
Mr. McHenry. And to that end we heard from one portal who
was represented by a gentleman, David Hillel-Tuch, who
testified that ``every securities market and/or offering has a
potential for fraud, but crowdfunding structures help minimize
that risk. Crowdfunding is highly transparent and there is
substantial feedback from other community participants, the
crowd. The crowd helps police players and keeps them honest.
Portals provide a clear and central location for communication
by potential investors to analyze and share their views on
offerings. The web-based structure also allows portals and
regulators to provide risk disclosure and investor education.
In addition, we expect portal operators to undertake a
gatekeeping role in authenticating issuer identity and
requiring minimum standards for issuers.''
And this is before rules have even been written he outlines
this. So do you agree that inherently the structure of
crowdfunding, because of the structure of crowdfunding, there
are significant protections against fraud?
Ms. Schapiro. I think, in a sense, it depends. I think
those are important protections. Many of those are actually
captured in the statute and I think they are very important.
But I think we can also have a situation where a portal isn't
policing the issuer, and isn't ensuring that proceeds aren't
transmitted before they should be, and isn't ensuring that
there is disclosure.
And that is why the rules actually matter, that we capture
those very ideas that are also in the statute in the rulemaking
regime so that all portals are subject to it because, frankly,
as you know, one that decides that the rules don't apply to
them and anything goes and allows fraud to happen will hurt
every single honest one that is out there, and that is why the
regulatory regime matters; and we can't just assume that
because people have approached crowdfunding responsibly in the
charitable context, that when this business is opened up, and
there is the opportunity to solicit many millions of investors,
that everyone will still continue to play by those high ethical
standards, and that is what the regulatory regime is there to
do.
Mr. McHenry. I would say with billions of dollars already
operating in this environment, with minimal fraud, that it
shows that light touch regulation, transparency, basic rules of
the road, would be sufficient, can be sufficient to that end of
mitigating fraud.
To a different provision, the Minority recommended a
witness, John Coffee of Columbia University Law School, and I
had a few questions. Incidentally, he offered this and I
thought it was very interesting. Innocent and material
exemption. That is Rule 508 in Reg D. So it is done for
accredited investors currently, if I am to understand
correctly. So this innocent and material exemption could be
applied to crowdfunding issuances. Do you foresee that and
would you support that?
Ms. Schapiro. I can't predict what the Commission will do,
but we----
Mr. McHenry. Would you support it?
Ms. Schapiro. The staff and I have talked about it. We
think it makes a lot of sense. I obviously want to explore it a
little bit further, but as an initial reaction I think
something like that does make sense. We are not looking to
catch people with footfalls, so insignificant deviations from
the requirements of the exemption shouldn't blow the exemption,
from my view, and it has worked in other contexts. So we would
absolutely be looking at that.
Mr. McHenry. Great. That is a great answer.
Now, in terms of the structure of the bill, we have small
issuances and we have a graduated scale up to $1 million, the
idea being that smaller issuances under $100,000 are a little
different than issuances of $900,000. Do you foresee and would
you support the rulemaking that, in essence, categorizes
issuances based on their size?
Ms. Schapiro. I think it is a very good question and it is
something that we have not made any decisions about. At a
minimum, it is something we could ask questions about in a
proposing release, about whether we should create some kind of
scale for different size issuances. As you know, we have a lot
of comfort with scale disclosure at the SEC in other contexts.
Title I, the IPO on-ramp, has a number of scale disclosure
provisions in it that we think are very manageable from our
perspective, so it is something we would definitely be looking
at.
Mr. McHenry. With that, I will now recognize Mr. Quigley
for 14 and a half minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Actually, I just have one area of interest,
Madam Chairman. The other day we talked about leapfrogging and
the pressures the SEC faces to deal with these two major bills,
Dodd-Frank and the JOBS Act, and that there was a concern that
there was pressure on you to leap ahead and get to the rules
completed that aren't due yet, when there are rules dealing
with Dodd-Frank that haven't been completed and past deadlines.
Do you feel this pressure? And how do you address the political
realities out there of getting all these done on a timely
basis?
Ms. Schapiro. Well, we absolutely feel the pressure and I
wish we could be moving more quickly to get all of these rules
completed at the agency, but we have tried to prioritize based
on deadlines for Dodd-Frank. We have either proposed or adopted
three-quarters of the more than 90 rules that we are required
to do; we have done 14 of the 20 or so studies. And this summer
I expect we will complete several more of the rules. The
biggest piece that is left are the over-the-counter derivatives
rules, which we would hope to----
Mr. Quigley. That is on Dodd-Frank.
Ms. Schapiro. That is Dodd-Frank.
Mr. Quigley. And the biggest part left on JOBS Act?
Ms. Schapiro. JOBS Act? I would say probably the General
Solicitation Rule, Reg. A, and the crowdfunding exemption. So
there are pieces of all of those. We will endeavor to meet the
end-of-the-year deadline for crowdfunding. General Solicitation
had a 90-day deadline and Regulation A doesn't actually have a
deadline, but it is a very significant rulemaking. So we do the
best we can with our staff, and balancing many of the JOBS Act
requirements fall to the Corporation Finance Division.
They also have responsibility for the asset-backed
securities rulemaking that is going on under Dodd-Frank, as
well as conflict minerals in the Congo, extractive industries
disclosure rules, and all the compensation disclosure rules,
including pay ratio. So there is a huge burden in that one
division and they are doing a phenomenal job and they are
pushing things through, but we just keep our noses to the
grindstone and try to turn things out as best we can, roughly
prioritizing based on the statutory deadlines.
Mr. Quigley. Well, good luck with all that, as they say,
and I thank you for your service.
Mr. McHenry. I thank my colleague.
I have a few questions on cost-benefit analysis, and I am
going to start by saying that I appreciate your prompt action
on cost-benefit analysis, and the draft guidance that you have
put forward and you have made public, that you testified that
the Commission staff is abiding by currently is a welcome sign,
and I think that is a good government initiative and showed
strong leadership on your part to make that happen, and I do
appreciate it. And like I said at the very beginning, you have
had a distinguished career in public service that is a rarity
in this day, to have a career in public service and maintain
your reputation at the same time.
So with this cost-benefit analysis I just have some
questions on that. And we do appreciate, when we have document
requests, that you and your staff comply to the best of your
capacity to do that, and that is helpful. That doesn't make
headlines, but we certainly appreciate it. You do have a very
fine staff and we are very grateful, and my interaction with
the Commission staff, and the commissioners, for that matter,
that we have integrity in this body, and that is very important
not just for our oversight role, but for the public, I mean, to
have confidence in the markets. And that is obviously a
challenge with some of the things that we have seen in the past
with market failures and fraud that occurs in our public
markets, just like fraud occurs, and lawbreaking happens in
society.
In our letter to you on May 23rd, we asked whether job
creation specifically will be considered in economic analysis,
and in your response from June 11th you said, in performing the
foregoing analyses with respect to particular rulemaking, the
Commission may need to consider the impact of the rule on job
creation, economic growth, and competitiveness of the U.S.
exchanges and issuances.
So I want to understand the word may. Now, I am not a
lawyer, so the difference between may and shall is very
significant. I want to understand why it is may consider job
creation.
Ms. Schapiro. Sure. I think we don't really look at our
economic analysis as going specifically to that one factor, but
we must consider burdens on competition of our rules and we
must consider whether our rules will promote efficiency,
competition, and capital formation. And if you equate capital
formation potentially to job creation, it will certainly be
covered in that.
So I think we don't separately pull out a line and say this
will create X number of jobs or this will hurt X number of
jobs, but we would talk about if our rule might cause people to
reorganize their businesses in such a way that they avoid our
rule and, therefore, move overseas. That would obviously have
an impact on jobs in the United States. So it is a broader
inquiry that we must do, but we don't single out job creation
necessarily as a specific factor. So I think that is the reason
for the use of the word may.
Mr. McHenry. Is there a distinction between must and shall?
And I am not trying to do this as trivia, just in----
Ms. Schapiro. Not to me.
Mr. McHenry. Okay.
Ms. Schapiro. I think generally things are written as shall
in rules and legislation, and I take it as a directive.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. So when we are talking about economic
growth, most people think about economic growth in terms of job
creation, and that, to me, is a question. You outline, as well,
the Commission is hiring 16 economists and asked for funding to
hire an additional 20 more in 2013. It is also interesting,
because we asked this as well, in contrast, in fiscal year 2012
the Commission hired 67 new attorneys. Fourteen more have
specific start dates within the next few months, an additional
24 candidates have been offered positions or are pending
background checks, and another 65 positions are under active
recruitment. So that is a total hiring of 170 folks. This is a
more than 10 to 1 ratio of attorneys, lawyers versus
economists.
So given that recognition that economic analysis must be
done, there is still this great prioritization of hiring
attorneys.
Ms. Schapiro. I am happy to address that. And I should add
we have, in addition to the 16 Ph.Ds who are joining us this
summer, we already have 23 economists working on economic
analysis just in our Division of Risk Strategy and Financial
Innovation. We have other economists who do risk modeling and
quantitative analysis.
But you are right, we hire more lawyers than we do
economists, although this is, I think, the largest ramp up in
economists in the agency's history, because we are, everyone
needs to remember, a law enforcement agency as well, and we
bring in the neighborhood of more than 700 enforcement cases
every year to try to remedy violations of the federal
securities laws.
And the other thing that is important is that we have a lot
of accountants who also both support the enforcement
initiatives, but also oversee FASB and the accounting standards
setting.
The lawyers we are hiring come to us with very specific
experiences really critical to the agency's ability to carry
out its mission, so we have been hiring people from hedge funds
and private equity funds with expertise in broker-dealer risk
and operations, structured finance expertise, trading
backgrounds, expertise in exchange traded funds and
derivatives. So we have lawyers who are responsible for much of
the market structure, the investment company regulation, and
the corporate finance disclosure review regulation, and we need
them to do our jobs and we need them, obviously, very much to
do the enforcement work.
Mr. McHenry. I certainly understand that and, as I
mentioned, the current guidance on economic analysis is on your
website, and you making that public is appreciated and
commendable, as well. In our panel that we had, we had four
panelists earlier this week, they all lauded this, and it is
rare that you can get four individuals testifying before this
Subcommittee and agree on anything, so that is a very positive
thing. And this is binding on staff now?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, it is.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. And is this the final rule?
Ms. Schapiro. It is the operative document right now. The
staff is following this guidance as it is published on the
website. We have asked the commissioners if they have comments
and additions or changes that they would like to see, and we
are working through that process to see if there are views that
the Commission would like to have expressed, in which case it
could become a Commission document, the Commission could
actually vote on it. But right now this is the operative way
forward for the staff in the rule writing divisions.
Mr. McHenry. Will you make those comments public?
Ms. Schapiro. Any changes we make to the document we would
certainly make public.
Mr. McHenry. And would you explain why those changes were
made? Would you commit to doing that as well?
Ms. Schapiro. If it is permissible to do that, if there is
not some rule that prohibits it.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Some law or rule?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, you know, deliberative process or
something.
Mr. McHenry. I am very interested because if it is
applicable now to the staff and binding on the staff now, then
any changes could endanger the analysis that is already out
there and impact, so we would have pre-memo and then have this
sort of interregnum here that we are currently in, apparently.
So the concern there is that with any changes----
Ms. Schapiro. We explain why.
Mr. McHenry. Yes.
Ms. Schapiro. That seems fair to me. So, as I said, I have
no objection, not having been told yet by the general counsel's
office that there is a reason we can't do that.
But I just want to add I think this guidance----
Mr. McHenry. Well, they are proximate, so I am sure I can
just look at faces and determine.
Ms. Schapiro.--this guidance, I am enormously proud of it
and I am enormously proud of the staff work that went into it
because, frankly, I think it informs good policymaking, and
that is what we need to be about; and it really forces us to go
through the kind of process you would hope that policymakers
would engage in before they pass rules that can have a very
profound effect on many people.
Mr. McHenry. You released a memo to us with one of our
document requests, and it is a memo dated--if we can put it up
on the slide. This is a draft of October 31st of last year, and
you released this. It looks like a completed draft. And, go to
the next page, this deals with President Obama's Executive
Order that outlines that independent agencies are supposed to
develop a plan for a retrospective of existing regulations, and
this was a directive, well, more of a presidential request of
sorts to independent agencies saying you should be doing this
and looking back at rules.
I don't mean this as a gotcha, we can certainly provide you
with the memo, but what was interesting is that it outlines in
a timely fashion from the President's instruction to
independent agencies from July of last year, this draft was
from October 31st and it outlines the elements of the plan.
And if we go to the next page here. So we are publishing a
plan on the Commission's website. Has that been done?
Ms. Schapiro. Excuse me. No, Mr. Chairman. That requires
the Commission to approve the plan, and the Commission has not
yet voted to approve the plan.
Mr. McHenry. Has it been brought up at a Commission meeting
or is it still----
Ms. Schapiro. It has not been brought up at a meeting; it
was provided to the commissioners, I believe, October 31st of
2011 for their comment, their input, their changes, their
views, and that process has gone very slowly and we don't have
all of their views incorporated into it.
But I should hasten to add that that does not mean we are
not doing many things that are already in the plan, because the
plan incorporated a number of current processes that had been
ongoing at the Commission for years, like the 10-year
regulatory flexibility act analysis and responses to requests
for relief and guidance, or rulemaking petitions that ask us to
revisit rules. Our Advisory Committee has raised rules with us
that give them concerns. We have roundtables where rules are
raised for us to review.
We obviously have lots and lots of meetings with industry,
and they are not shy about telling us about rules that they
think we need to look at. So a lot of these processes are going
on, but you are right, we have not published the retrospective
rule review because the Commission has not yet voted to do so.
I am perfectly comfortable with it as it is and would vote to
go forward.
Mr. McHenry. Will this be on the agenda for incoming
months?
Ms. Schapiro. I think if we can't break it loose, we will
need to put it on a public meeting agenda at some point, yes.
Mr. McHenry. Well, it was interesting because--and I do
appreciate this, and I mean this sincerely, that you have
released this. We requested documents dealing with this and you
freely submitted it to us, and I think it is a reasonable draft
and it was done in a timely fashion to when the President
requested it, and, to me, part of it says we will put this on
the website, we will make this public.
And I want to put this on the slide, because the fact you
support it--this is an important slide. One more after this. We
will take several steps to enhance public understanding of our
retrospective review processes and to engage in more active
public outreach seeking input for our identification of rules
for review and our conduct of such reviews, including--and you
go through a number of things, public outreach and on and on
and on.
So it is a good memo, and I think the fact that the staff
came forward, that you support it, is a very positive thing,
and I think it would be helpful to the market to see this
process that you have outlined and done it in accordance with
the President's Executive Order.
Ms. Schapiro. Well, I agree with that, Mr. Chairman. In
fact, I would point out that in developing this document we
went out to the public twice, in March of 2011, where we asked
for public input on reviewing existing rules, especially rules
that impacted smaller businesses, and then again in September
we invited public comment specifically on how we should develop
this plan. So it was done with some care and some thought, so I
will endeavor to see if I can get it broken loose.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. I appreciate that. As I said, I
know you are one of five commissioners, but the chairman has
significant sway.
Ms. Schapiro. I hope that is true.
Mr. McHenry. So dealing with cost-benefit analysis, so the
SEC is going forward.
We can take the slides down.
The SEC has put forward this memo; it is binding on the
staff to actually look at the costs and the benefits of
rulemaking. It is done in a way that I think economists would
say is appropriate and rigorous. The procedures, going forward,
for a review process are significantly different than the
previous Commission's process for economic analysis, which has
been viewed as more or less perfunctory, rather than essential
and essential check-off in order for a rule to go forward. You
can tell the memo I think is good, in my opinion.
But there are also self-regulatory agencies, and these
SROs, FINRA, PCAOB, the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board,
these SRO rules are subject to Commission approval and, as
such, I believe that they should be subject to the same
economic analysis that the current guidance demands. Do you
think that SROs should do cost-benefit analysis in their rules?
Ms. Schapiro. It is a very good question. You know, there
are 32 self-regulatory organizations, and they file something
around 2,000 rules with us every year. So just the volume is
quite extraordinary. And I think many of the rules, 77 percent
of the rules, in fact, go effective immediately upon filing
with the SEC. Of those that are left, a number have to do with
new products, new lines of business, particularly for
exchanges.
And in Dodd-Frank Congress very much streamlined the
process for those remaining rules in a way that would actually
bolster those businesses' ability to get to market faster,
encourage innovation, and speed. So engaging in a full-blown
cost-benefit analysis for each of those rules could defeat the
purposes that were just put in place, of making us go very
quickly to approve those rules in order to allow them to get to
market quickly.
Mr. McHenry. Now, it is a small number that are non-
ministerial and non-procedural in nature. Would you say that
major and significant rulemaking?
Ms. Schapiro. Well, I think there is probably a way to talk
about it where it does make sense. I think there are probably
some category of rules where more analysis ought to be done.
The do an analysis of burdens on competition in SRO rules, and
we at the SEC, in approving those rules, are in fact required
to do what we call the ECCF analysis, efficiency, competition,
and capital formation analysis, when we are looking at SRO
rules. So there is that which is already done. But there is
probably a small subset of SRO rules where further analysis, we
should be talking about that. I don't disagree with that.
I do think it would be a mistake to have a blanket
requirement across all SRO rules because the analysis can take
a very long time and, again, many of them are more routine and
operational, and probably don't call for that kind of an
effort.
I would just also add, as you know, under the JOBS Act, the
PCAOB rules that would apply to emerging growth companies have
to be determined by the SEC to be necessary in the public
interest and promote efficiency, competition, and capital
formation, so there is that addition.
Mr. McHenry. And to that point the question of public
interest. Look, I am in your wheelhouse right now; I am talking
about an SRO and I am talking about the SEC, and you have great
expertise with your prior experience, your previous job with
FINRA, of course. So you have great experience with this. So
there is certainly rulemaking from the SROs that should take
into account the draft guidance that you have put forward for
the economic analysis.
Now, how can the SEC rule determine whether or not
something is in the public interest? Let's just set aside the
ministerial part. Let's set aside sort of paperwork provisions
and some basic procedures that so many of these rules, by their
nature, the SROs can react faster than a government regulatory
body in adapting those wide variety of rules. So how can you
determine if it is in the public interest if there hasn't been
an economic analysis done on significant rules?
Ms. Schapiro. Well, the SROs are required to discuss the
reason for the rule, the justification of the rule, what
benefits they believe the rule will bring to different
constituencies. They are required to discuss the potential
impact of the rule change on competition. When we put the rules
out for--this is a very important part of the process, is when
we put the rules out for comment and commenters give their
views on the burdens on competition or the necessity for the
rule, we then work with the SRO staffs to make sure they
respond to those comments in any final rule approach.
I don't want to leave the impression there is nothing there
for SRO rules; there is. I think the question is on whether on
rules that have a more major, profound impact we should be
seeking more economic analysis I think is a fair question for
us to look at.
Mr. McHenry. So if we can go to the slide on the dissent
from SRO rulemaking, it reads: Any rulemaking, whether by a
self-regulatory organization such as the MSRB, which is the
Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, or by the Commission
itself should be the product of a careful and balanced
assessment of the potential consequences that could arise. The
decisionmaking process that led to the Commission's approval of
the MSRB's proposed rule changes fall short of meeting the
benchmark. The Commission has a fundamental oversight role with
respect to SROs, and an undue deference to an SRO in the SRO
rulemaking process undercuts the basic structure of that
regulatory relationship.
Now, I understand this is a dissent; the majority, three
commissioners, you being one of them, were on the other side of
this. If you could respond to that, I would appreciate it.
Ms. Schapiro. Sure. I think what I would say is that the
majority of the Commission believed the rule did adequately
address the commenter's concerns and did an adequate analysis
for us to conclude that the rule was appropriate. I will also
say, though, that this rule was about to become effective by
operation of the calendar, because at the outside we only have
240 days to approve or disapprove a rule, and then it goes into
effect.
So that said, I think we will always be willing to try to
improve the analysis of SRO rules and rule filings, and
obviously we have all read the dissent. Don't agree with it,
but we have all read it, and we will strive to do more.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Thank you. I did want to give you the
opportunity to comment on that.
So I just have a couple other provisions within the JOBS
Act that I just want to get your feedback on.
Will you exempt Reg. A from the shareholder cap under 12G
of the Exchange Act? Do you foresee that?
Ms. Schapiro. So I understand from the expert that we will
consider it, but there was not an explicit exemption provided
in the statute. But it is something we will consider.
Mr. McHenry. Well, do you believe that the SEC has that
authority to provide for that exemption?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mr. McHenry. Okay.
Ms. Schapiro. I am told.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Okay. And, again, I am not trying to
play gotcha, and if I go back to questions about SROs, you can
play gotcha with us.
Ms. Schapiro. I wouldn't do that. And, obviously, we can
always supplement the record, I assume, on that point.
Mr. McHenry. Absolutely.
Ms. Schapiro. But the Reg. A rulemaking, which is going to
be a significant one, is one that does not have a time limit,
so we have prioritized general solicitation and crowdfunding.
Mr. McHenry. Excellent. Very good. Okay, so to accredited
investors. Accreditation is obviously unnecessary in the case
of transactions among family members, so will the Commission
create an exemption to the accreditation requirement, if it
applies to the 1500 additional investors, in cases where the
shares are transferred or sold to children or grandchildren or
family members, in cases where shares are received as gifts or
inheritance?
Ms. Schapiro. I don't think we have made any decision about
that. It is certainly something we will look at.
Mr. McHenry. If you could comment on that for the record.
Ms. Schapiro. Sure.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
And the increase to the registration threshold for banks
from 500 to 2,000 shareholders, it failed to include S&L
institutions, so will the Commission correct this apparent
oversight?
Ms. Schapiro. Well, this is an issue I have spoken with a
number of members of Congress about and our staff has met with
the Community Bankers Association, and we are in the process
right now of trying to understand the similarities and
differences, frankly, between thrift and bank holding companies
so that we can understand, for example, what types of reports
thrifts file, as banks do, with their regulators, whether
shareholders have access to them. We are also talking with the
OCC about that. So it is an issue that is still open. I
understand the deep interest in it.
I will say that we have done the research to say that we
believe there are about 114 thrift and S&L holding companies
that are registered right now under the Exchange Act, and of
those about 86 have fewer than 1200 shareholders of record and
could delist. So given that large a universe, I think we
probably need to approach this through rulemaking, rather than
through a one-off exemptive process or something. But it is
very much on our radar right now.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Okay. Thank you. I appreciate that and I
appreciate your willingness to comment on that.
Then I would be remiss if I didn't ask about money market
funds. And I know you have made enormous comments on this, but
we are talking about a $2.5 trillion industry, so there is
strong opposition from the industry, as well as some State and
municipal treasurers, as well, and what that would do to
liquidity, especially in this time where we are looking to what
is happening in Europe and the implications that that obviously
has on world markets and liquidity in the world market. So I
would give you an opportunity to comment, please.
Ms. Schapiro. I would be happy to. And as you have rightly
pointed out, I can talk for a very long time on this very
subject because I feel very strongly about it.
The American taxpayer was on the hook when the Reserve Fund
broke the buck in the form of a guarantee of money market
funds, which at that time were over a $3 trillion industry in
the United States, and my view is the American taxpayer should
never be put in that position again. One way to ensure that is
to try to deal with the structural weaknesses that exist in
money market funds in a way that allows their value to actually
float to reflect the value of the underlying securities, just
like any other mutual fund, so this event of breaking the buck
is not a monumental event that causes people to run for the
doors.
And that is the second weakness, is that as the value of a
money market fund moves towards $0.99, away from the true $1.00
value, there is a huge incentive to get your money out at $1.00
and leave the losses concentrated in those slower moving small
business and retail investors who are left in the money market
fund, and the potential to create a panic is extraordinary.
In 2008, when Reserve broke the buck, within a matter of a
couple days $300 billion was pulled out of money market funds,
and it was really only stopped because the Treasury and the Fed
stepped in with a guarantee program and a liquidity facility,
and I think before we have another crisis, I hope we never do,
but in the event we do, I think it would be wise for us to have
taken the steps to bolster the resiliency of money market funds
to withstand or to prevent runs. They are very valuable tools.
They are used by retail investors, by businesses, by State and
local governments, as you pointed out, and we think they can be
made stronger and better by either having a small capital
buffer to absorb those small variations in price or to have
their value actually float.
Mr. McHenry. So the Commission has a 337-page proposal, as
we read, I believe it was yesterday in Bloomberg, I believe. So
the staff proposal, did it go through the economic analysis?
Ms. Schapiro. This is a proposal to the Commission, so
nothing has been made public or published, but it contains an
extensive economic analysis, yes.
Mr. McHenry. Okay, it does. And it is an either or, either
float the nav or hold more capital and curb redemptions?
Ms. Schapiro. Those would be choices that funds could
choose between.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Okay. And from what we have heard and
read, there is not a unity of thought on the Commission quite
yet.
Ms. Schapiro. Not quite yet. And I am ever the optimist,
and now that they have a document to look at and obviously it
is going to take a little time to read it and absorb it and
have conversations with the staff about it, we will see where
we go from there. But I am optimistic that people will think
that this is something that needs to be publicly aired and
discussed and debated.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Quigley, if you have any final comments or any
final time you would like.
Mr. Quigley. I thank you again for your service and
appreciate your coming back again and again.
Mr. McHenry. And two final things of note. Would you be
willing to come back in September and give us an update? We
will be happy to work with your schedule. We know you obviously
keep a very hectic and busy schedule, and we do appreciate your
willingness to submit to congressional oversight.
Ms. Schapiro. Of course, I am more than happy to come back.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. I appreciate it. And again, I have
said this a number of times, but I do appreciate your public
service and I do appreciate your willingness to be open and
transparent and engage in this conversation, this discussion.
To that end, I would love to give you any opportunity to
address anything that I have not raised or any comments or any
corrections or additions you would like to make.
Mr. Quigley. Although that would be hard to imagine.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Schapiro. I can't think of anything. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. Look, I deeply care about this and
the work that the SEC does. I want to make sure it is done
correctly and the American people know what is happening in
this process so there is some certainty in the marketplace
about the process, the procedures of the SEC.
And the final comment I would make to the ability to raise
capital in this Country is that entrepreneurs are waiting for
these opportunities that will come out of the rulemaking that
you are undertaking. Your work is important and it has an
enormous impact on large and small businesses and economic
growth, and entrepreneurs are waiting, and we are certainly
interested in the work you are doing and certainly appreciate
your willingness to work with the public and work with
interested parties, get their feedback and make sure that these
rules are done well.
So thank you for your testimony. Thank you for being here
today.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:53 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


