- AMERICA'S INNOVATION CHALLENGE: WHAT OBSTACLES DO ENTREPRENEURS FACE?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AMERICA'S INNOVATION CHALLENGE: WHAT OBSTACLES DO ENTREPRENEURS FACE?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TARP, FINANCIAL SERVICES
AND BAILOUTS OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROGRAMS

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 2, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-92

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

71-965 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services and Bailouts of Public and
Private Programs

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire,      MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Minority Member
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               PETER WELCH, Vermont
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JACKIE SPEIER, California
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on November 2, 2011.................................     1
Statement of:
Koester, Eric, co-founder and CEO, Zaarly, Inc.; Lonna J.
Williams, CEO, Ridge Diagnostics; and TSVI Goldenberg, CEO,
eemRa......................................................     9
Goldenberg, TSVI.........................................    30
Koester, Eric............................................     9
Williams, Lonna J........................................    18
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Goldenberg, TSVI, CEO, eemRa, prepared statement of..........    32
Koester, Eric, co-founder and CEO, Zaarly, Inc., prepared
statement of...............................................    12
McHenry, Hon. Patrick T., a Representative in Congress from
the State of North Carolina, prepared statement of.........     4
Williams, Lonna J., CEO, Ridge Diagnostics, prepared
statement of...............................................    21

AMERICA'S INNOVATION CHALLENGE: WHAT OBSTACLES DO ENTREPRENEURS FACE?

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services and
Bailouts of Public and Private Programs,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:33 a.m. in
room 2203, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick T.
McHenry (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives McHenry, Amash, Meehan, Guinta,
Maloney, Quigley, and Yarmuth.
Staff present: Will L. Boyington, staff assistant; Molly
Boyl, parliamentarian; Peter Haller, senior counsel;
Christopher Hixon, deputy chief counsel, oversight; Hudson T.
Hollister, counsel; Rebecca Watkins, press secretary; Jeff
Wease, deputy CIO; Jaron Bourke, minority director of
administration; Adam Koshkin, minority staff assistant; Jason
Powell, minority senior counsel; Brian Quinn and Davida Walsh,
minority counsels; and Rory Sheehan, minority new media press
secretary.
Mr. McHenry. The committee will now come to order.
This is the Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services and
Bailouts of Public and Private Programs. Today's hearing is on
America's Innovation Challenge: What Obstacles Do Entrepreneurs
Face?
It is the tradition of this subcommittee to begin with the
Oversight and Government Reform Committee's Mission Statement.
We exist to secure two fundamental principles. First,
Americans have the right to know that the money Washington
takes from them is well spent. Second, Americans deserve an
efficient, effective government that works for them.
Our duty on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee
is to protect these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to
hold government accountable to taxpayers because taxpayers have
a right to know what they get from their government.
We will work tirelessly in partnership with citizen
watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American people and bring
genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy. This is the mission
of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee.
I will recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
Over 2 years into an economic recovery, America's labor and
capital markets continue to face unprecedented challenges.
Nearly 14 million Americans remain officially unemployed, an
additional 11 million underemployed, and small businesses
continue to struggle to access capital despite endless numbers
of government initiatives. Fixing our capital markets and
economy will not occur overnight, nor will it be achieved with
more government regulation.
Today's oversight hearing serves as part two in our capital
formation series, examining government barriers to small
business, capital formation and growth. The origin of these
barriers to capital formation rest in two major Federal
securities laws: the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, they have not been substantially updated
since a gallon of gasoline cost 10 cents, 31 percent of
American households had a telephone, and the national debt was
just $22.5 billion.
Today, gas prices are 35 times that per gallon and nearly
every American owns a phone. In fact, most households have
access to the internet in their pockets. The national debt,
well, that is maybe for a different hearing.
While the comparison of then and now is nostalgic, the
ramifications of not modernizing our securities regulations
have led to registration and reporting requirements so onerous
and costly that small companies have great difficulty raising
capital.
For instance, if a startup company offers an equity stake
to investors through a medium like Facebook or Twitter, it is
presumably in violation of SEC regulations for such
communication and offerings. However, soliciting money for
one's favorite charity or political candidate, it is perfectly
legal using the internet medium and that is clearly saying
something is wrong. When politics exceeds where business is,
there is something wrong culturally with that.
Since September when this subcommittee had its first
hearing to address barriers to capital formation, the House
Financial Services Committee approved four pieces of
legislation with bipartisan support that will modernize SEC
regulations to promote rather than hinder small business access
to capital financing. The full House is expected to vote on all
four of these this week.
The Small Company Capital Formation Act of 2011, sponsored
by Congressman Schweikert of Arizona, would authorize the SEC
to exempt from registration any class of securities so long as
the 12-month aggregate offering does not exceed $50 million.
Congressman Himes of Connecticut sponsored legislation to
raise the bank shareholder threshold for SEC registration from
$500 to $2,000. The SEC has neglected to update this threshold
for nearly 50 years.
The Access to Capital Job Creators Act, sponsored by
Congressman McCarthy of California, removes a regulatory ban
that prevents small, privately held companies from using
advertisements to solicit investors.
Last, my legislation, the Entrepreneur Access to Capital
Act, which I introduced a few weeks ago, removes SEC
restrictions on crowd funding to allow entrepreneurs to raise
capital from everyday investors. This legislation simply
extends the same characteristics of crowd sourcing or crowd
funding today that is limited to the realm of charities and the
arts through online communication social networking. This would
allow small businesses and innovators to raise capital.
Already, this is prevalent in Europe and Asia and has
proven that broadening communication and investment
capabilities between investors and entrepreneurs can have a
positive impact on capital formation, the lifeblood of our
economy.
Each of these bills strengthens the mission of the SEC to
protect investors, maintain fair, orderly and efficient markets
and facilitates capital formation. Federal and State regulators
remain empowered to fight deceit, misrepresentation and other
fraud in the sale of securities.
This is an important piece. This key mandate for investor
protection in each capital formation bill is why all four drew
broad, bipartisan support from Members of Congress on both
sides of the aisle and marketplace participants. While the
bills approved by the House Financial Services Committee serve
as a solid first step, there is more to do. That is what this
hearing is about today.
I look forward to the SEC to complete its review of
regulatory burdens on small business capital formation, which
they have pledged to do, including the exemption of credit
investors and employees from outdated 500-shareholder cap
limitations.
Today's witnesses serve as real life examples of businesses
that face barriers when raising capital and would benefit from
simple, modern updates to SEC regulations. I am interested to
hear what each of you have to say about the various bills
before Congress and the additional ideas that you have for
businesses that face the challenge of raising capital and the
immediate effects it would have from responsible securities
laws and what the SEC can do to protect investors and increase
access to capital. This was a very important note in order for
us to reduce the unemployment rate and get people working
again.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Patrick T. McHenry
follows:]

Mr. McHenry. With that, I recognize Mr. Quigley of
Illinois, the ranking member.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing and for your recent bipartisan work to spur
capital formation for startup businesses through crowd funding
legislation.
I thank our witnesses for being here today.
We recognize that the number one priority of this Congress
has to be lowering the 9 percent unemployment rate. For
businesses to expand and hire new workers, they need capital. A
July 2010 report by the Chamber of Commerce states ``Clearly,
any strategy to jump start the economy must have a robust small
business component that allows entrepreneurs to access capital
and retain existing cash-flow from operations in order to
start, grow and expand their enterprises.''
That is why I am pleased to see that both President Obama
and Chairman McHenry have found common ground on the idea of
crowd funding. To the extent that crowd funding can match ready
capital with quality investment opportunities, it will be a
success. The question should not be whether to allow crowd
funding but under what terms it should move forward and what
other ideas we should consider.
After exploring crowd funding with the help of expert
testimony, at our September 5th hearing, I am encouraged that
many of the potential problems with crowd funding were
addressed when the chairman's legislation was taken up by the
Financial Services Committee.
Still, some issues remain. For example, there are
legitimate concerns that exempting crowd funding from
securities regulation would open or expand opportunities for
fraud. Just as water standards keep our water safe to drink,
financial regulations protect us against unsafe financial
products.
Crowd funding might also expose ordinary investors to a
level of risk that is unacceptable and not accompanied by
standard registration and disclosure. We have to be careful to
ensure that investors fully understand the risk of investing in
these financial products.
There is also the issue of State preemption. We have to
carefully consider what role State securities administrators
should play in managing fraud concerns and maintaining the
integrity of the securities market.
Finally, although I think it is wonderful that we are
exploring crowd funding as one way to encourage business
innovation in this country, an important point to remember is
that crowd funding is not a panacea for the state of the U.S.
economy, job growth or even the capital needs of small and
startup businesses.
The challenges facing small businesses and entrepreneurs in
the United States are varied and so too should be our
strategies. For example, Ms. Williams, as I understand it, will
testify about how her business' initial achievements were made
possible through small government-sponsored grant programs such
as the Small Business Innovation Research Program.
I hope that all of our witnesses can touch on how a multi-
pronged approach to capital formation can reach the most
potential entrepreneurs. I also hope they can help us explore
how the strategies the President laid out in his Jobs Act will
help small business and entrepreneurs overcome some of the
obstacles they are facing and spur American innovation.
I thank the chairman again for calling this timely hearing
and I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the ranking member. Members have 7
days to submit opening statements for the record.
I will now recognize the panel. Our first panelist today is
Mr. Eric Koester who is the chief operating officer and co-
founder of Zaarly, which is a Web site. Ms. Lonna Williams is
the chief executive officer of Ridge Diagnostics. Dr. Tsvi
Goldenberg is the chief executive officer of eemRa.
Without objection, I ask unanimous consent that the panel
may each have 6 minutes for their opening comments.
I will now recognize Mr. Koester. If you could summarize
your opening statement, you have 6 minutes. Then we will have
plenty of time for questions.

STATEMENT OF ERIC KOESTER, CO-FOUNDER AND CEO, ZAARLY, INC.;
LONNA J. WILLIAMS, CEO, RIDGE DIAGNOSTICS; AND TSVI GOLDENBERG,
CEO, eemRa

STATEMENT OF ERIC KOESTER

Mr. Koester. Good morning, Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Quigley and members of the committee.
My name is Eric Koester and I am one of the co-founders and
the chief operating officer of Zaarly, a real-time, online
commerce marketplace.
Zaarly represents an early success story of our innovation
economy, having been formed just this past March, launched the
product in May, added over 100,000 users just this past summer,
and hired 30 employees with hopes of hiring more.
This past month, we were able to announce that we had
raised venture capital funding and were fortunate to add Meg
Whitman to our board, who we hope can help us take this product
from early adoption to mass scale.
I hope to provide a bit of a unique vantage point to the
challenges faced by entrepreneurs because of my background.
During my career as an attorney specializing in advising
entrepreneurs, small businesses and startups, I was able to
work with hundreds of entrepreneurs across dozens of
industries. Then I too followed the allure of the American
dream and left the practice of law to launch my own company,
Zaarly.
As a result of these experiences, I think I do have an
insight to the challenges faced by today's entrepreneurs.
Today, my testimony will focus on three key areas: one, what
are the key challenges broadly faced by today's entrepreneurs;
two, an examination of the broad landscape that is facing
today's entrepreneurs and small business owners; and finally,
how some enhancements to today's regulatory scheme can help aid
entrepreneurs.
The first question is what are the overall key challenges
faced by some entrepreneurs today? I think the important one
discussed by this committee today has to do with fundraising
and opportunities to get access to capital.
The second one is really an access to talent. Zaarly has
hired 30 new employees just this past year and if I had the
opportunity to hire 10 more qualified engineers, I certainly
would. I think this can be addressed in a number of different
ways, but I do think looking at opportunities for immigration
reform and continuing to invest in education, sciences and more
innovation opportunities will help that.
The third opportunity and challenge faced by small
businesses and entrepreneurs is streamlining the paperwork, the
formation in the regulatory scheme that we face.
The fourth is an open and free internet, cell phone and
data opportunity and access to those resources.
Finally, I think the largest challenge we as entrepreneurs
face is the general challenges of operating a business, getting
more customers and making them love our products.
Starting a business is obviously never easy. There are
thousands of ways for businesses to misstep from team dynamics
to market forces to the inability to find financing. The
reforms being discussed by the committee will not necessarily
make starting or expanding a business any easier. There are
still thousands of ways for businesses to misstep and thousands
of ways for businesses to fail.
However, the reason these reforms are important are that
they do allow another opportunity for businesses to expand and
potentially succeed, to find new sources of capital, to raise
additional cushion to hire more employees, or provide an
additional runway for the business model to be expanded. By
providing these additional avenues to access to funds this is
the opportunity I think businesses will now have to expand and
grow.
What are the key challenges faced by entrepreneurs and
business founders today that are different from the days when,
as Chairman McHenry noted, gas was 35 cents a gallon? My time
advising entrepreneurs and small business owners has been
important in noting my views. Just as important, I have been
fortunate to learn firsthand in the founding of Zaarly what
some of those challenges are.
The first lesson about today's landscape is that starting a
business is now cheaper than ever before, although there is not
an easy way to start a business without access to some capital.
Today, businesses, with the help of technology, have been able
to be started for as little as $5,000 and expanded into tens of
thousands of dollars.
While technology has been able to reduce these costs for
things such as bookkeeping, advertising, data storage and
equipment rental, today's technology businesses and other
businesses still do require technology and capital to expand
those businesses and exceed beyond that early proving point.
The second challenge in expanding the opportunity for
businesses today is the explosion of the freelance economy.
Today, 1 of every 10 workers for companies is not an employee
of the company they work for. These individuals are independent
contractors, freelancers and individual entrepreneurs that can
help these businesses be more effective and efficient. This
trend is only expected to continue with careers such as
graphics design, software development, photography, writers and
artists, all expect to see their ranks grow by as much as 10
percent in the next 10 years.
These individuals are entrepreneurs and small business
owners who do require access to capital to grow and expand as
our economy needs them more and more.
The next new change in the landscape has been the emergency
of international competition that affects businesses even
earlier and earlier. Two examples of the innovation economy,
Groupon and Living Social, have seen international copycats pop
in as few as months after they launched their businesses.
Leading businesses such as Zaarly and those on the panel today
need to launch faster, quicker and gain access to capital soon.
Finally, I would like to note that it is important that
these innovation reforms be expanded to allow crowd funding and
similar tools. They eliminate the restriction of general
solicitation and they align with the current provisions to
expand the credit investor rules.
Ultimately, I believe these reforms will open new channels
for fundraising and allow businesses such as ours to succeed.
Thank you and I look forward to questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Koester follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Mr. Koester.
Ms. Williams.
The lights in front of you, I didn't point this out, red,
yellow and green, 1 minute remaining, the yellow light will
come on, and means to wrap it up, you have a minute to go. The
red light obviously still means stop.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF LONNA J. WILLIAMS

Ms. Williams. Thank you. I am very pleased to be here today
and recognize all of you.
I am glad to hear you are all recognizing the challenges
that entrepreneurs have today in sourcing capital. These are
very unique times for this. The things I will talk about today
really are in contrast to what you just heard because I am a
life sciences entrepreneur. We are creating products that are
medical products of which we need to train physicians to use as
well as go through the research and development stages to get
them to the useful, marketable tools for physicians.
I am Lonna Williams. I am the CEO of Ridge Diagnostics.
Ridge is an early stage life science company with a mission to
develop objective, diagnostic and therapy management blood
tests for neuropsychiatric disorders. Neuropsychiatric
disorders are things like bipolar disorder, schizophrenia and
very importantly, depression. Our testing also impacts the
medication selection and efficacy of those particular drugs
used for those disorders.
This climate has created what I call a near perfect storm
for medical product innovation. As you know, most innovation
comes from small companies in this country and many of the jobs
created are coming from small companies as well. We are facing
growing issues.
I am going to talk about Ridge but most medical companies
that are at the same stage as mine are facing these growing
issues like questionable hurdles at FDA, some are known, some
are not known; a very slow Patent and Trademark Office that has
prevented us from issuing a number of different studies and
publishing our work because it took 2\1/2\ years to get the
first Office Action from the USPTO, so it slowed down our
ability to move forward with our technology and our
publications.
Also there is an unknown path to reimbursement. There are
methods of getting reimbursement yet still some of it is
unknown. Ultimately, the real crux is the limited sources of
capital available to us to grow our companies. We can work
through just about anything if we have the time and money to be
able to do that.
A little bit about Ridge, who we are and what we do, all of
us that are engaged in our board of directors, our senior
management team are serial entrepreneurs. We have been engaged
in over 20 companies in the aggregate startup or have founded
or have managed since the mid-1980's. We have also had
experience in large, multinational companies. We all agree we
are facing a very unique time as it relates to our traditional
means of funding.
Ridge is providing blood tests that will create objective
diagnosis for depression. That really is useful for a variety
of reasons. First is serving the under served that don't have
access to specialty medical care. It will create a substantial
number of jobs because this is a very, very large problem we
are trying to solve. The scope and size of this is huge.
Twenty million adults suffer from depression in the United
States and 6 million teens very year. That is about 1 in 10
Americans that are taking antidepressants today. That is more
than cancer, cardiovascular disease and AIDS. With that number
of prescriptions being written, it is truly a health care
crisis.
We are finding in the last few years, antidepressants have
been at least in the top three of all prescription drugs
written in the United States and the single most prescribed
drug for people age 18 to 44. I have read a number of different
statistics but one in particular recently published was that
antidepressant use has increased by 400 percent between 2005
and 2008. With these numbers we are looking at this broad
prescription rate, yet no objective tools to diagnose
depression or to help choose or select the therapy that might
be the most effective.
Our system is paying for treatment, whether it be the right
treatment or not, but it is not paying for the early stages of
accurate diagnosis and prevention.
What we know is that 50 percent of all of the cases of
depression are missed by primary care physicians, so it is not
as easy to diagnose as the pharmaceutical advertisements seem
to make it. We know that 50 percent of those initial 200-plus
million prescriptions written for antidepressants fail.
We have a significant problem in financing a company and a
product that can add objectivity to this large, costly
situation we are facing. Traditionally, venture capital has
played a role in taking technologies like mine to the mass
markets. We start out in the early phases of our companies
being funded by angel investors, by friends and families,
ourselves, by government grant programs like the SBIR Program
from which we received a National Science Foundation Grant. We
also have a study on teenagers being funded by NIH.
Those grants are very helpful but they don't give us enough
capital, if you will, to continue on with studies and to make
our products commercially available and to be able to educate
physicians in a way where they can start adopting the
technologies.
Diagnostics are very, very useful. However, they are not
contributing yet to the high cost of care because although 60
to 70 percent of all decisions in health care are made by some
kind of diagnostic test. Diagnostics only account for 2.3
percent of all national health care spending and only 1.6
percent of Medicare spending. Having more diagnostics on the
market is going to bend the cost down curve by identifying the
right patient and perhaps providing the right drug at the right
time. It is not going to contribute to the overall higher cost
of care.
Last, I would like to say that because we are without
venture capital funds, it is important for us to look to other
means of capital. Certainly the crowd funding initiative is one
that could be very important for us but we also have looked to
large corporations because this is where our options have left
us.
That comes at a high cost because it does affect autonomy
and autonomy is where innovation comes from and it does affect
job creation. As you know, most jobs are created by small
companies. I have just a couple of facts I want to share with
you that I received from the Kauffman Foundation related to
this specifically. This is in a report they published in March.
From 1980 to 2005, firms less than 5 years old accounted for
all net job growth in the United States.
I will end by saying that we think these additional forms
of capital that will replace venture capital for companies like
ours will certainly help to change the curve related to slower
job growth, certainly will rapidly bring products that are
efficient and cost effective to care, especially to the
underserved, and will help to bend the health care cost curve
down as related to a disease area that affects 1 in 10
Americans.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Williams follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Ms. Williams.
Dr. Goldenberg.

STATEMENT OF TSVI GOLDENBERG

Dr. Goldenberg. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Quigley
and other distinguished House Members, it is a distinct honor
and privilege to testify before this committee.
I want to share with you my firsthand experience as an
entrepreneur and to help you understand the challenges
entrepreneurs face today.
For over 20 years, I have been a co-founder and executive
of a medical device company, biotech company and most recently,
a healthcare IT company located in San Diego. I am here today
to describe how difficult life is in the valley of death of
healthcare startup companies. I will compare and contrast my
experience funding startup companies 20 years ago to the
difficulties I am currently encountering.
Before I go to the present, I want to go back to the past.
My goal here is to convince you of the need for Congress to act
to create new opportunities for funding which is vital to the
advancement of medical technology and essentially create an
unfettered access for all Americans to their own medical
records.
One of the companies I co-founded in the late 1980's was
Advanced Interventional Systems, AIS. During the late 1980's,
the standard of care in cardiology for treating blocked
coronary arteries was to perform coronary artery bypass
surgery, a medical procedure performed to relieve angina and
reduce the risk of death from coronary artery disease.
AIS was a part of a new wave of companies that pioneered
coronary angioplasty. Angioplasty as you may know is the
technique of widening a narrowed or obstructed blood vessel,
typically occurring as the result of atherosclerosis. My co-
founder and I launched AIS with just $3 million series A
investment from VCs. This initial investment allowed us to hire
a core team who developed a catheter prototype for animal
study. There was also sufficient funding from this initial
infusion of funds for our first submission to the FDA
requesting permission to initiate clinical trials in several
hospitals.
Today, angioplasty is the standard of care of cardiology.
What was initiated and developed by many small startup
companies developed into a multibillion dollar industry.
Angioplasty has saved lives, lowered health care costs and
created many thousands of jobs.
This success would not have been possible without the
initial investment from a group of VCs who were willing to come
in at the startup stage with a long term view to success.
Unfortunately, this would not happen today. VCs have drifted to
a later stage safe zone and shy away from the risk associated
with the early stage of venture.
Let us fast forward to the present. The company that we are
trying to currently fund, eemRa, is a consumer-centered,
healthcare information, financial services portal. It is
designed to operate as a key element of the Health Information
Exchange or HIE.
HIEs were created by the High Tech Act to serve the
community which will demonstrate the future meaningful use of
electronic medical records exchanged among hospitals, clinics
and labs. eemRa's goal is to develop access for Americans to
all their health related information. As medical insurance
premiums are increasing, a growing number of Americans are
choosing high deductible plans to lower their medical insurance
costs.
Our mission is to act as a single service provider for
consumers that aggregates information from providers and
insurers. Our portal will enable the consumer to compare the
cost of healthcare services at different providers. For
example, if a patient needs a battery of blood tests, he or she
could go into our portal to compare the cost of getting the
blood tests at one lab versus an alternative. This is valuable
to those with high deductible insurance plans and the average
struggling American trying to make ends meet.
Yet, despite our innovative technology that can increase
patient control of their healthcare, eemRa faces funding
difficulties in this economic climate. If Congress were to pass
some of the bills being considered, we could start immediately
hiring 15 people with a $3 million investment to start our
operation. eemRa is not alone. The American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 has been producing large numbers of
discoveries and inventions. This is great. However, in order
for these discoveries to be developed into devices, drugs and
software, startup companies are needed to commercialize these
discoveries and inventions.
Large companies are unwilling or incapable of handling high
risk/high gain endeavors. Their complex hierarchies are unable
to move fast enough to provide the intense concentration of
effort needed to execute early stage projects.
As you can see from my example, the severe shortage of
capital funding has slowed the formation of startup companies
to a trickle of what it has been. The result is the American
people are being hurt by the lack of creation of small
companies which produces technology that increases the quality
of life while also producing high paying jobs.
Additionally, until ARRA discoveries are moved into
commercialization, the public is not really benefiting from
ARRA.
In closing, I encourage this committee and Congress to
promptly act to advance legislation that will allow capital to
flow to emerging companies and startups.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Goldenberg follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Thank you. I thank the panel for their
testimony.
The normal tradition is the chairman asks questions first,
then the ranking member and we go back and forth from there. At
this time, because of Mr. Quigley's schedule, I would like to
recognize him and I will then ask questions and go through the
normal path of Republicans, Democrats in that order.
With that, Mr. Quigley is recognized.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You all make a compelling case for trying to find new ways
to raise venture capital, capital to do all of the job creation
ideas you have brought forward. This is different, and because
you have gone through this I will start with you, Mr. Koester.
Here we are talking about the potential for less sophisticated
investors and at the same time, less regulation. We want this
to work and I am for this.
If you are in our shoes, how do you try to protect those
new investors in terms of the advice they might need? You are
used to more sophisticated investors perhaps who are doing more
due diligence. How do we protect them? What are your thoughts?
Then we will go to the other witnesses.
The President's suggestion was a maximum of $10,000. Some
have suggested a low of $100. What are your thoughts having
been through this?
Mr. Koester. Thank you. That is a great question.
I think that the key lesson that we can take is what has
happened with the information explosion the internet has
brought. I think even among sophisticated investors, we have
actually seen a dissemination of information that allows
investors to make better decisions among private companies
today.
A great example is the company called AngelList , which
actually assembles and aggregates startup companies looking for
financing among accredited investors. That tool actually now
allows you to take information, such as the profile of the
entrepreneurs being invested in, potentially their social
network blogging about them, and then also when one investor
has met with that team and validated they are a sophisticated
team or an investment they would make, that kind of information
is able to be assimilated into the reputation of that startup
company that then assists the other investors.
What I think really is happening is that by allowing kind
of the dissemination of this information across a number of
tools, I think you will start to see what is similar to
reputation on the Internet where now you can snap your fingers
and suddenly know if someone is qualified to take a loan or if
someone is qualified to essentially do work on your house.
I think that same level of information will start to be a
sign to startup companies so that we can take all this
information from a credit score of an entrepreneur to his prior
businesses successes, aggregate that information and give you a
risk profile on that startup company. I think you will see that
from the crowd funding discussion you had by allowing
entrepreneurs to essentially understand this sector which would
be the early stage crowd funding.
I think you will start to see some interesting innovations
that will allow reputation to help these businesses make those
decisions.
Mr. Quigley. Ms. Williams.
Ms. Williams. I agree. I think there are a number of means
that we can use to disclose information about our companies in
a way where we can provide enough information that these
reasonably informed investors can make a decision on their own.
Like they are making decisions going to the stock market
and buying something on the public market, they are making a
decision based on something that exists that they feel is
worthwhile.
We have 20-plus individual investors in our company now.
They are accredited investors but we provide them with a number
of disclosure documents, including our financials. We provide
bios on ourselves and have meetings with them. Some are over
the internet by Skype or something like that.
I think we can create some guardrails that are very
helpful. Whether it is done on the internet, which it should
be, I think we can securitize that, but disclosure I think is
really the key.
Dr. Goldenberg. I agree with my colleague. I would like to
add that I do see a role for the SEC. The SEC will simplify the
language, for example, and make it more readable by the average
person. I don't think the issue of sophistication will play a
role.
To give you an example, in the past, I have seen many
sophisticated investors, the VC or the Angel, and they made
mistakes and the ratio of success has now changed. Being
sophisticated or being experienced will not necessarily give
you a chance to a higher success.
I see the combination between simple rules from the SEC
which will be properly displayed on the Web site of the company
and the company sharing information and this is all about
sharing. I think the bigger issue is to force the company to
share information to make sure they are not holding back
because we have that issue even when you are private or public.
You have to share information. If you share all the
information, bad and good, I think that will eliminate some of
the risk.
Mr. Quigley. Very briefly, the bad actors out there that
can discourage investment by all, any thoughts on who should
play a role in helping investors deal with them?
Mr. Koester. I do think the market will solve that. I
ultimately think because of the reputation of these bad actor
investors, bad actor companies will be kind of disclosed. I do
think that solves a lot of it. I think even today for example,
when we were choosing which venture capitalist to go with,
there is actually now tracking that will basically give the
reputation of the venture capital fund and the venture capital
partner himself.
When we were making decisions on who to take as an
investor, we were able to look at that information on their
reputation and decide which of them would be a bad addition to
our team and the same when we are adding team members to our
company, we can look at background information as well as
reputation on tools like Linked In to find out who those bad
actors are. That information really does help empower the
individuals.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you for your accommodation, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the ranking member and I certainly
appreciate the work he has done in Congress for disclosure
which is to the panel's point.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Panelists, you all are basically serial entrepreneurs,
that's fair to assess you that way. In raising capital, my
legislation, which is the crowd funding idea, we originally
designed it to allow folks to raise up to $5 million in capital
from a large number of people. Individuals are capped at 10
percent of their annual income or $10,000 to make sure this is
low dollar, that folks aren't risking their 401(k). In fact,
they can't even access their 401(k) for this type of
investment.
Having said that, what is the marker for raising capital
that would be helpful in your experience, your past experiences
and what you are going through right now? What is that dollar
amount of capital you need to raise for crowd funding to be
effective or helpful?
Mr. Koester. I think it is a great question. Some of it
depends on industry. I do think we being an Internet mobile
company, we started raising $1 million to get our product
launched which was sufficient, but I do think to scale that
business requires more capital.
I do think my colleagues will discuss in the biotech and
medical sector that $1 million is enough to basically get you
started maybe but it is not enough to really do enough damage
to understand even if you have a product on your hands. I think
the $5 million is really a place where venture capitalists
actually will start to invest more. I think up to that $5
million is right now a lacking area.
Mr. McHenry. Pick a dollar amount, tell me a dollar amount,
$2 million, $3 million, or $4 million?
Mr. Koester. I think at least $3 million.
Mr. McHenry. At least $3 million. Ms. Williams.
Ms. Williams. Obviously the sector I am in, we do require a
little more capital than that. However, we have raised at Ridge
about $4.5 million over the last couple of years through Angel
money and the grants which got us to the point with our
particular technology to be able to commercialize at least on a
limited basis. We are receiving reimbursement.
We have had to work really hard for that $4.5 million
because we are getting it in $50,000 to $100,000 increments. I
think the $5 million number is a very good number because until
we get to a point where we can demonstrate some kind of
financeable milestone which takes out a lot of the risk factor,
we need to continue to raise money, so $5 million to me is a
really good starting point.
Dr. Goldenberg. I would agree with my colleague on the
right. We need at least $5 million in the medical device
biotech companies. Biotech is even more than medical devices,
so $5 million would be the minimum. If we do health IT, we
probably can do it with $3 million but I would go with $5
million.
Mr. McHenry. The higher amount. The concept of crowd
funding, would that replace Angel investors in your minds or
would that basically take you to a capacity to get venture
capital money or other types of financing?
Ms. Williams. In my opinion, I think it could be one or the
other frankly and it depends on the type of company even
whether it is in the healthcare sector. For example, Angel
money is available, so are the grants and loans to get you to a
certain point. Venture money today is not available, so I can
use $5 million that will significantly take me into the
marketplace where I can actually start generating my own
capital and bootstrapping from there.
In this situation, I think it would replace venture
capital. If the markets continue to be a volatile as they are,
and we are seeing this now, Angels are dropping off and holding
on to their cash. Individuals are doing the same thing. If that
is the case, crowd funding could certainly replace some of
those typical accredited investors that may not want to
participate at a higher level of investment but the folks who
might be a part of the crowd funding initiative not buying
stock on the open market because they don't want to be in the
stock market.
Mr. McHenry. Do you think that crowd funding could be
competition to bring down the cost of capital from Angel
investors?
Ms. Williams. I think it certainly could be. In all cases
today, there is limited competition whether it is in the VC
side or the Angel side, that those of us raising money are
giving up a significant amount of the company for very small
amounts of money.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Koester.
Mr. Koester. Absolutely. The reality of what this does is
it allows another avenue which essentially creates more
competition for these companies. I think what has been
noticeable by this company AngelList that I think has started
to mass market the Angel investment space is by literally
creating competition in disclosing information across these
companies you create better value for the companies that are
going to succeed, you windup increasing the amount these
companies are able to own and you give companies a new angle to
raise money they might not otherwise have had.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Koester, I was on Zaarly yesterday looking at what is
available in the Washington, DC, market, who is seeking to buy
and who is seeking to sell and I know somebody in Adams Morgan
is looking for a gently used iPad 2. Thanks so much and I
appreciate your testimony.
We will now go back to the normal process. Mr. Meehan is
recognized for 5 minutes. Then we will go to Mr. Yarmuth and
back and forth.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to the panel
not only for the work that you are doing and allowing us to
explore this issue but what you are doing out there to try to
create jobs.
I am stuck on a couple of things which I would like you to
tell me how we get out of. One, I am struck by the fact that
you are entrepreneurs particularly in the life sciences. I have
a lot of that in my area. I hear frequently about the legacy of
significant investment by big pharma or otherwise. The truth of
the matter is there is a library of work that has been done but
it sits. There is a lot of opportunity in there and yet we
cannot acquire it and get it down to where entrepreneurs can
actually take advantage of some ideas they would be willing to
move forward on. How do we unleash more of that? The second
question would be how do we prevent that? Maybe you're
answering by virtue of your testimony today.
I am struck by the fact that you keep saying because of the
VC market drying up and because of banks not doing loaning, you
are being pulled right back into the same circumstance in which
it is the big corporations you have to go back to, the very
ones that are too big and too slow to respond to a global
marketplace.
How do we unleash that $1.4 trillion that is sitting on
corporate balance sheets and do it in a way that can allow you
to put that money to work and reverse this tendency to keep
going back because that is where the money is but it slows down
the entrepreneurial spirit?
I will take it in order. Mr. Koester, as a recovering
attorney, I will let you jump into that first.
Mr. Koester. I appreciate that. Thank you.
The point you are raising about unlocking potential
sciences locked in various places really does come down to
capital. When I was an attorney, one of the things I did see
was that you have to pay to license that technology from big
pharma. I do think it all comes back to money.
Mr. Meehan. What can we do to require them to do more? I
guess these are proprietary things but sometimes they have had
government money invested in that. I am a told an awful lot of
good ideas that are sitting on the shelf. Do you agree with
that?
Mr. Koester. I think that actually part of it would come
down more to education, matching entrepreneurs with these
businesses. A lot of times these assets that are locked up are
unknown to the potential entrepreneurs and they are looking for
ways to disclose it. A smart, savvy entrepreneur who can figure
out where these ideas and this technology is might be able to
acquire it very cheaply.
I have seen that happen with a client named Clineta that
formed a business simply to go out and extract unutilized
resources from biotech companies and used those in turn to
commercialize those and sell them back.
Mr. Meehan. Ms. Williams, do you have some thoughts?
Ms. Williams. There are a lot of technologies that come out
of big pharma that don't meet their revenue hurdles, that get
acquired by smaller companies, biopharma companies and are
developed to a point where they see proof of principle and then
they sell them back to pharmaceutical companies. That is where
venture capital has facilitated that loop.
They have pulled the capital to allow the entrepreneurs to
further develop that technology and then sell it back.
Mr. Meehan. Why has venture capital money dried up? You
would suspect that people see opportunity in this environment?
Ms. Williams. You would suspect that. I have talked to over
100 venture capitalists in the last 18 months and what I hear
from them is that their resources, their sources of capital
have waned, so they now have to reduce what they consider their
risk profiles.
Instead of investing in Series A capitalization for
companies like mine, they are investing in later stage and what
they perceive to be less risk type companies. In fact, they
have gone so far as to buy stock in the open market because it
has been undervalued.
They have to protect their own investors, they have to
protect their portfolio companies. There is very little
liquidity in their portfolios now because of the lagging IPO
market, so they are stuck. They can't make new investments for
the most part or they are not willing to. That is why it has
dried up for early stage companies.
Your comment is a good one. There is a lot of pent-up
technology sitting there that could be very useful but not
useful enough that it is addressing the masses. Without access
to capital, available moneys, it is not going to come out of
big pharma or any other corporation.
Mr. Meehan. Dr. Goldenberg, do you have any thoughts?
Dr. Goldenberg. First of all, I would like to clarify that
one way to start companies is not normally our ideas. We
basically would go to a university in San Diego, the University
of California San Diego, and that is where we get our idea, our
discoveries. We basically package it and put in a business
plan, do the planning and then go out and talk to the VC.
We ask the same thing talking to the VC that they basically
prefer to be later stage for a simple reason, because they are
afraid of the market. If they invest in a small startup right
now, they have to come multiple times until they take it IPO.
The IPO market doesn't exist right now. For them to invest,
they get stuck with an investment, and go to their limited
partners and say, I have no exit scenario for you.
Mr. Meehan. Because there is nobody coming behind that is
making an investment?
Dr. Goldenberg. No, because there is no public market for
new companies. Private companies do not go public right now.
The stock market is structured in a way right now that there is
no issues of new companies.
Mr. Koester. The one point to that is the hearing in May
talked about second market which can be secondary markets, the
semi-public market where you have certain disclosure
opportunities. I think that is what is being addressed by the
500 shareholder limit increased.
Fundamentally, we hope that does allow more companies such
as Zaarly when it does advance to a further stage that we can
do a non-fully public sale but we can sell to sophisticated
investors in an open market that is constrained, so it is not
public entirely but it is constrained in a way.
I think that addresses that and I do think that is an
important step in this process and why I am still supportive of
the 200 limit because it does address that ill liquid market
right now.
Dr. Goldenberg. If you open the public market, the VC will
come back. The VC are not bad people, it is a risk versus gain.
That's one point.
The second point, you mentioned the $1.3 trillion, one way
of unlocking that money is some tax break. If you go to big
pharma and tell them for every dollar they invest in a biotech
with an idea or without an idea, they get a tax break off their
taxable income or revenue, that may be looked as a good
investment because what big pharma wants to do is increase the
pipeline of drugs. Right now they don't invest that much in
biotech because they like to keep the cash for themselves for
rainy days. If you give them a tax break, you meaning Congress,
they may unlock their money.
Mr. McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Yarmuth is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the panel for the testimony. It is a very
interesting discussion.
I have the background of having been involved in the
startup of a number of ventures, some successful, some not so
successful because that is the way the world works. I am
familiar with many of the issues and challenges that you face.
I am intrigued by the whole notion of crowd funding. I
think it has enormous potential. I also think there are
enormous opportunities for mischief in this area. We know that
any time we create some kind of new business technique, there
are those out there who want to take advantage of it for
purposes other than which it was intended. I am concerned about
the regulation.
The chairman asked what kind of monetary limit you would
think would be appropriate. If we were to lift the 499 limit on
number of investors, do you have any sense of what a manageable
amount would be and something that would still retain some kind
of element of security?
Mr. Koester. I think the current proposal that has a broad
base of 2,000 and includes certain individuals as credit
investors and employees does allow you to solicit from a broad
enough pool. I think fundamentally as executives of companies,
2,000 shareholders is something I cannot fathom to manage.
However, I do think if the decision is to close the company
or to have 2,000 shareholders and I believe in the idea, I
would absolutely take 2,000 shareholders and not sleep because
I do think it is one of those things that ultimately
entrepreneurs like us believe in our vision so much that we are
willing to do what it takes. If that means manage 2,000
shareholders, then that is what we do.
Mr. Yarmuth. I think Ms. Williams mentioned the issue of
how much equity is given up in some of these deals particularly
with venture capital and that is always going to be in the
equation. If you had your absolute ideal situation for getting
money any way you could get it, what way would be preferable?
Would it be selling equity, just having access to affordable
loans? What would be your preference?
Ms. Williams. I think I would probably look to a variety of
different sources. I think selling equity would be one. You
look for that, not just for money, but you look for it for
expertise, for assistance with other areas of business. To me,
that is not necessarily a bad thing.
I would like to see that happen in a way where you are not
giving up the majority share of your company to be able to gain
expertise. I think loans would be fantastic. Those are pretty
much unavailable to us today.
Mr. Yarmuth. The cost of borrowing money, if you could get
it, the interest rates now are far lower than the cost of the
equity you would have to give up?
Ms. Williams. Yes.
Mr. Yarmuth. Which leads me to the next point, I have a
piece of legislation that I have introduced that would actually
direct the SBA to lend money to small businesses on the same
basis that we are lending it to large banks--in other words,
free. The idea if you have a certain track record, why not use
government funds to make those kind of loans. SBA doesn't want
to do that, I must confess, but that is why the legislation
actually directs them to.
Is this the kind of program you think might be helpful in
your situations, probably not in the $2 million to $5 million
range but $500,000 or so? You could get very low income
financing.
Dr. Goldenberg. I actually went to the SBA. We got so
desperate about 6 months ago and went to the SBA. We said we
started a company right here in San Diego and talked with the
head of SBA in San Diego and explained the situation. He said,
you need to go to a bank. We went to the bank and the bank said
something very simple. What is the collateral you are going to
bring me, how about your house? That is not the business we are
in.
As a startup company, medical device or health IT, I cannot
put up my house. In other words, the availability of free
money, when I say free money, I mean inexpensive money in the
form of a loan will not help me that much.
Mr. Yarmuth. Would not help you?
Dr. Goldenberg. Would not help me, not the type of company
we are.
Mr. Yarmuth. Because you cannot afford to pay it back.
Dr. Goldenberg. Because we have no collateral, we cannot
pay it back. We are not going to have revenue for 3 to 5 years
or we will have but it will not be where we can pay back our
loans, so we will go into default.
Mr. Yarmuth. One quick question because you talked about
research and a lot of other things for which funding is
threatened right now because of our current financial situation
as a nation. Do you think it is advisable at this point in our
future to cut funding for things like scientific, medical
research, education and many of the other things that would
help support either directly or indirectly the activities you
are in?
Mr. Koester. There is a shortage of engineers and
scientists for the technology industries we are in.
Mr. Yarmuth. Thank you very much. My time is up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McHenry. The Vice Chair, Mr. Guinta from New Hampshire,
is recognized.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to follow
up briefly on the SBA.
I think the SBA has a certain role to play in very, very
small businesses. I am not sure the SBA is properly
incentivized to assist the kind of companies you are looking to
build, grow and expand. I think the clearer way to do this is
to give you greater flexibility and greater opportunities to
identify your own private capital.
There are a couple of things I want to talk to you about,
Ms. Williams. You mentioned in your testimony a bit about
autonomy issues when getting dollars from larger companies.
First, can you expand on that a little bit?
Ms. Williams. Depending on what the transaction looks like,
it could be something as limited as a licensing agreement or a
strategic partnership. Today, to facilitate that, the larger
companies are taking equity in the company. They are not just
paying a licensing fee like they had in the past where you are
left autonomous. They are actually taking equity in the company
so they have some control over what it is you are doing.
It has gone so far for the most part and they are so heavy
handed because they can be that they are basically acquiring
the company. When that happens, they absorb the company into
their own infrastructure. That then reduces the opportunity for
job creation that would otherwise be realized by the small
company hiring and growing. It takes away the autonomy as it
relates to innovation because, for the most part, they are not
willing to take risks and invest money in new ideas. It affects
that whole job creation aspect as well. That is what I was
referring to.
Mr. Guinta. In my home State of New Hampshire, about 75 to
80 percent of our economy is generated by a small business
owner. That is defined as 500 employees or less. In New
Hampshire, it is even smaller. It is the lifeline and the life
blood of our local economy.
We are trying to attract more companies like yours into the
southern tier of New Hampshire and to the sea coast of New
Hampshire. One of the things I continue to hear again is the
lack of access to capital, the lack of choices.
I think someone on the panel mentioned we have a decline in
the number of IPOs in this country and on the New York Stock
Exchange. We have a decline in VC investment. We have a decline
also in Angel investment. There is a lot here that is shrinking
in terms of access. Some of that is actually going overseas and
those companies are being created overseas and those jobs are
being created overseas. Probably all three of your companies,
you are talking a minimum of a $60,000 job plus. These are high
paying, high quality jobs that we could be creating right here
in America if the access to capital issue is addressed.
There are three components. One, I think the chairman's
bill makes a lot of sense at $5 million instead of $1 million,
which is what the President is looking for. I think we have to
have the proper level of company disclosure, so individuals can
do their own research. I tend to believe in the individual
American, that they can make the right decision so long as the
bad actors are minimized by access to information. That makes
sense to me. Allowing an individual to invest in your company
provides you greater access.
The second component I want to ask about you touched on a
little bit is raising funds by issuing equity and how that
gives you the ability to defer payments. If you get a loan from
the SBA and your business plan suggests you are not going to be
making money until 3 to 5 years out, you have already
eliminated that option but selling equity provides you that
greater opportunity, does it not?
Dr. Goldenberg. That is correct. One way to look at equity
the way you describe it is that it is our way of printing
money. We basically give a piece of the company for getting
money in but that is some form of IOU for the future that we
will develop it and have the revenue and then they will make
much more.
Mr. Guinta. This is exactly what spurs the
entrepreneurship, the innovation and the ability to create an
idea and bring it to market. That is what we want to see
happening in our country with a 9.1 percent unemployment rate.
This is a critical component.
The other component that I am very concerned about is the
ban on general solicitation. Mr. Koester, could you talk a bit
about that, how that has affected your company and what that
would do if we lifted it. How could you get that capital
quicker and how you could get job creation quicker as a result?
Mr. Koester. I think the real challenge is that an
entrepreneur cannot use all the tools they can to generate
business to generate investment. For example, if you have a
presence on social media or write a book and say in that book
that you are seeking funding, you could actually be sanctioned
by the SEC. There are ways around those limits so it is more
form over substance.
I think it allows people to just have open disclosure of
information and we don't wind up having back channel
discussions in cloaked secrecy. I think it puts an open tarp on
things and for us, maybe our financing process could have been
shortened from a 9-month process down to a couple month process
if we could have opened it up and made it with open dialog.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you all very much. I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. We will begin a second round.
There are a few other things on which I wanted your
thoughts. We have a 500 shareholder cap. This was raised
earlier but I want to get your feedback on this.
It appears right now that allowing an unlimited number of
accredited investors to invest in your company is no longer
legislatively attainable at this moment, at least in the short
run. The cap will likely remain at 500 for the remainder of
this Congress unless the SEC acts. How do you feel about this
turn of events? How do you feel about that limitation? What
impact do you think that would have if we raised that cap on
your ability to raise capital and what that would mean for
jobs, growth and innovation?
Mr. Koester, we will begin with you and go across the
panel.
Mr. Koester. I think the challenge to the crowd funding
legislation you have introduced is there essentially becomes a
waterfall effect. By opening up crowd funding which may allow
me as a company to add 100 shareholders, suddenly now I only
have 400 left and I think we start opening it up to a broader
audience but then we also basically keep the cap on that
audience tight. I think those two need to be thought of as
orchestrated together because I do think when you open up the
shareholder base early in the company's life cycle, it winds up
limiting what you can do later on down the road.
Essentially for me as a business, were I to add 200 crowd
source investors to my company, down the road it would make it
challenging or me to use a tool like second market or to use a
tool that would allow me to not go over that cap and raise
funds in that way. I do think it is a challenge to have those
two not move in tandem.
Mr. McHenry. To be clear on this, my crowd funding
legislation has no cap, so that is the beauty of it. It is a
relatively small amount of capital you can raise, but it is
from an infinite number of people. These individuals are capped
by what they can invest annually. That was due to a lot of
concern about fraud, to make sure someone doesn't put up $1
million on a $1.5 million crowd funding raising venture without
having a clue. There is this concern for fraud and investor
protection. You wouldn't be subject to that. That I think is
one of the positives of it.
To this larger question, we basically have a 500
shareholder cap which includes credit investors, includes
connected people, employees, and those that are close
relationship individuals. It is a pretty limited group. To
remove employees from that calculation is helpful. To remove
accredited investors, would that be helpful? Would that be a
positive so you could have even pushing up to 1,000?
Mr. Koester. Yes.
Mr. McHenry. You mentioned you would much rather not have
to deal with 1,000 individuals. I get that. I am the youngest
of five kids. It would be easier to have a brother and sister
and not two brothers and two sisters, especially when they are
bigger than you. It is sort of difficult to deal with and
contend with. Do you think it would be helpful to remove that
accredited investor number from that 500 shareholder cap? Would
that help?
Ms. Williams. I think it would. They have kind of separated
themselves out anyway, so they are manageable as it is. If you
think about 1,000 investors, to me I think there might be a way
to create the mutual fund concept with those people so it
doesn't mean that me or my CFO are managing 1,000 people. It
means that I am managing an institutional vehicle or an
investment vehicle of one, three or five that might have 100 or
150 people in it. That way they can kind of form their own
opinions and that would come to me in the form of five opinions
instead of 500 opinions. I think there are ways of making that
manageable for the entrepreneur.
Mr. McHenry. Dr. Goldenberg.
Dr. Goldenberg. If I understand you correctly, you want to
move the accredited investors out of the one available to
invest?
Mr. McHenry. Rather limit it to 500 shareholders, to remove
that accredited investor from that count or raise the count.
Dr. Goldenberg. Will they be allowed to invest in this
crowd funding?
Mr. McHenry. Two separate issues. Crowd funding is
available to every individual just capping the percentage they
can invest of their income. The question with accredited
investors and the 500 shareholder cap is a separate question.
Do you think it would be helpful to raise that number?
Additionally, would it be helpful to remove the accredited
investors from that count of individuals?
Dr. Goldenberg. The way I look at this crowd funding is it
is another form of IPO because you are going to have a large
number of investors. I have taken a private company public and
once you get used to it, it is manageable. The crowd funding to
me is another form of a public offering without really calling
it a public offering. Whether they give us the money now or
later, we will manage the same with the risk and the reporting
and everything, the disclosure. I would agree with your point,
the more you have the better.
Mr. McHenry. Limiting the choices for raising capital,
whether that is equity or giving away equity or getting a loan
or bootstrapping, there is a cost to that. Widening the array
of capital choices for you as an innovator and entrepreneur
lowers the cost potentially. It gives you more opportunities.
I have too many questions and I know your time is limited.
Ms. Williams, you said something very interesting which was
right now, you are going to the big corporations, Fortune 500
companies or Fortune 1000 and getting capital from them.
Describe for me the cost limitations, what that means beyond
your company, what does it mean to your ability to grow jobs,
to the ability of the economy to start moving? What is the
macro view of what this means?
Ms. Williams. It can mean good and bad. To me as it relates
to job creation to start, I think it is not going to help to
create more jobs for the most part. As I said earlier, small
companies really have the ability to create jobs where larger
companies don't prove to do that. With a company like mine,
they will absorb my company into theirs, so I will not be out
hiring and growing. Therefore, job creation will be flat as it
relates to me specifically.
I know I can create 300 jobs with under $10 million of
funding in just a few years at Ridge alone based on our
forecasting. To me, it is not the alternative I wanted to take
but it is the only choice I have right now.
They will take a percentage of the company--frankly, we are
negotiating that right now and what that is going to be--and
they will control the single largest market because they will
have licensing rights in the single largest area of use for
this particular blood test. I am not going to have access to
that. My shareholders will have a royalty revenue that will
contribute to their value but not the full value of product
sales. That is the balance we have to choose.
Typically the larger companies are very risk adverse. They
have their own array of things they have to manage and I
appreciate that. Therefore, they will be less likely to
accelerate innovation. They don't want to have their earnings
per share reduced for any reason, especially right now, and
want to make sure management is retaining their physicians, so
they are not going to make any mistakes. They will toe the
line.
I think it is going to create a flat environment and a job
reduction as relates to potential new jobs.
Mr. McHenry. When we talk about capital markets,
regulations coming from Washington, whether SEC or the laws we
have actively passed in this Congress, can you touch on what is
limiting your ability to grow and create jobs? Tell me the
limitations, the barriers and the problems. State the problem,
a regulatory problem or law, that impedes your ability to grow
and create jobs.
Mr. Koester. I think a lot of it has to come down to
Sarbanes-Oxley. I think that has slowed the ability of private
companies to go public. I think it has created a backlog within
the entire cycle. I think we have locked up innovation capital
exchange by having no clear exit valve for companies once they
hit a certain size.
A company such as Facebook or Twitter in other days should
have gone public by now. However, due to the fact there is an
increased burden on being a public company, you are seeing
those companies hold back longer than they would have before.
The backward effect of that is the shareholders of Facebook,
the venture capitalists who basically invested in them early,
are unable to get back that capital so they can reinvest in the
next wave of companies.
I think that creates a backlog of problems where you wind
up not having the flow of that innovation capital exchanged
back. What we need to find is more ways to spur companies to be
able to go public. I think there are multiple ways of doing
that. One is the public market and the second one is companies
like second market and similar that do allow liquidity. I think
the rules that limit liquidity of companies is where I think we
really see some backlog.
Mr. McHenry. Ms. Williams.
Ms. Williams. I would agree. I cannot put my finger on any
other specific things other than perhaps taxation which
obviously is not something that affects us today. I live in the
State of California but our laboratory and our research is all
done in North Carolina. We are trying to create jobs there.
There is a significantly different cost in doing business in
California than there is in North Carolina as it relates to
taxes and other things. That will be a driving factor and
probably is for a number of companies where they decide they
are going to incorporate and where they will develop their
companies.
Mr. McHenry. Dr. Goldenberg.
Dr. Goldenberg. We talked about raising funds but the other
obstacle is, for instance, in our case dealing with the Health
and Human Services. There is their Office of National
Coordinator. We tried to talk to them both about incorporating
our system in their program, the HIE, the Health Information
Exchange, and they kind of ignored us. They like to deal with
large hospitals, community projects but they shy away and are
not that interested in talking to small companies.
It would be nice to have them onboard and also recognize
the role we are playing in commercializing all this.
Mr. McHenry. If you had just one thing you wanted to say
about job creation, here is your moment. Go for it. Mr.
Koester.
Mr. Koester. Give us a chance and we will create a lot of
jobs.
Ms. Williams. I agree and I think we should go back to
talking about the loan opportunity because the State of North
Carolina and the North Carolina Biotechnology Association has
funded Ridge to the tune of over $500,000 over several years to
be able to do our research and have our laboratory in that
area.
Loans, whether they are securitized with some kind of
collateral or not, which is what has happened in the State of
North Carolina in that particular area because they are
offering entrepreneurs the opportunity is really a terrific way
to get jobs started. I think we need to go back and think about
how to construct loans, whether it be through SBA or others
where we are not giving up equity to be able to create jobs.
Mr. McHenry. Dr. Goldenberg.
Dr. Goldenberg. I think creating jobs is a great effort but
we are also creating high paying jobs. I think that is very
important and people forget about that. I think that should be
recognized.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney from New York is back. Before I recognize Mrs.
Maloney, I want to thank my colleague for working diligently on
improving the legislation I filed and working with me to amend
it and working in a very collaborative way to bring a bill that
has bipartisan support and allays a lot of the concerns about
fraud and the structure you worked with us on creating. I think
it will be very beneficial and I thank my colleague.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you and it will be on the floor
tomorrow and I will be there supporting it with you. I want to
credit the chairman's leadership for being open to suggestions
and working with us in a very creative way to make a good bill
a better bill. People say this Congress can't work together,
well this is one example where we are working together to help
get access to the markets and to help smaller companies move
forward, and to remove the barriers, in this case, to his
legislation on what is called crowd funding, which is the aim
of the chairman's legislation.
It is also, I might add, a component of President Obama's
Americans Job Act. The President is likewise supporting the
legislation. In fact, the President's legislation includes
several provisions to increase the amount of capital, small or
startup businesses can access, retain and put to good use.
While crowd funding would likely be helpful for some
startups, I would like to ask the panelists, wouldn't you agree
that crowd funding and related or similar changes to securities
law are not the only tools that we can have at our disposal to
encourage the startup of businesses and small businesses moving
forward.
I would like to give to you for your comment some of the
ideas that are put forward in the American Jobs Act which we
would like to get to the floor also for a vote. I hope the
chairman can help us move that legislation to the floor for the
vote. For example, the American Jobs Act plan we have proposed
cutting in half small business employer and employee payroll
taxes. This would put money right back into workers' and
employers' hands.
Another provision is temporarily eliminating employer
payroll taxes for small businesses that create jobs or give
raises for existing workers above the prior year's wages and
eliminating the payroll tax if that is accomplished.
Extending an immediate 100 percent expensing writeoff into
2012 to encourage businesses to invest in machinery and other
new equipment; extending tax credits for businesses that hire
workers who have been unemployed for at least 6 months; raising
the cap on many public offerings of small firms from $5 million
to $50 million this is actually on the floor tomorrow and is a
bill that likewise we have worked together on in a very
positive way. That will be moving forward. Another provision is
increasing skills-based training for youth and adults.
I would like to ask all the witnesses if you would comment
on these policies and whether or not you think they would be
helpful to new or small businesses and if you have another idea
you think could help get our economy moving, help businesses
grow and expand and hire more people. I would like to start
with Mr. Koester and go down the line to Ms. Williams and Dr.
Goldenberg.
Mr. Koester. It is great to see the support of small
businesses and early stage companies because I do think that
our goal is to grow into those large, mature businesses that
can create thousands and thousands of jobs. I think across the
board, any provisions that allow increased access to capital,
increased ability to attract and retain employees and an
ability to basically grow our business free of restrictions and
limitations are helpful across the board.
I also think one of the points all of us will face in the
technology sector is improvements to immigration will be an
important thing for us to be able to attract talent from around
the world. I think that is one of the things that the United
States has an incredible advantage at doing. I do think that is
another piece of long term sustainability.
Mrs. Maloney. May I comment on that and I would like to
bring it to the chairman's attention, I do have a piece of
legislation called the Startup Business Visa Application. This
would speed up visas for people coming to America sponsored by
other American businessmen who are willing to invest in their
startup idea. The money can come from either the immigrant or
from an American businessman and help move that forward.
As the chairman and the panelists know, we have a program
for investment where if an entrepreneur wants to come to this
country and invest $1 million, then there is a speed up process
to help them come and invest in a business that has been
acknowledged and supported by American business. They are not
using all those visas, so it wouldn't be new visas. It would be
taking the visas that already exist and allowing them to come
with capital.
I would like to request additional time to put forward
another idea that I think is critically important. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. This is great. This is bipartisan cooperation.
Many businesses have been started by really very few
people, one or two people with incredibly little capital. If
you look at the story of Steve Jobs, he started in his garage
with one friend and $100. A lot of businesses in America, in
fact, most of them, have started with an idea and an
entrepreneur trying to move forward.
I would like this committee to look at micro loans, the
small loans that are given out to one or two individuals in
small amounts. This country has supported micro loans in
foreign countries in many ways to help their economy. I think
it would be an excellent way to partner with the private sector
to create a micro loan area that could respond to some of these
young people who have a fine education but the jobs are not
there for them. Let us give them a helping hand to move
forward.
Mr. McHenry. Would you yield on the note of micro loans?
Mrs. Maloney. Yes.
Mr. McHenry. In doing all the research we did for crowd
funding, there are two interesting Web sites that are
available--prosper.com and kickstarter.com. Mr. Koester
mentioned that. Both Web sites do peer-to-peer micro lending
and it is absolutely fascinating the success they have.
Earlier when my colleague had to step to the other hearing,
Mr. Koester mentioned in essence you establish a reputation as
an entrepreneur and that reputation will enable your investors
to create a risk profile. Prosper is doing that. It is
fascinating to watch.
Amazon allowed individuals to write negative reviews about
a book. People said that was crazy, you are trying to sell
books, why would you do that. He said, I want people to come
back and buy another book, that is why. Likewise eBay, you have
individuals who exchange goods on eBay every day and they are
wonderful products. If you send the person a bad product, you
are done. You are not going to be able to sell your stuff on
eBay anymore.
Likewise, you can do one-on-one individual fraud but on the
internet, it makes it very difficult because you establish a
reputation which prevents you from getting away with it more
than once or a limited number of times.
I would yield back.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank the gentleman for his insight. I
would like to request a hearing on Kickstarter and prosper.com
to take a look at these smaller startups and the new
technologies. I commend you for moving forward with the crowd
funding. I think it is an exciting idea and excepting
democratic amendments to really protect investors more and put
more transparency out there, I think there is a lot of new
ideas out there with this new economy and with the high tech
economy. We should be looking at them.
I think the micro loans have been particularly successful,
particularly with women starting small cottage businesses. I
also think the young men and women who are out of work and
highly educated would be very good prospects to have an idea
and try to start working on it and give them a little support
to do it.
I would like to ask Dr. Goldenberg if he could respond to
micro loans and specifically the idea of a public/private
match. We are all in this economy together, we are all in this
country together. I would like an opportunity for successful
businesses to really give back to the young men and women who
want to follow in their footsteps of going forward with new
products, innovation, new ideas.
Dr. Goldenberg. I think micro loaning is a great idea and I
would encourage you to pursue it for a simple reason. It
provides new money. American ingenuity is everywhere in every
field, not just in our fields of medical technology or health
IT. It can see it everywhere you go. There is a small business
or small operator. I don't know the exact number for micro
loans but $10,000 to $25,000, I think would be a big step for
them to start working and producing something.
Mrs. Maloney. What about a public/private match, what about
involving the public sector? What is your feeling on that,
voluntarily?
Dr. Goldenberg. Again, I am looking at it from the point of
generating new funding. If you can do that matching and provide
more services or more consulting that will help start a new
business, I think that would be great.
Mrs. Maloney. Ms. Williams.
Ms. Williams. Yes, I agree. I think micro lending is a
valuable way to generate additional new businesses. I actually
participated in it outside the United States in a very small
way.
Mrs. Maloney. Excuse me. I have to run to another hearing
and give back my time. I look forward to working with you.
Mr. McHenry. You may finish your answer.
Ms. Williams. I am for micro lending.
Mr. McHenry. This is for the record and we are being
streamed online, so it is helpful to establish this record
because you are creating jobs. We in Congress may previously
have created jobs in our previous work but we are trying to
create the regulatory framework that frees you up and enables
you to be creative.
The final question I have for the whole panel. The online
guy, the woman who does biotech and the gentleman who does a
different form of biotech, it is great to have this cross
section, but do you think the lack of capital in the current
market, affects certain industries more than others and what
does that mean?
Dr. Goldenberg. As I am looking at the panel, one of the
things that struck me was that we are operating at different
time scales. In my world, before now, we talk about 3 to 5
years. My colleague, he operates on 6 months?
Mr. Koester. Twenty-four hours.
Dr. Goldenberg. Twenty-four hours. We are much slower and
we need to invest now in order to see the fruit in 3 to 5
years. We are here asking the Congress to keep that in mind. A
very large part of the American economy--I think actually the
largest part of the American economy--is drugs, devices. I
think it is approaching $100 billion or even more in sales per
year. Whatever you decide to do will have a major impact. Keep
in mind that the time to get there is not 6 months. That is
very important.
Mr. McHenry. Over the horizon.
Dr. Goldenberg. Over the horizon. We are operating either
with little revenue or have revenue but not necessarily
profitable. That is something to keep in mind.
Mr. McHenry. Ms. Williams.
Ms. Williams. I think we can bifurcate that to a certain
degree by saying what we do from a development and research
standpoint in creating these new medical products takes more
time. The dissemination of information about those products
once they have been proven can go quickly with the tools being
developed in the tech sector, so we can reduce the time that we
make these products available and we can educate physicians
online through Medscape and other ways of continuing medical
education where it doesn't require some costly sales rep
knocking on their door.
I think it is going to take us more time because we have to
do that credible research and make sure we are creating a safe
and efficacious product. We can disseminate that information
much more quickly and essentially catch up from that standpoint
with the technology sector.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Koester, in terms of the lack of capital,
does it affect one industry more so than others? For instance,
in tech there is perhaps this emphasis on apps, the sexy, cool
apps, the newest, greatest thing, is capital flowing whether it
is Ashton Kutcher or whatever, putting a lot of money in those.
You are actually in a more over the horizon perspective rather
than an app where you have a very short turn time. You are
actually building something that takes a little more time even
though it is still very brief traditionally?
Mr. Koester. Yes, that is a very good point. Our ultimate
goal at Zaarly is to create local commerce, local jobs. We have
seen almost 8 million truly local American, community-based
jobs and requests being generated from our tool. While it is
relatively fast, I think we also see a long time horizon and
hopefully spurring American jobs and hopefully keeping that $8
million that may never have otherwise existed in these
communities.
Fundamentally, I think it is incumbent on government,
corporations and the populace to support innovation. I do think
that the biotech and health sector does have a longer horizon
and I do think that access to capital may sometimes slow those
innovations that may not have mass market adoption. There are
technologies that may meet a need of a healthcare need that is
out there whereas they may not receive the funding because the
venture capital space isn't quite as willing to bet on a $500
million company versus a $5 billion company. I think that is
one of the challenges, helping those companies.
The other interesting thing about my industry is I think we
benefit from the investment the U.S. Government made in
telecom, the internet and those types of things. I think those
investments that were made in infrastructure wind up allowing
us to launch a business in a weekend. Were it not for the
ability to get the internet on your phone that comes from
investments made by the government and others, I don't think
our ability to launch this company would exist.
I do think those kinds of investments do have a huge impact
on our ability to launch technology businesses. I think those
types of investments in things like genomics, research, super
computers and those types of things that can speed up the
healthcare and biotech sectors are crucial.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you for your testimony.
Today is largely focused on capital formation and
regulatory impediments on capital formation but there are so
many other issues we have to face. Through the testimony today,
it is fascinating to hear no matter what we do to spur more
capital formation, businesses still have the challenge and they
can still fail. With a great idea, you can still fail.
The challenging environment today of getting consumers to
actually use your product still remains or getting your product
to the market, still remains, but we also need to make sure
that we are in a fruitful space for that innovation to occur
and the regulatory impediments that we can remove and relieve
from small businesses, that we actually take that on.
We clearly have to have infrastructure, educational
resources and the right investments and those constructs so
that can take place. We still are the largest economy on earth,
we still have wonderful opportunities and wonderful resources,
even though we are going through very challenging times right
now.
The fact remains that we can still get back to those good
days of real and strong economic growth and job creation and
get this unemployment rate down and give people choices and
opportunities.
Thank you so much for testifying today in particular about
capital formation and thank you for providing this committee
and this Congress your insight and experience. We certainly
appreciate that.
With that, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:12 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


