- HAS DODD-FRANK ENDED TOO BIG TO FAIL?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HAS DODD-FRANK ENDED TOO BIG TO FAIL?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TARP, FINANCIAL SERVICES
AND BAILOUTS OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROGRAMS

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 30, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-21

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-620 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services and Bailouts of Public and
Private Programs

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire,      MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Minority Member
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               PETER WELCH, Vermont
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JACKIE SPEIER, California
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 30, 2011...................................     1
Statement of:
Barofsky, Neil, Special Inspector General for the Troubled
Asset Relief Program.......................................    13
Massad, Tim, Acting Assistant Secretary for Financial
Stability and Chief Counsel................................    42
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Barofsky, Neil, Special Inspector General for the Troubled
Asset Relief Program, prepared statement of................    16
Connolly, Hon. Gerald E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, prepared statement of...............    99
Maloney, Hon. Carolyn B., a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York, article dated March 29, 2011........    66
Massad, Tim, Acting Assistant Secretary for Financial
Stability and Chief Counsel, prepared statement of.........    44
McHenry, Hon. Patrick T., a Representative in Congress from
the State of North Carolina:
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Various prepared statements..............................    72
Quigley, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, prepared statement of...................    10

HAS DODD-FRANK ENDED TOO BIG TO FAIL?

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 30, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services and
Bailouts of Public and Private Programs,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick T.
McHenry (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives McHenry, Buerkle, Meehan, Ross,
Quigley, and Welch.
Also present: Representatives Issa and Cummings.
Staff present: Michael R. Bebeau and Gwen D'Luzansky,
assistant clerks; Robert Borden, general counsel; Lawrence J.
Brady, staff director; Katelyn E. Christ, research analyst;
Benjamin Stroud Cole, policy advisor and investigative analyst;
Drew Colliatie, staff assistant; John Cuaderes, deputy staff
director; Adam P. Fromm, director of Member liaison and floor
operations; Linda Good, chief clerk; Tyler Grimm and Ryan M.
Hambleton, professional staff members; Peter Haller, senior
counsel; Christopher Hixon, deputy chief counsel, oversight;
Hudson T. Hollister, counsel; Justin LoFranco, press assistant;
Laura L. Rush, deputy chief clerk; Becca Watkins, deputy press
secretary; Kevin Corbin, minority clerk; Ashley Etienne,
minority director of communications; Carla Hultberg, minority
chief clerk; Lucinda Lessley, minority policy director; Jason
Powell, minority senior counsel; and Suzanne Sachsman Grooms,
minority chief counsel.
Mr. McHenry. The committee will come to order. Today's
hearing is entitled ``Has Dodd-Frank Ended Too Big to Fail?''
This is the Special Inspector General for TARP, Mr. Barofsky's
last day on the job, and he has had an eventful 2\1/2\ years.
It has probably felt like a lifetime. We certainly appreciate
your service and we appreciate you being here on your final day
on the job.
But as has been tradition for our subcommittee, we begin by
reading the Oversight and Government Reform Committee's mission
statement: We exist to secure two fundamental principles:
first, America has a right to know that the money Washington
takes from them is well spent and, second, Americans deserve an
efficient, effective government that works for them. Our duty
on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee is to protect
these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to hold government
accountable to taxpayers because taxpayers have a right to know
what they get from their government. We will work tirelessly in
partnership with citizen watchdogs to deliver the facts to the
American people and bring genuine reform to the Federal
bureaucracy.
This is the mission statement of the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee. It is also very similar to the
mission statement of inspector generals across our government.
Today's hearing will explore whether our largest financial
institutions--I will start by giving an opening statement, so
we will start the time now. Today's hearing will explore
whether our largest financial institutions are still too big to
fail. Despite passage of the Dodd-Frank Act and subsequent
financial regulations, specifically, we are concerned about the
ongoing perception that government bailouts remain an option
for poorly managed financial firms. The bottom line is that
2,300 pages, or over that, Dodd-Frank was supposed to end too
big to fail. As it turns out, Dodd-Frank has only reinforced
the bailout culture, perpetuated the moral hazard of government
intervention, and tipped the economic scales for a few at the
expense of growth and competition.
In his January 2011 quarterly report to Congress, the
Special Inspector General for TARP, Mr. Barofsky, outlined his
concerns with the lasting legacy of too big to fail. This
report detailed the unfair competitive advantage of certain
financial institutions with implicit government support.
Through inflated credit ratings and greater access to cheap
credit, these institutions receive benefits that crowd out
their smaller competitors.
Those findings were backed up by data from the FDIC, which
found the large financial institutions paid 78 basis points
less to borrow funds than their smaller rivals. This point was
not lost on credit rating agencies, who now take implicit
government backing into account when rating credit worthiness.
This funding advantage is the result of the market perception
that certain institutions are just simply too big to fail.
Dodd-Frank codifies open-ended ad hoc deal making like we
saw in the financial crisis of 2008. And if that was not
enough, Secretary Geithner stated to the Special Inspector
General in December 2010 that in the future we may have to do
exceptional things again. And he said this well after the
passage of Dodd-Frank.
The combination of an implicit government guarantee and
cheap money only reinforces the moral hazard that Dodd-Frank
failed to eliminate. Instead of taking bailouts off the table,
the Federal Government has given large institutions a special
preferred status. Last November voters delivered a very loud
message to Washington: they don't want their hard-earned tax
dollars going to any more bailouts. The American taxpayer does
not want their government in the business of picking winners
and losers.
We need to create a competitive lending environment where
small businesses can gain access to capital and thrive; where
they can feel confident in the credit markets and start
creating jobs again. By recognizing our Government's ongoing
willingness to bail out large institutions, we can begin to
have an honest conversation about ending too big to fail.
I am interested to hear what our first panel and second
panel have to say about this matter. On the first panel we are
going to have the Special Inspector General for TARP; on the
second panel we will have a representative from Treasury, Mr.
Massad, who is the Acting Under Secretary for Financial
Stability.
With that, I would like to yield the balance of my time to
the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Issa.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Patrick T. McHenry
follows:]

Mr. Issa. I thank the chairman for holding this hearing and
I thank the chairman for yielding his time.
I really just wanted to thank a unique individual. If there
is a wall of fame for IGs, Neil, you are going to be on it. You
have done an amazingly good job. I looked at your op ed this
morning and said, darn, he got the title we should have had. It
is entitled ``Where the Bailout Went Wrong.'' So I look forward
to hearing your thoughts on, regardless of good intentions of
Dodd-Frank and of the TARP bill, where we should learn from the
mistakes that probably were inevitable, but, due to your hard
work, they are very public, and we intend to address them one
by one. So as you go off to academia to teach and to write, I
hope you will consider an invitation to come back here exactly
that, an invitation, one, where we want your counsel in
whatever form it can be provided.
Again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing,
one of many in your series, and taking seriously the special
committee responsibilities for oversight. And again, nobody is
more a hero here than a great IG, and we have a great IG in
front of us.
I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the chairman.
At this time I yield 5 minutes to the ranking member, Mr.
Quigley, and, by prior agreement, he will share his time with
the full committee ranking member as well.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening this
meeting.
Again, I would like to thank our guest today, Mr. Barofsky,
for his work at SIGTARP. We appreciate all you have done for
us.
One of the lessons of the financial crisis is that the
government bears too much risk and taxpayers are left
vulnerable to huge losses. More importantly, if firms perceive
that taxpayers will cover their losses, then those firms have
an incentive to take even bigger risk. And as these over-
leverage firms grow in size, they can become too big to fail,
in effect passing all their risk on the taxpayers, who would
not allow a financial collapse.
TARP, which was passed by Congress and signed by President
Bush, averted a catastrophe, and while TARP will likely end up
as a net profit for taxpayers, we should not minimize the fact
that it exposed taxpayers to unacceptable losses.
Today we must continue to safeguard our financial system
against collapse. TARP did not create too big to fail, but it
did reinforce it. The Dodd-Frank law is an attempt to roll back
those perverse incentives that caused firms to become too big
to fail; it establishes stronger prudential regulation, closing
many of the loopholes that allowed excessive risk-taking; it
created a systemic risk regulator to oversee all financial
firms that are systemically important; most importantly, it
creates a special resolution authority for failing firms to end
bailouts and impose losses on shareholders.
Resolution authority's successive failure will be judged on
whether the market perceives it is a credible alternative to
bailouts. For me, this is the key question: Does the market
view resolution authority as a credible alternative to
bailouts? It is my understanding that implementation of Dodd-
Frank is still in its early stages. I am hopeful that the
result will be a predictable, credible, and orderly process for
unwinding failing financial firms.
Addressing the too big to fail problem is even more
important today than before the financial crisis. In 1999, the
five largest U.S. banking institutions controlled 38 percent of
all banking industry assets. Today they control 52 percent of
banking assets. To fix this problem, we need to ensure that
Dodd-Frank is successfully implemented.
I look forward to hearing testimony from our witnesses and
I yield the balance of my time to the ranking member of the
full committee.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Mike Quigley follows:]

Mr. Cummings. I thank the gentleman for yielding and I
thank the chairman for calling the hearing this morning.
Unfortunately, today's hearing represents a tragically missed
opportunity in the majority's refusal to grant the request to
invite Representative Barney Frank to testify before the
subcommittee. As the chairman of the House Financial Services
Committee throughout the drafting of the financial regulatory
reform legislation and as the current ranking member monitoring
the implementation of that legislation, Representative Frank's
expertise on the matters before us today is unparalleled. We
would have benefited greatly if we were able to hear from him.
But despite the disappointment in this subcommittee's
process, I thank our witnesses for appearing before us today. I
particularly recognize our Special Inspector General Barofsky
and I too commend you for a job well done. I want to thank you
for working with me the many times I bugged you to do reports
and look into things; I really do appreciate it. Your tireless
work has enabled us to better fulfill our role in ensuring
efficient and effective government oversight of the TARP
program and again I thank you.
In the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, we enacted Dodd-
Frank in order to set into place a robust regulatory structure
to end too big to fail. According to FDIC Chairwoman Sheila
Bair, the new requirements under Dodd-Frank will ensure that
the largest financial companies can be wound down in an orderly
fashion without taxpayer cost. Under Title 2 of the Dodd-Frank
Act, there are no more bailouts.
However, as Chairwoman Bair has said, and Mr. Barofsky and
others have acknowledged, Dodd-Frank will not work unless we
provide our regulators with the resources they need to make
full use of these new regulatory authorities.
Frighteningly, the budget proposed by the new majority
would effectively cripple the regulators. If we drastically cut
the budget of our agencies charged with carrying out this
important regulation, we will be paving the way for the next
financial collapse and we will never be rid of entities that
are in fact too big to fail, and I trust that Mr. Barofsky will
comment on that, the whole issue of the need to make sure that
these agencies are properly funded.
I am looking forward to the hearing from today's witnesses
and again, Mr. Barofsky, I want to thank you for all that you
have done. I know you are moving on to academia, but I know
that many students will benefit from what you have to say and
what you have learned, and we hope you will return to
government soon. May God bless you, and I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the full committee ranking member. In
response to requests to have Mr. Frank testify before the
committee, I also serve on the Financial Services Committee. He
is an ex officio member of five subcommittees on that
committee; he has been chairman of the Financial Services for
the previous 4 years; he is the ranking member of Financial
Services. He has every venue to speak about his law that he
passed.
Today is about the implementation of Dodd-Frank and whether
or not that has ended the culture of too big to fail or whether
or not it has propagated it. So we have two panels today. One
is the Special Inspector General who oversees the program; the
second panel is the Treasury Department, and they can, in
essence, have a full panel to themselves. In essence, we are
giving the minority a full panel. So usually that is praised,
but I certainly understand, in this atmosphere, it may not be.
But our first witness today is Mr. Neil Barofsky. He is the
outgoing Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset
Relief Program. Prior to assuming his position at the U.S.
Treasury, Mr. Barofsky was a Federal prosecutor in the U.S.
Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York for
more than 8 years.
Mr. Barofsky's last day is today. I know his staff is
sitting behind him. They are not smiling. I think they are sad
to see you go, Mr. Barofsky. We certainly appreciate your
service to your Government that you have rendered in the last
2\1/2\ years; we know it has been busy, it has been
challenging, and you have put more hours into government
service than you will ever be paid for, so we appreciate your
service to your Government, and in the interest of openness.
So, with that, it is the policy of the committee that all
witnesses be sworn in to testify. If you would please rise and
raise your right hand.
[Witness sworn.]
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. Let the record reflect that the
witness answered in the affirmative. Thank you, Mr. Barofsky.
So now we will give you an opportunity for your opening
statement. Your written testimony will be entered into the
record, but we would like to give you an opportunity to say
what is on your mind.

STATEMENT OF NEIL BAROFSKY, SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR THE
TROUBLED ASSET RELIEF PROGRAM

Mr. Barofsky. Thank you, Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Quigley, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Cummings. Thank you for
your kind comments and thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today. It is a privilege and an honor to testify
before this subcommittee on this, my final day as Special
Inspector General.
It is hard to believe that 2\1/2\ years ago there was no
such thing as TARP, no such thing as SIGTARP, certainly no such
thing as a TARP Subcommittee, and since that time we have seen
an historic outpouring and outlaying of Government funds to a
financial industry that was teetering on the brink of collapse,
accompanied by historic oversight.
The Emergency Economic Stabilization Act [EESA], which, of
course, created TARP, also created SIGTARP at Congress's
insistence, and I am proud to say that, since our inception in
December 2008, we have made great progress fulfilling the goals
set forth for us by Congress. By the numbers alone, we have
issued nine quarterly reports, 13 audits, secured civil or
criminal charges against more than 50 individuals, 18 different
defendants have been convicted of TARP-related fraud, and our
investigations have helped assist in the recovery of or
prevention to loss from fraud from more than $700 million,
making sure that SIGTARP as an agency will more than pay for
itself. As importantly, we have helped bring transparency and
accountability to a program desperately in need of them.
Treasury, through TARP, made a series of promises both to
Wall Street and to Main Street. Unfortunately, its track record
has been mixed. It has fulfilled its promises to Wall Street,
as reflected in the returns of record profitability of the
Nation's largest banks, but, unfortunately, it has failed to
live up to some of its promises to Main Street.
First, with respect to the promise to restore lending, such
an important part of any economic recovery, has gone
unfulfilled. When Treasury gave out hundreds of billions of
dollars to banks, it did so without any policy in place to
accomplish that goal, without any strings to require lending or
even provide incentives for it. Not surprisingly, credit
continued to contract throughout the financial crisis and well
into the recovery.
Second, the promise to preserve home ownership, such an
important part of the legislative bargain that Treasury struck
with Congress in order to get TARP passed, lies in tatters. The
original promise to modify up to $700 billion in mortgages that
Treasury was to purchase under TARP cast aside within weeks
after EESA was passed. That was replaced months later by a
promise by this administration to modify up to four million
mortgages for struggling homeowners. That promise too has
essentially been cast aside, replaced with the cold, stark
reality of a failed program that was poorly designed, poorly
managed, poorly executed, and will come nowhere close to living
up to that original promise.
Finally, after Secretary Paulson and then Secretary
Geithner told the world that they would stand by and not let
our largest banks fail, and demonstrated that they were ready,
willing and able to use the TARP funds to accomplish that, we
are left with a financial system with the largest banks that
are bigger, more concentrated, and even more dangerous to the
system than before the crisis.
We were then promised that through regulatory reform, the
era of bank bailouts would end, a promise that looks like it
too may very well go unmet because, notwithstanding the passage
of Dodd-Frank, the financial markets still perceive that the
U.S. Government will bail out the largest banks, with credit
rating agencies explicitly giving higher ratings to those banks
based on the assumption that, should they hit the rocks again,
the U.S. Government will come to their rescue.
As to the execution of Dodd-Frank, it still remains
theoretically possible that it will address the problems of too
big to fail. Treasury and the regulators were certain we would
give them the broad powers and authorities to take on the
largest banks. But these are the same regulators whose
incompetence and lack of foresight was described by the
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission as one of the causes of the
financial crisis.
And while Chairman Sheila Bair stands out as a strong
advocate for using the tools of Dodd-Frank to either shrink or
simplify the most complex financial institutions as necessary,
she also appears to stand alone as her term quickly winds down.
Without dramatic and quick action, I am afraid that this
promise too will be broken, with potentially devastating
consequences.
Mr. Chairman, ranking member, I thank you for the
opportunity to be here today. I also want to thank you and the
chairman of the full committee and the ranking member of the
full committee for your strong support over the years. At
SIGTARP, we would not have been able to accomplish nearly any
of our goals or our accomplishments if it wasn't for the
strong, continuous and, above all, bipartisan support from
Congress.
If we had received only support from one side or the other,
it would not have had nearly the impact that your uniform
support has been for our office, so I thank you. I also want to
thank the incredible men and women who work at SIGTARP for
their sacrifices, their commitment. They demonstrate all the
good that is in Federal workers, and it has truly been my
privilege and honor to get to work with them for the last two-
plus years.
So I thank you and I look forward to answering any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barofsky follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Thank you for your testimony. I recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
To initially start this questioning, you have mentioned in
your reports, you mention in your editorial today in the New
York Times that the objectives of TARP have been shifted
dramatically in the 2\1/2\ years since the creation of the
program. It is not evolving, but it seems like if they fail to
meet metrics they have set for themselves, that they change the
metrics. Can you elaborate on this?
Mr. Barofsky. It has happened far too often with this
program that when a goal wasn't met, rather than do what you
would expect in a good government program, which is you have a
goal, you set forth a plan or policy to achieve that goal, you
measure performance against that goal, and if you are not
performing you change the program, so make the necessary
changes to accomplish that goal.
Far too often in TARP it has been set a goal, adopt no
policy to achieve that goal, basically ignore it, try not to be
incredibly transparent about the progress toward that goal;
when you don't meet that goal, rather than change the program,
change the goal and then declare mission accomplished, program
a success, and move on. That has happened with the housing
program, certainly, and it has happened with a lot of the Main
Street goals, which have basically been written out.
Recently, in testifying in front of congressional oversight
panel, a Treasury official talked about these goals, these
incredibly important Main Street goals that were part of the
bargain, is why TARP got passed, and dismissed them essentially
a window dressing, just things to be taken into account. Well,
they were intended to be more than that, and those are some of
the broken promises that I discussed in the op ed and that we
discussed in our reports.
Mr. McHenry. Now, to go further on this, there has been a
discussion in recent days that TARP has been a success for the
taxpayers, that in dollars and cents terms it hasn't been a
huge negative. What are the negatives? What is the legacy of
TARP and our unprecedented intervention in the market?
Mr. Barofsky. Well, I think that there are a number of
areas where TARP fell short. First, of course, are the goals
not met, the goals that were part of the bargaining we just
discussed that were not met, and there is a cost to not meeting
your Main Street goals. One of those costs has been on the
impact of government credibility, and the bottom line is that
people don't trust their government, and part of the reason why
they don't trust their government today is because of the
bailout, because of the failure to meet its goals and, frankly,
because of the mismanagement of the program.
Second, one of TARP's greatest legacies is the two big to
fail problem. As I noted before, when the secretaries told the
markets we are not going to let these banks fail, this was
instrumental in one of the other positive aspects of TARP,
which is helping to prevent a financial collapse, but it really
exacerbated the problem of too big to fail; it was no longer
implicit, it was as explicit as it could be.
The whole reason why TARP helped contribute to avoiding the
economic collapse was because of the promise we are not going
to let these institutions fail, and that has had the unintended
consequences of the problem of getting bigger and bigger, more
concentrated. You mentioned now the statistical data that backs
up what we all know, that they are able to borrow money more
cheaply, they are able to access the credit markets, access the
capital markets, and right now they are more systemically
significant than they were before, if for no other reason that
there are fewer of them and they are bigger than ever, and that
is a real legacy.
Mr. McHenry. Now, has Dodd-Frank prevented that from
continuing?
Mr. Barofsky. Dodd-Frank was not a magic wand. Passing a
piece of legislation that gave Treasury and the regulators
certain powers and authorities didn't actually change the
status quo; it gave one possible path that the regulators could
choose to use to potentially accomplish that goal, but the bill
itself is just that, a bill, and, unfortunately, based on the
market's perception, they are very, very much unconvinced that
it will be used in the effective way that it would need to be
used in order to really address too big to fail.
Mr. McHenry. Even in the design of the bill does it leave
wide openings for bailouts to continue?
Mr. Barofsky. Well, technically, under the letter of the
law, and there is some dispute about what the meaning of all
this is, it does state in certain language that bailouts won't
happen. But that sort of ignores reality, and the reality is
when we talk about too big to fail, I think far too often we
lose sight of the fact what those words mean and that it means
really what they say, that whether there is a law on the books
or not a law on the books, if these institutions, if we have a
repeat of the financial crisis, it is not going to matter what
the law on the books is because its failure is not an option.
You can't let those banks fail if that happens. It doesn't
matter your political ideology, it doesn't matter your personal
ideology; the country will go down the tube, there will be a
systemic crash that will have devastating consequences, Great
Depression, Armageddon, no cash coming out of the ATMs. And the
point is that, much like with TARP, the White House, whoever
happens to be president at the time and whoever happens to be
controlling Congress at that time, for the best of the country
has to go in and rescue the banks. It is not a moral question;
that is what too big to fails means.
So while I think people can argue whether certain
interpretations and portions of Dodd-Frank which gives a
certain degree of discretion as to which creditors possibly get
paid 100 cents on the dollar and which don't, which I know is a
subject of the debate, or other provisions that you can point
to and say, OK, this doesn't mean an orderly bankruptcy, this
gives a suggestion that these banks can continue in the form of
a bailout, whether funded by the industry or elsewhere, it is
almost all besides the point because, if you have too big to
fail banks, it is all going to be put to the side and we are
going to be right back where we were in late 2008.
Mr. McHenry. So, in essence, it codifies the status quo.
Mr. Barofsky. Unless and until Treasury and the regulators
use the powers that they have under Dodd-Frank--and a lot of
these powers, frankly, they had before Dodd-Frank and went
unused. But unless and until they use those authorities, we are
actually in the status quo or slightly worse than the status
quo because this, with nothing. Maybe you have a chance of
convincing the markets, but right now the markets are looking
at Dodd-Frank and they are rejecting it.
Now, that is not to say that Dodd-Frank doesn't do some
good things that help limit the banks. Increasing capital
requirements is important around the edges, the Volcker rule,
although I think a lot of exceptions may defeat it, are all
helpful to help limit, in certain areas, potential risks, but
the big ticket question that we are talking about today, does
it solve too big to fail, the answer is certainly not yet. And
by all indications of what has been happening and what the
direction has been, I am not entirely optimistic that it will.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. Thank you for testifying.
I recognize Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is not that I disagree with you on the point; I want to
understand it a little bit better. As you advocate in your
testimony today and editorial discussing Ms. Bair's
recommendation to simplify or shrink, can you react to, I
guess, the response to that about too big to fail, Mr. Zandi's
remark? And if I can quote, ``There is no reasonable way of
sufficiently reducing their size and complexity without
jeopardizing their independence. Large European and Asian banks
will gobble them up, pushing the too big to fail risk overseas
and outside of our control. Cutting our banks down in size
won't mean there will be any less risk taking in the financial
system; it will mean that the risk taking will shift elsewhere
in the financial system where it is harder to monitor and to
regulate. Think hedge funds.''
What would your response to that be?
Mr. Barofsky. Well, that seems almost to me like an
embracing of too big to fail.
Mr. Quigley. But is he correct?
Mr. Barofsky. I don't think he is correct. I mean, I think
that if you--this is very similar to a different argument that
has been advanced that our largest banks, if they are not of
the size and scope that they are, they are not going to be able
to compete with their larger European banks.
Essentially what that means, if we break that down, what it
really means is that, OK, so other countries guarantee their
banks and those banks have an advantage, and unless we
guarantee our banks, our banks are not going to be able to
compete with those other banks. That is essentially what it
comes down to.
So really the question becomes do you believe that the
Government should subsidize and guarantee and backstop our
largest financial institutions or do you believe that we should
be true to our capitalist ideals and let these banks compete
without an economic subsidy, a very significant subsidy that
they receive? And, sure, there are a number of doomsday
scenarios that one could posit, that if we actually use the
tools of Dodd-Frank and were true to the idea of ending too big
to fail, it may actually result in banks that are not as
profitable as they are today.
Mr. Quigley. But there are all sorts of instances in which
unfair trade practices, for example, by other countries do put
our capitalistic ideals at risk. I am just asking, you don't
see that as a possibility in the banking industry?
Mr. Barofsky. I think it is a possibility, but I think
there are other ways to deal with those policy concerns rather
than embracing the idea that we should be effectively granting
our largest banks a subsidy and essentially putting them on the
books. I mean, there is very little difference when you compare
where we were in the lead up to the financial crisis with
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac than we are right now with some of
our largest banks.
It is the same type of implicit guarantee; it is the same
type of distortions on the market. And in many ways we could
very well end up in that exact same situation. So, sure, maybe
our banks are able to reap short-term profits because they are
able to compete with other banks that have subsidies, but I am
going to take the other side. I am going to say if we remove
these subsidies, if we remove this implicit guarantee, over
time we are going to have a healthier and better banking
system. This is what Chairman Ben Bernanke said recently, this
is what Larry Summers said recently, that our system would be
stronger without it.
Mr. Quigley. How do you protect our banks in the meantime
from unfair practices or unfair competition as it might exist?
Mr. Barofsky. Well again I think there is constant
interaction----
Mr. Quigley. I don't think you need to like too big to fail
or embrace it to be concerned about that potential risk, right?
Mr. Barofsky. Right. And we shouldn't ignore it. But the
Treasury Department has whole offices that are dedicated to
dealing with foreign countries and dealing with foreign
regulators through the G-20. There are mechanisms to deal with
unfair practices internationally, and that is the right place
to deal with them, I think, not throwing your hands up and
saying we are going to subsidize our largest banks; we are
going to take money out of one pocket and put it into the
pockets of the shareholders and executives at these largest
banks, and I think that is what is happening.
One study I saw recently was $34 billion was one of the
dollar subsidies that we give to our largest banks as an
implicit guarantee, and I say take that money and let's put it
elsewhere, and I think we will be better off.
Mr. Quigley. And I appreciate that. I guess the second
point would be what is implied here is that this encourages
banks to engage in risky behavior. Could you detail the risky
behavior you see today?
Mr. Barofsky. Sure. The idea of risky behavior is that
banks sort of have--anyone who runs a bank, especially when
they are large and interconnected in so many different
businesses, they are going to make decisions on how they invest
their money, how they manage their portfolio, and the question
comes what is the level of risk that they are going to attach
to each of those decisions.
And the problem with too big to fail is that it impacts
that decisionmaking process. Senator Kaufman, when he was Chair
of the congressional oversight panel, described it as being the
rational decision of an executive when you take out the sine
curve, what you call the bottom of the sine curve in the
decisionmaking process of profit and loss from a particular
design, and that what too big to fail does is takes out the
bottom of that because it is the rational assumption that if
the risk doesn't work out, you are not going to have the
negative consequences of that risk. And that is what happens
with too big to fail, is you actually rationalize risky
behavior because it is in the best interest not only of the
bank, but of the shareholders and its executives.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Meehan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Barofsky, for once again coming before
our committee. But let me thank you, as well, for the service
that you have given in looking at this issue in such scope, a
tremendous challenge to our country when it happened but the
healthy capacity to then look back at what happened and ask the
kinds of difficult questions that allow us to consider the
implications of all that happened so quickly with such
remarkable significance at the height of the challenge to our
financial system.
So I appreciate your service to our Nation and I thank you
for it and wish you the best of luck as you move into the next
part, but thank you for your contribution. And I know that you
would say, as well, that is something that has been a great
part of it, has been the work that you have done, but you have
been supported by some other fine people as well, some of whom
I have known from prior existence, and I want to compliment
them too on the great work that they have done with you for
your work.
But you have studied this. You have spent time really
looking at the big picture and have had the chance to sit back
maybe more than many of the people here in Congress have, and
you made a comment talking about unless there is dramatic and
quick action, we are going to head down a path, and that is a
very concerning observation to me. Can you identify what you
mean by dramatic and quick action, and what you think we ought
to be doing here in Congress to protect against the kind of
concern that you have identified in your testimony?
Mr. Barofsky. First of all, thank you for your kind
comments, and it is certainly true, I am the one who gets to
sit at the table and I am the one who gets to take the credit
for our successes and the blame for our failures, but it
doesn't happen without the people at SIGTARP and the senior
staff, and, yes, we have both benefited from one individual,
you as a U.S. attorney, of course, that is my Chief of Staff,
Geoff Moulton, who has been wonderful for our organization and
I am deeply appreciative.
As to your question, what I was referring to is I think we
have to stay here within the realm of the possible, and I could
go back and say that there are certain things that could have
been done with Dodd-Frank, things that were suggested in the
Senate by Senators Brown and Kaufman that could have made this
a better protecting against too big to fail, but here in the
realm of where we are today there is a path that has a better
chance than most of succeeding, and that is the one that is
being advocated by Sheila Bair, outgoing chair of the FDIC, and
it is ultimately not a very dramatic departure, it is really
just fulfilling the mandate of Dodd-Frank.
And what she has said is that part of the proposal is these
living wills, where the banks are required to come up with
plans of how they would be resolved in the event of a financial
crisis, and she came out with something and has been saying
this over and over again, which on its face does not appear to
be very controversial. She says in order for us to carry out
the mandate of Dodd-Frank, in order for us to really address
too big to fail, we need to use these provisions, and if banks
come up with things that are not sufficiently credible not just
to us but to the markets, so that they can be resolved in a
meaningful way, then we need to use the powers of Dodd-Frank to
simplify and shrink those institutions. And she has had
stronger language than that on other occasions.
What is remarkable about this is the deafening silence with
which it has been met by the other regulators, the other
members of the Financial Stability Oversight Council, including
its chairman, Secretary Tim Geithner. This is a path that at
least has a chance of working because ultimately they are too
complex, they are too large, and I think Chairman Greenspan
said, famously, in the beginning of this crisis, too big to
fail starts with too big. And it is not always too big; that
would be an oversimplification. It is interconnectedness, it is
a number of other things. But it is a really, really good place
to start.
But it really does appear that is what is happening with
Chairman Bair's suggestion is that the others are playing the
equivalent of a regulatory game of running out the clock; they
say nothing, they do nothing, and the bottom line is that she
is not going to be able to institute those changes before she
steps down over the course of this summer, and even those plans
aren't going to be coming in a matter of 6 months. It could be
a year before anything happens.
So what would be an example of dramatic change? How about a
strong endorsement from the Secretary of the Treasury, from the
chairman of the Federal Reserve and others that Chairman Bair's
suggestion is going to be adopted? Perhaps this could help chip
away at the market's perception that resolution authority is
somewhat of a joke. I mean, if you look at the language that
Moody's used in rejecting the idea that Dodd-Frank is going to
work, going to somehow end too big to fail, that this
resolution authority is going to work, it is striking language.
It is not just a passive rejection, it is a complete rejection.
Mr. Meehan. Well, Moody's is one of the groups that has
actually included within their analysis the idea that the
government is actually going to bail out the banks. I mean,
this is part of the problem that we are looking at.
Mr. Barofsky. Absolutely. They reject that this is really
going to happen. So it is a minor first step. But I think if we
start by the government officials who are in charge of
implementing Dodd-Frank, instead of issuing what are basically,
I am sorry, empty statements that this is going to end too big
to fail as we know it, we are never going to have to bail out
anyone again, citing to different provisions in the law, which
I have heard and I am sure you will hear again, that, oh, this
law says we can't bail out, so therefore there will never be a
bailout, let's start with an articulated plan, similar to the
one advocated by Chairman Bair, saying, OK, this is how we are
going to do this; we are going to simplify and shrink these
institutions so we can have a credible response to the market
that we are not going to bail them out, because right now the
empty rhetoric we are not going to bail these banks out, the
market is not buying it.
And you can actually measure whether or not your statements
are effective or not; all you have to do is look at what the
credit rating agencies say, look at what the spread is, how
much cheaper the benefit is, how much cheaper it is for the big
banks to raise capital. I mean, there are things you can
actually look to.
And while it is unfortunate that credit rating agencies
still have so much power and so much influence, that is the sad
reality of where we are today, and I think that it has to start
with an increase in rhetoric and then it has to be backed up by
demonstrated action to fulfill those rhetorical promises. But
right now we don't really have any of that; what we have is a
lot of discussion about endless rulemaking that will accomplish
some goal; a real sense of incrementalism, we will do a little
bit here and a little bit there, and maybe eventually the
incentives will be in place that these banks may reduce in
size. I personally believe that Chairman Bair's approach is the
better one.
Mr. McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
The ranking member of the full committee, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Barofsky, thank you so much. As you were
testifying, I could not help but think about the fact that come
June 25th, in my district, 40 miles from here, people will
march into a room to a conference, someone preventing
foreclosure, they will march in, Mr. Barofsky, with tears,
literally, about 1,000 of them--that is what happened at the
other five--and they will face some very difficult situations,
and finally they will get a chance to sit down with some
lenders and try to come to some resolve with regard to
modifications. Many of them will be lied to. Many of them have
been lied to. They have been playing games with them, a lot of
these servicers, as if they were fools.
When I read your editorial piece at 4:25 this morning, I
was very impressed and I am just wondering. You know, we just
voted yesterday to end the HAMP program, and I know how you
feel about it; many of us feel the same way. But when you end
the program, if we end the program and there is nothing to
substitute, nothing, I am just wondering is that a good idea? I
am just curious.
Mr. Barofsky. I mean, as Special Inspector General it has
always been my position and continues to be my position that
TARP made a promise and, Congressman, I don't want to presume
anything about you or your decision to make your vote, but for
a lot of progressives that I have spoken to, Members of
Congress, the reason why they voted for TARP, one of the really
things that convinced them to vote for what was essentially a
bank bailout was this promise to preserve home ownership.
Mr. Cummings. Well, you are right, that was one of the
reasons why I voted for it.
Mr. Barofsky. So this is as part and parcel of TARP, in my
view, as was the need to save the financial system. I don't
rank them, but I put them side by side. It was just as
important a goal of TARP to preserve home ownership in dealing
with the foreclosure crisis as it was to save the large banks.
Now, the second panelist today disagrees with that
conception and talks about that as being something to be taken
into account, but I believe that is on par. So I look at the
disappointment, the broken promise of the HAMP program and I do
agree with you that we can't just abandon that goal of TARP.
I also can't defend, for those who voted for termination of
HAMP, I can't defend this program because ultimately Treasury
has had opportunity after opportunity to make meaningful
change. Why on earth have those servicers that you just
described, what they have done to those homeowners in this
program, which has been so well documented, how come Treasury
has not lived up to a different promise it made, the promise it
made in November 2009 to impose financial penalties on those
servicers for not performing? Why are we here, 2 years into the
program, without a single financial penalty for nonperformance
under the program?
Mr. Cummings. And I agree with you. Before they shut me
down, I need to get to one other thing, though. You know, the
reason why I started out the way I did is because we can have
all the discussions we want, but when I go back to my district,
and I know Members on both sides of the aisle, when they go
back to their district, some of them may not see these folks,
but there are a lot of Americans suffering, and you are talking
about too big to fail and Dodd-Frank. If we basically cut the
money for carrying out Dodd-Frank, do you have an opinion on
that? Because that is what is happening.
Mr. Barofsky. I come from a law enforcement background; I
spent 8 years at the U.S. Attorney's Office, and I have seen,
during budget freezes, and hiring freezes. At SIGTARP we have
been blessed, and I thank all the members of this committee on
both sides of the aisle for your generous support through
resources for our agency; we couldn't do what we could
otherwise. But those types of budget cuts and freezes have a
direct impact on the ability of those offices to put people in
jail, to lock people up, to hold people accountable.
Mr. Cummings. But does it also have an impact, you said you
know how the market is viewing Dodd-Frank. You talked about the
possibilities that Dodd-Frank could operate, but you also said
they look at it and say, you know what, we are not so worried
about it because you said too big to fail. But also could it be
that they see that there is an effort to kind of take the money
from out of these agencies so that they can properly enforce
and carry out Dodd-Frank? That is what I am trying to get at.
Mr. Barofsky. It may be part of that perception issue.
Look, the bottom line is if the regulatory agencies that are
charged with, again, they are not just charged with
implementing Dodd-Frank, they are implementing other things,
including law enforcement goals and enforcement goals. I am
thinking specifically of the SEC. When you take away funding,
it may be that they reallocate resources to Dodd-Frank, but
overall, as an agency, they are going to be able to accomplish
less as far as enforcement is concerned and accomplish less,
perhaps, in implementing Dodd-Frank. And I am not here to wade
into the politics of a budget battle.
Mr. Cummings. No, I understand.
Mr. Barofsky. But, look, it is just simple; I have seen it
over and over again. When budget cuts hit, when spending
freezes hit, it has a direct impact on enforcement. That is a
reality.
Mr. Cummings. Just one last thing, Mr. Chairman.
A Wall Street Journal article recently noted that
Republicans appear to be drafting bills aimed at dismantling
the financial reform piece by piece at a time. What impact do
you think that these repeated news reports about the funding or
dismantling Dodd-Frank have on the market's perception of
whether Dodd-Frank is working?
Mr. Barofsky. To be honest with you, I am not really sure
of what the impact is, in part because of the political
realities of divided government. It is a question of how much
success one side may have versus the other side. I haven't
really traced anything or seen anything or heard anything that
directly links that but, of course, if the agencies are cut so
deeply to the bone that they are unable to implement provisions
of regulatory reform, that is going to have an impact.
But I think the far greater impact, frankly, is the lack of
political and regulatory will in staking out how they are going
to use those authorities, even if they have all the resources,
to really take on the issue of too big to fail. And unless and
until we see that shift, I think that is going to have the far
greater impact on market perception.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the ranking member.
Ms. Buerkle is recognized.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Barofsky, for being here this morning. To echo my colleagues'
comments to you and your staff, thank you for all the fine work
that you do. I have one general question and then I would like
to just ask a couple questions about some of the comments you
have made already.
Would you agree that TARP picked winners, perhaps letting
weaker entities survive? And, if so, do you think that maybe
was a misallocation of funds?
Mr. Barofsky. Well, when you look at TARP as a whole, I
think that the lack of transparency in the program in certain
aspects have led to the very fair criticism that at times TARP
may have picked winners and losers. Generally speaking, when we
are talking about the different TARP programs and, of course,
there were 13 different TARP subprograms. We often think of
TARP as a monolith, and usually then we think of TARP as one of
those programs, the capital purchase programs, which, by very
definition, picked winners and losers because banks applied for
TARP funds, and some received TARP funds and others didn't. And
those who received TARP funds essentially got the benefit of
government capital and those that did not.
But there was in fact a process in place that was dependent
mostly on the banks' regulatory ratings or CAMEL's ratings,
that type of thing, and on certain occasions there were
exceptions and we have done audit work on this. So certainly
there were winners and losers picked. TARP certainly didn't
have a perfect record; there have been a number of banks that
were supposedly healthy, deemed healthy and viable that failed;
others that were deemed healthy and viable and, months later,
had to get tremendous amount of additional support, like Bank
of America and Citigroup. So I certainly understand that
concern.
On the flip side, it would have probably been inappropriate
for TARP to give money to all financial institutions that came
to the window. Part of the importance of protecting taxpayer
money was making sure that it went into banks that were healthy
and viable, but they didn't have a perfect track record. But I
don't blame them for not having a perfect track record. Based
on our audit work and our reporting, it was an incredibly
difficult time, to say the least; there was a real sense of
panic. They made mistakes, for sure, but I don't think those
were mistakes that were intentional in any way. Overall, I
think they tried to get it right; they just didn't sometimes.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you. I just want to go back to a comment
when you were responding to our chairman. You mentioned that
unless Treasury and the regulators use their authorities, and
you mentioned that some of those authorities they already have,
that we will experience a status quo or worse. Could you expand
on that for me, the authorities that you are referring to, and
whether or not they exist outside of Dodd-Frank, prior to Dodd-
Frank, actually?
Mr. Barofsky. I think the concept of, for example, caps on
leverage, capital floors are sort of examples of things that
have been around for a while. I think what Dodd-Frank does, and
this is sort of one of the positive things it does, it really
forces an entry point for using those types of mechanisms
anticipatorily.
In other words, again, I am going to go back to the
discussion earlier about using living wills. This gives us an
entry to evaluate the largest banks, those deemed systemically
significant, and evaluate whether or not they really could
survive or whether the system could survive their failure; and
that is the key to any resolution plan, is to take whatever it
is and, as Chairman Bair suggests, putting it through a reality
check.
And if it doesn't meet that reality check, using those
tools to either spin off certain businesses, to shrink the
company, to simplify the organizational structure. If you look
at some of the stuff that came out of the Lehman bankruptcy and
the 3,200-something different entities that were comprised
there, hopelessly complex, it makes resolution very difficult.
I mean, I think that is a good start.
Of course, we also have to remember that one of the
limitations if we wait too long, in other words, we don't use
the authorities when we get these resolution plans,
prescriptively, before the next financial crisis, even our best
intentions may not really work because in an era of a financial
crisis, that is when all these institutions are suffering
similar threats at the same time. It is going to be very
difficult to execute some of these resolution plans.
How do you sell off a large business or a large business
chunk as part of a resolution if there is no one to buy it
because the other entities are also going through the same
stress of a financial system collapse? And I think that is what
Secretary Geithner meant when he said to us that Dodd-Frank
helps, but in the event of another financial crisis the size
and the scope of the one that we just went through, there may
be a need to do exceptional things again, because even with the
best intentions the reality of that type of shock to the system
is going to require, as long as the banks are too big, it is
going to require, again, extraordinary intervention.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Welch, 5 minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barofsky, I want to thank you for the tremendous work
that you have done. We are really in your debt.
Mr. Barofsky. Thank you.
Mr. Welch. As I understand it, what you are saying is that
Dodd-Frank has not succeeded in making the market believe that
it has addressed this question too big to fail.
Mr. Barofsky. In essence, the implementation of Dodd-Frank
has not succeeded in convincing the market.
Mr. Welch. And when you say the implementation, is that
because of the regulatory provisions that had to be part of the
followup of Dodd-Frank?
Mr. Barofsky. Right. So much of Dodd-Frank put the
responsibility on the regulators and, frankly, on the Treasury
Department as the chair of the Financial Stability Oversight
Council to implement the necessary changes and send the right
messages to the market.
Mr. Welch. So we would have been better off with Congress
specifying what were the guidelines and what were the
parameters within which these large financial institutions
could operate, is that what would have been a better approach?
Mr. Barofsky. Well, I don't know whether I can say it would
have been a better approach; it would have been a more
effective approach if ideas like Senator Browns and Senator
Kaufman's amendment in the Senate to Dodd-Frank, which would
have put leverage caps and size caps on the largest
institutions. If that had passed, that would have sent a very
large and very clear message to the markets that the largest
banks are not going to be too big to fail.
Mr. Welch. And that is simple.
Mr. Barofsky. And much simpler. You would have relied a lot
less on the regulators if that were included.
Mr. Welch. And when we get into the regulators, we are, of
course, having a budget challenge in this country and in this
Congress, and if we are cutting the budget for, for instance,
the SEC by $25 million, what kind of signal does that send and
how does that affect the ability to actually supervise the
regulations that would apply?
Mr. Barofsky. Well, according to the SEC, it would have a
very direct result; it would inhibit their ability, according
to Chairman Shapiro, of being able to implement the
requirements that they need to do under Dodd-Frank.
Mr. Welch. Right. And in your independent capacity, that
conclusion that they are offering makes sense to you; that is a
threat to their ability to carry out their responsibilities?
Mr. Barofsky. There is no question. When you are a
regulatory agency, a law enforcement agency, and you have fewer
resources, you have to make cuts. Frankly, you have to make
cuts across the board; everything suffers. So that will suffer;
I think enforcement will suffer.
Mr. Welch. The same thing with the Consumer Financial
Protection Board. Dodd-Frank called for an independent watchdog
and that would be independent, it wouldn't be their advocating
for the interest of the large financial institutions, it would
be advocating for the interest of consumers, and the CR
provision, continuing resolution provision, would cut that
budget by 40 percent, from about $143 million to $80 billion.
So would you have the same response to that budgetary cut and
its impact on being able to provide those protections?
Mr. Barofsky. I would imagine so. I am not really familiar
with the budget of the Consumer Protection Bureau and what the
requirements are, but, again, having been fortunate enough to
work with Elizabeth Warren as she was the chair of the
congressional oversight panel, I would certainly take her at
her word that if this would impact the ability of that bureau
to go forward, then it would be accurate.
Mr. Welch. Let me ask you this. One of the points of this
hearing is there are some legitimate questions about how TARP
is being implemented and whether too big to fail is going to
work, and it is not clear what the consensus would be on this
committee as to whether we would want to be tougher on the too
big to fail policy or not; that is not part of what the hearing
is.
But let's assume that we did have a view that was shared
across the aisle, both sides, where we did want to protect the
taxpayer from a future bailout. What would be your
recommendation that Congress should do in order to provide us
with protection against another bailout?
Mr. Barofsky. I think, again, step one is working within
the realm of the possible of the bill that has already been
passed, and that is to exert as much pressure as you can on the
Financial Stability Oversight Council, on Secretary Geithner to
fulfill the promise and to not take an incrementalist approach,
but to take a strong, hard look at the recommendations and the
advocacy of Chairman Bair and use those tools. The goal should
be nothing short of getting rid of that subsidy, getting rid of
that economic advantage that the largest banks have over their
smaller counterparts, whether it is the 78 basis points
referenced in the chairman's opening statement, whether it is
the implicit guarantee, the increased credit rating.
That has to be a goal because this is the remarkable thing
about too big to fail: perception matters. Perception is as
important as anything else, and it is unfortunate. It is
unfortunate that credit rating agencies still have so much
influence over things, but that is the reality, and we need to
take that perception head-on and we need to figure out how to
use the tools that we currently have to try to deal with that
perception and not just, I am sorry, essentially ignore the
advocacy of Chairman Bair and others who have strong ideas
about trying to get us to a point where these banks no longer
enjoy that subsidy.
Mr. McHenry. If the gentleman would yield, I would be happy
to, I think we agree that we want to end too big to fail, and I
know that has been your advocacy in your time as Congress, as
well as mine. The bill of goods that some of us saw coming out
of Dodd-Frank is that it would prevent too big to fail.
Mr. Welch. Well, I appreciate that and, as the chairman
knows, I voted, really in significant part because of the
testimony of Mr. Barofsky, in favor of the committee bill on
HAMP. And to the extent that we can find ways to solve the
problem, we have to do it together. So I really appreciate your
statement.
Mr. McHenry. Well, thank you. And I appreciate the
gentleman's advocacy. We don't always agree, but you certainly
had a great way of reaching out and trying to find consensus,
and I appreciate that.
With that, I yield 5 minutes to Mr. Issa, the chairman of
the full committee.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would join in saying
that as we start looking at the particulars of the continuing
resolution, if we can get to some bipartisan discussion where
we agree to the number and then begin saying if we need to add
to SEC or as Mr. Barofsky, I am sure, would agree, some of the
sunlight Web sites and so on that are also seeing cuts plus
those back up because they actually save us money, then I think
we could find those offsets.
I think as the chairman worked so hard to recognize that
HAMP was a large amount of money that did not need to be spent
to ruin people's credit ratings, it still, at the same time, I
would join with the gentleman in saying I am concerned about
where we make the cuts, and I would hope that in the very near
future we begin talking about the need to make austerity moves
and then begin to say where can we find multiple votes for
something by putting things back in.
You mentioned the SEC. I am very concerned that many of the
sunlight activities that we have, on a bipartisan basis, been
investing in are also on the block there, and it is my
intention to work with leadership on whatever the final
resolution is, once we get with the Senate, to plus those back
up. I think we need to have the access that, quite frankly,
Dodd-Frank, with bipartisan support of this committee, almost
got in the way of data transparency; and we still have to get
back as a committee to getting that transparency into what was
Dodd-Frank.
Mr. Barofsky, if I can throw a slide up, I want to just go
through a couple of these, because it illustrates probably the
most important point you are making today, which is the two to
dash three step credit rating increase.
Go to the next slide.
Real examples. Wells Fargo. If their cost of money is 4.81
versus Comerica at 5.26.
Next slide.
If Goldman Sachs, vilified often here, but if their cost of
money is just under 5 percent while National City is over 6
percent, that is not the three-quarters of a point you were
talking about, it is even greater.
Next slide.
Barclay's Bank at 4.39 versus BB&T, certainly important in
this region, a little less than three-quarters of a point, 5.07
higher.
Last, Citicorp, 5.64, not earned in any way except that
they are big; Huntington National Bank, 6.54.
Let me ask it to you in a different way, as a former
businessman. If I am among the most credit-worthy companies,
the Fortune 500 down to small companies that simply have
healthy balance sheets, is there any reason in the world that
they are not going to migrate to the largest banks when the
largest bank can make a profit nearly a point cheaper than its
competition? Pure cost of money. Isn't this going to move the
most creditworthy onto the big banks, while leaving the little
banks with higher rates and being forced to take whatever is
left behind?
Mr. Barofsky. No, absolutely, because, again, let's say you
are depositing money at one of these banks and you go beyond
the FDIC's limit. Don't you want to have the implicit
government guarantee of too big to fail behind your deposits? I
mean, you may, from an ethical and moral point of view, not
want to support these institutions because of this implicit
government guarantee, but, as a businessman, how could you not
take advantage of the fact that you are getting what is
essentially free deposit insurance based on the implicit
guarantee that the government is going to bail them out? And
what does that do? Makes them bigger; makes them even more
systemically important. It is a downward spiral. It also takes
those smaller banks, it gives them an incentive as well. We
need to get bigger; we need to get into this gravy train; we
need to get on this subsidy level so that we can also out-price
our competition and raise money more cheaply just because of
this implicit guarantee. It is a complete perversion of the
system.
Mr. Issa. And I think that brings up a point that I want to
make sure the committee focuses on. If we do not change where
we are today, the five banks that represent 50 percent will be
seven banks that represent 80 percent. Basically, through
mergers the little banks will get this rate by getting big
enough to be not too big to fail, right? That would be the
business approach in order to get my business away from the big
five.
Mr. Barofsky. It is a real danger. I mean, there are some
provisions in Dodd-Frank that limit concentration above 10
percent of all deposits, but it is a real concern and a real
problem. One of the things that we talk about is Lehman, and
wasn't Lehman a good example of the government not stepping in,
but so much of the incentive of allowing Lehman to fail was the
lesson that we need to get bigger than Lehman because we need
to make sure that we are big enough that we don't have to go
through a bankruptcy because of the implicit guarantee of too
big to fail.
Mr. Issa. Well, thank you and thank you for your service
and your testimony here today. I look forward to reading your
work as an academic.
Yield back.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Now I recognize Mr. Ross of Florida.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barofsky, a pleasure to have you here. You know, as I
was a kid growing up, I remember commercials and the Avis
commercial: We try harder because we are No. 2. All of a sudden
No. 1 seems to now be, in the financial markets, a guarantee by
the Federal Government, and that whoever is No. 2, good luck to
them, because you can try as hard as you want, as long as you
are too big to fail, you will always be No. 1.
So my question and followup with the chairman here, with
community banks, if we see what happens, where you have seven
banks take 80 percent of the market, it seems to me that there
is an incentive only for community banks to merge with or to be
acquired by the too big to fail banks. Is that what we are
seeing a precedent with the TARP package?
Mr. Barofsky. Well, again, there are some limits on, there
potentially could be some limits in Dodd-Frank and from the
regulators that could help to prevent the largest banks from
just gobbling up all the smaller community banks over a certain
cap, but certainly consolidation and continued consolidation
certainly could occur and might be a likely bi-product of where
we are.
Mr. Ross. Which really wouldn't be that healthy for the
consumer or, in this state of economy that we have today, where
the community banks are the ones that are serving most of our
businesses in terms of loans, it could give them what I think
would be an opportunity for the too big to fail banks to
dictate more policy and restrictions that would make it even
more prohibitive to have a recovering economy.
Mr. Barofsky. Less competition is never good for the
consumer. And I have to say although the notion of the too big
to fail banks of having even more political power almost seems
unfathomable at this point, but it certainly could happen.
Mr. Ross. Systemically, as a result of the TARP package,
and I may have missed this because I came in late, but has
there been anything to change the way we do business to avoid
ever having to have another TARP package passed by this
Congress?
Mr. Barofsky. In many ways, the way the TARP has been
executed, and its legacy of increased moral hazard has made
future bailouts, if anything, more likely, and unless and until
we deal with this too big to fail problem, the increased
concentration, the increased size, the increased
interconnectiveness, the fewer number of large institutions all
will contribute and lead us to a point where the too big to
fail banks have become even bigger and their failure even less
conceivable or possible.
Mr. Ross. And would it not be just as likely, then, because
of the precedent set there, that such packages, TARP packages
would now be considered for nonfinancial institutions;
insurance companies? We saw that with AIG, but I guess my
question is does this not set a precedent that goes well beyond
assisting the too big to fail financial institutions and to any
entity that may be deemed to be too big to fail, regardless of
what their commercial purpose is?
Mr. Barofsky. The moral hazard generated by TARP wasn't
just limited to banks, it was, as you said, to insurance
companies like AIG, to the automobile industry like GM and
Chrysler. So, no, I think that is part of TARP's legacy, is the
expanding moral hazard.
Mr. Ross. And as a professor, would it be wise now in any
of your classes that you would consider the opportunity of
changing your business plan to include a path to where you can
now be acquired or be guaranteed by Federal Government because
of the precedent that has been set over the last 2 years?
Mr. Barofsky. It certainly is a possibility. Again, unless
we take the steps to make that so painful and really address it
through our regulation, again, right now it is a pretty good
place to be, to be too big to fail.
Mr. Ross. So much for entrepreneurship.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the gentleman.
With that, I ask unanimous consent that I have two
additional minutes, and I will grant the full committee ranking
member or the gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch, 2 minutes. OK,
thank you.
Mr. Barofsky, I have spoken to you about the Small Business
Lending Fund, this legislative creation that doesn't have
oversight from your office, from the SIGTARP's office. Can you
talk about the Small Business Lending Fund and the impact this
has, especially on these TARP banks, these small TARP banks
that are still within the program?
Mr. Barofsky. Sure. Part of the Small Business Lending Fund
Congress enabled Treasury to refinance, if you will, really
move banks off of the TARP ledger and onto the SBLF ledger.
And, when doing so, Congress gave Treasury the authority and
direction to adopt certain procedures that were different for
the TARP banks than other banks that come in and apply for this
program.
And we made a series of recommendations to Treasury, which
have been rejected, to help protect the American taxpayer as
those banks move from the TARP ledger to the SBLF ledger. Look,
there is less oversight in the SBLF program; there are less
protections, capital protections for the taxpayer, and we have
made a couple recommendations and they have been rejected.
It is not entirely within our jurisdiction; on this issue
it very much is within our jurisdiction because we have
jurisdiction over the sale of troubled assets, and here the
sale of the preferred shares of stock, which essentially are
being sold from one government entity and purchased by another
government entity is very much, in our view, within the
confines of our jurisdiction, which is why we have announced an
audit specifically on this issue.
Unfortunately, Treasury is dithering on whether or not they
think we have this jurisdiction. We have tried to schedule an
entrance conference and we were told to hold off for a little
bit because the Treasury general counsel has to decide whether
or not we have the right to conduct an audit of the exit of
banks from TARP.
Now, I haven't written a letter, I haven't made a big deal
about this because, frankly, I can't even conceive that they
are going to come out and suggest that the very clear intent of
Congress that we have jurisdiction over the exit of TARP banks
isn't going to be there, and because the money hasn't funded
into this program yet, we don't have this great sense of
immediacy of getting this entrance scheduled.
But if there is some bizarre legal construct that they
adopt and suggest that we can't do this work, I certainly hope
that my successor will immediately bring that to this
committee's attention because this is a really important area
because of the potential for the taxpayer really to get a raw
deal as TARP banks exit TARP and go into SBLF, and we need very
close oversight.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. Thank you for testifying.
I yield 2 minutes to the full committee ranking member, Mr.
Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Barofsky, back on February 25th I
requested that your office conduct an audit and analyze the
homeowner complaints. Can you tell me what is going on with
that and when we can expect to have some results?
Mr. Barofsky. I just got an email that has the preliminary
numbers. We are going through I think it is more than 25,000
hits to our hotline, and part of what this has been helpful is
helping us to organize and categorize our hotline hits. Since
we have gotten your letter our staff has been going through our
hotline literally entry by entry and pulling together, and I
got notice just last night that we have some preliminary
results.
So I expect that we will have it to you before too long. I
don't want to give you an exact date because when you are
walking out you shouldn't dump on the people behind you with a
commitment that you can't deliver, but I will definitely have
staff get in touch with your staff today to give you an
estimate of the timeframe.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you. That may be one of your last
duties?
Mr. Barofsky. Probably, yes. I think so.
Mr. Cummings. Let me ask you this. One of the things that
concerns me is that we are going to--as you move on, the
question becomes--and Mr. Massad is going to testify in a few
minutes. I remember when I was practicing law, one of the
things I would say if one witness wasn't side by side with the
other, which is never, I would say what would your response be
to what they are going to say in some way or another. It sounds
like you made some reasonable recommendations and Mr. Massad,
who will testify in a few minutes, has said, Mr. Chairman, that
he is going to come in, he told us a month or so ago that he
was going to be retooling.
Have you seen any evidence of that? And why wouldn't the
administration accept some of your recommendations? Why do you
think? I am just curious because there is a lot of frustration
on both sides of the aisle, and I am just curious as to what
you think.
Mr. Barofsky. There has been no retooling. The announcement
yesterday, which I think, non-coincidentally, was on the date
of the vote in the House to terminate HAMP. There was an
announcement, it was an op ed in Politico that Mr. Massad
authored, and essentially it said that they are going to now,
finally, 2 years later, almost 18 months after the promise to
impose financial penalties on nonperforming servicers, there is
going to be a plan.
So I read the op ed, it was brought to my attention, and,
frankly, it sounded initially like a little bit of a gimmick.
The idea is they are going to give servicers grades and then
withhold payments based on that grade. But, OK, at least it is
some movement in that direction, although, again, I don't put a
lot of faith in words at this point, given the words that we
had almost 18 months ago; it is action that matters.
So I did what I would normally do in that situation, I
reached out to the Treasury and said, OK, give us the backup
for this. Let's give us so we can evaluate, so if I am asked a
question today in front of this committee, I can give an
opinion about whether this is going to be effective, what the
construct is, and the response back I get, first, I got no
response, and then eventually we got a response that, no, no,
no, we can't tell you because we don't have any other policy or
plan other than what was outlined in the op ed.
This is ready, fire, aim all over again with respect to
this program. So this has been the one incidence of potential
retooling of finally meeting our recommendation? And not just
our recommendation, almost everyone's recommendation to start
holding servicers accountable financially? And I am hopeful. I
am hoping that this is better late than never, as opposed to
too little too late, but ultimately words, at this point, are
just words. And after all of the broken promises we need to see
some action on this front if we are ever going to get the
servicers to be held accountable for their terrible and abysmal
performance that even Treasury acknowledges.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the ranking member.
Mr. Barofsky, we certainly appreciate your testimony, your
candor, your ability to actually react to a whole variety of
questions. Too often in Congress we see the person on the other
side of the panel as more sport. It is quite interesting to
have someone who is on the other side of the panel who is of
sporting mood, that you are willing to react and answer the
question posed to you.
Too often in this place and around Washington it is not
about answering the question posed to you, it is about what you
want to answer; and you have been very frank, very forthcoming,
very open in answering the questions posed to you, even when
they are not convenient, and we certainly appreciate your
service to your government and to your country. Thank you for
your time today, thank you for your testimony, and, most of
all, thank you for your hard work.
Mr. Barofsky. Thank you, sir.
Mr. McHenry. Good luck to you in your future endeavors. God
bless.
Mr. Barofsky. Thank you so much.
Mr. McHenry. This committee will now be in recess for 5
minutes until we set for the second panel.
[Recess.]
Mr. McHenry. The committee will come back to order. We will
now recognize our second panel. Mr. Timothy Massad is the
Acting Assistant Secretary for Financial Stability at the U.S.
Treasury. In his capacity, Mr. Massad heads the Office of
Financial Stability which administers TARP. Prior to joining
Treasury, Mr. Massad was a partner with a New York law firm
which has a diverse corporate practice.
Thank you for being here today. It is the policy of this
committee that all witnesses be sworn in before they testify.
If you would please stand and raise your right hand.
[Witness sworn.]
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. You may be seated. Let the record
reflect that the witness answered in the affirmative.
So, with that, Mr. Massad, we will recognize you for 5
minutes. Your written testimony will be entered into the
record. We will then have some questions from the panel.

STATEMENT OF TIM MASSAD, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
FINANCIAL STABILITY AND CHIEF COUNSEL

Mr. Massad. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman McHenry, Ranking
Member Quigley, and distinguished members of the subcommittee
for the opportunity to testify today. You have invited me here
to address whether the perception that some institutions are
too big to fail persists despite the passage of Dodd-Frank, and
I am happy to do so. I am also pleased to be following Special
Inspector General for TARP Neil Barofsky on his last day in
office.
SIGTARP's recent quarterly report suggests that TARP's most
significant legacy may be the moral hazard associated with too
big to fail institutions, and I am happy to address that
statement as well.
Moral hazard is a real and significant concern, but to
suggest that this is TARP's main legacy confuses a response to
a crisis with the need to fix the flaws in our regulatory
system that helped trigger the crisis. TARP was necessary and
it did what it was supposed to do. Its most significant legacy
is that it, combined with other government actions, helped save
our economy from a catastrophic collapse and may have helped
prevent a second Great Depression.
The lesson we learned from having to take these actions was
that, to better protect ourselves against future crises and to
deal with the moral hazard issue, our regulatory system needed
to be fixed. Today, while more work remains, we have taken
significant action to do just that. In particular, we have
taken steps to address the moral hazard associated with the
fact that TARP and other government interventions were
necessary and to address the too big to fail problem.
Just 19 months after TARP was enacted, Congress passed the
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, the
most comprehensive reform of our financial regulatory system
since the 1930's. Dodd-Frank contains three main elements that
work together to address the too big to fail problem in
particular.
First, and most important, Dodd-Frank gives the government
authority to shut down and break apart large non-bank financial
firms whose imminent failure might threaten the broader system.
It does so in a way that protects the economy, while ensuring
that large financial firms, and not taxpayers, bear the costs.
Dodd-Frank provides us with the tools to ensure that no firm
will be insulated from the consequences of its actions or
protected from failure. Dodd-Frank makes clear that taxpayers
must not be asked to bear the costs of a financial firm's
failure.
Second, Dodd-Frank creates a framework for identifying and
responding to risk in the financial system; it creates the
Financial Stability Oversight Council, FSOC, and the Office of
Financial Research, the OFR. FSOC is charged with identifying
risks to financial stability, responding to any emerging
systemic threats, and promoting market discipline. OFR supports
this task by addressing the critical need for more
standardized, more useful, and more reliable data.
Third, Dodd-Frank requires regulators to impose
substantially stronger prudential standards. Risk-based
capital, leverage and liquidity standards will be tougher.
Bigger and more complex firms will have to hold more capital
than smaller and less complex firms. Dodd-Frank also requires
that certain large firms undergo regular stress tests, and
requires living wills. It also restricts risky activities by
banks such a proprietary trading, as well as the excessive
growth by acquisition of the very largest firms.
Dodd-Frank sets a clear path forward. We have made
important progress since enactment to implement its provisions,
but there is a lot more work to do. The financial markets are
closely watching this progress, which underscores the
importance of the implementation.
Let me turn briefly back to TARP, because another piece of
restoring a strong financial system is unwinding the
extraordinary assistance that had to be provided during the
crisis. Since I last appeared before the full committee, TARP
has continued to make good progress. We have moved quickly to
reduce the dependence of the financial system on the emergency
support provided.
I am happy to note that as this hearing is taking place, we
expect to receive an additional $7.4 billion in repayments from
banks. This means the taxpayers will have recovered more than
100 percent of the funds invested in the banking system, that
is $251 billion compared to the $245 billion invested. Every
additional dollar we recover from now on will be a net gain to
the taxpayer. And with today's repayments, over 70 percent of
the total amount disbursed under TARP has been recovered. The
ultimate cost of TARP will be far less than anyone expected.
Earlier this month, the CBO estimated the overall cost to be
approximately $19 billion.
Of course, TARP is only one part of the actions taken by
the government to respond to this crisis, which also included
support for Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, the Federal Reserve's
actions to provide credit and guarantees of money market funds
and bank debt. And it is important to look also to the cost of
all of these measures. Our latest estimate of the direct fiscal
cost of these interventions, which will be made available
shortly, will show that there actually should be a small profit
when we look at all those actions combined.
Now, this estimate does not include the stimulus measures
and it doesn't include the significant costs to our economy of
this crisis. Jobs were lost, businesses failed, household
wealth declined, and tax revenues fell. But that damage would
have been far worse without the government's emergency
response.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. I welcome
your questions. And let me just say I am also happy to respond
to any of the matters that Mr. Barofsky raised, whether it is
pertaining to Dodd-Frank or other issues.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Massad follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Mr. Massad. I recognize myself for
5 minutes.
There are a number of questions that Dodd-Frank raises.
Now, I certainly read your editorial against my legislation
ending the HAMP program. We don't have to relitigate that; we
won the vote last night, so I am fine with that, obviously, and
we had a bipartisan vote as well.
And I hope that sends a strong message to the overseer of
that program, you, Mr. Massad, and your staff that the status
quo there is simply not acceptable. Destroying 800,000 people's
credit scores, taking their savings is not a responsible
program in order to help a half a million people. And the
people that are brought into the program, given verbal
modifications of their mortgages, and yet are kicked out at the
program at the end of the day, in your recent report, that
number was 740,240. And we appreciate your releasing those
numbers, but it is simply not acceptable. But we don't have to
relitigate that because I was happy to win the vote.
Now, I want to raise a question that I think is
interesting. You said the taxpayers won't be on the hook for
future bailouts. Can you explain how you justify that under
Dodd-Frank?
Mr. Massad. Dodd-Frank provides that taxpayers will not
fund any bailout. What it provides is it gives the authority--
--
Mr. McHenry. How does it provide that?
Mr. Massad. It gives the authority to the FDIC to liquidate
a non-bank financial firm that is threatening the system and to
impose those costs on creditors and shareholders, including the
ability to clawback those costs. And to the extent those costs
can't be imposed on creditors and shareholders, then there is
an assessment after the fact on large financial institutions.
Mr. McHenry. OK. So you disagree with Mr. Barofsky's
assertion that Dodd-Frank and your boss, the Treasury
Secretary's comment in the event of a next crisis, we would
have to do extraordinary things beyond the scope of the Dodd-
Frank legislation?
Mr. Massad. As I have testified before, Mr. Chairman, the
Secretary's statement referred to the fact that it is difficult
to predict the shape, the nature of a crisis, and you may have
to take extraordinary actions, but he was referring to using
the tools of Dodd-Frank.
Mr. McHenry. Interesting. Interesting. OK, so another
question I have is, is Treasury, in terms of looking at
financial stability, are you looking at the interconnectedness
of our financial markets across regulatory regimes, meaning
foreign regulations and how they are moving forward? Speaking
to market participants, I think they see an opportunity for
regulatory arbitrage and to make money based on the fact that
other European countries, for instance, are behind us in terms
of changing their financial regulations. Is this a concern to
you?
Mr. Massad. Oh, absolutely, Mr. Chairman. It is a very good
question; thank you for raising it. One of the important things
we have to do is to work with foreign regulators to try to----
Mr. McHenry. Are you doing that?
Mr. Massad. Yes. There is a lot of work going on by
Treasury, by the Fed, by others to do that. The Dodd-Frank law
provides for that.
Mr. McHenry. Well, I know it provides for that. I am asking
you the question of how that is going. Is that progressing? And
how is it progressing? What are you doing?
Mr. Massad. There is a lot of work going on by each agency,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McHenry. I know that there is a lot of work going on by
each agency. I mean, you are stating some very obvious things.
I understand part of the Treasury tact here, and I have seen
you in committees before, is not to answer questions. Well, I
am the chairman of this committee; I call my own time, so you
need to answer the question.
Mr. Massad. Mr. Chairman, I will be happy to provide you
with details about that. I do not have them at my fingertips.
It is not my responsibility to coordinate with our
international friends on those regulatory regimes; it is my
responsibility to implement the TARP program. But I would be
very happy to get you a detailed response on that.
Mr. McHenry. OK. So financial stability doesn't entail
looking at international regulatory regimes is what I am trying
to understand from you. I will move on. I will move on. It is
fine.
So the Financial Stability Oversight Council, which is a
creation of Dodd-Frank, entails a number of regulators sitting
on a council together, and I understand that. Now, each
regulator has their own staff. Is it your view, in terms of
preparing for this and how this council will actually operate,
how their meetings will occur, where they will occur, is this
largely being driven by the Treasury Department?
Mr. Massad. Mr. Chairman, the FSOC is chaired by the
Secretary of the Treasury; it has a number of members, as you
know, 10 voting members as well as non-voting members. It meets
periodically. It is developing staff. It is promulgating rules.
So there is a lot of activity there and it requires the
coordination across all agencies, as you know.
If I may also, though, respond, I don't believe I said that
financial stability doesn't entail looking at international
regimes; I think I said the contrary, sir. And, again, I would
be happy to get you details on what is going on in that regard.
Mr. McHenry. Well, you said it wasn't your responsibility.
Mr. Massad. That is correct, it is not. My responsibility
is the TARP program.
Mr. McHenry. Right. OK, fantastic. Great.
So, with that, I recognize Mr. Quigley for 5 minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning.
Mr. Massad. Good morning.
Mr. Quigley. Questions this morning were brought up earlier
about community banks and their relative disadvantage. Are you
in a position to talk about the comparative disadvantage many
of those banks, many of them in my State, are at at this point
and what can be done?
Mr. Massad. Congressman, that is a very important question.
I would be happy to talk about that. We obviously have to have
a thriving community bank sector in this country. We have taken
a number of actions under the TARP program to do that. The
Obama administration did not provide any funds to large banks;
we provided funds to about 400 small banks, and about 650 small
banks were funded under the program.
The Treasury also pushed for the implementation of the
Small Business Lending Fund to provide additional assistance to
those banks. The differential you have referred to is
important, and I think, once again, Dodd-Frank provides us with
some tools to address that. It allows us to impose tougher
standards on the largest banks; capital standards, leverage
standards, liquidity standards. Now, again, there is a lot of
work to be done to implement that, but I think it does give us
some tools to address that very problem.
Mr. Quigley. If you could mention at least some of the
differences that still exist that need to be addressed. Could
you detail some of those?
Mr. Massad. Sure. Well, a basic problem, of course, is a
lot of our small banks don't have access to the capital
markets. That is why, of course, we have been able to see that
a lot of the larger banks have repaid TARP funds; many of the
smaller banks have not because it is more difficult for them to
raise money to do so. But we are continuing to work with them.
The capital under TARP is not required to be repaid at any
time. And I think, again, the fact that we funded a lot of
those banks has helped them weather this storm.
Mr. Quigley. The perception in my State is that, as
simplistic as it sounds, you have bailed out the big banks and
shut down the small ones. If you were in my position, how do
you respond to those banks?
Mr. Massad. Very good question, Congressman. I think what
we say is that, in fact, under TARP, particularly under
President Obama, we provided capital to any small bank that was
viable, and we ended up providing that to, as I say, overall in
the TARP program, about 650 banks, and we are continuing to
work with them. Now, the issues you have raised, as to whether
big banks have an advantage, again, I think the Dodd-Frank Act
is meant to provide us with tools to level the playing field.
It needs to be fully implemented.
Mr. Quigley. Longer discussion at some other point.
Let me shift gears just for a few minutes. March 21st of
this year Forbes reports that Goldman Sachs and others are
skirting the Volcker Rule by saying that it doesn't apply to
long-term principal investments. What has Treasury's reaction
to that been?
Mr. Massad. Congressman, I am not familiar with the
particulars of implementing the Volcker Rule. I would be happy
to get you a response on that.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Meehan [presiding].
[Remarks made off mic.]
Mr. Meehan [continuing]. Time to be before our committee,
and you had identified at the outset of your comments that one
of the things that you would do is to try to be responsive to
any comments that were made by the gentleman who testified
before you. He raised an issue, which was a question that I
think your general counsel was looking at, the right to conduct
an audit of the exit of banks from TARP. Is there any reason
why that should be a question? And what is your position as to
the authority of the Inspector General to audit that particular
process?
Mr. Massad. Thank you, Congressman, that is a very good
question. I believe that issue goes to whether SIGTARP or the
Treasury Inspector General has jurisdiction or what each of
their jurisdiction is. That is the issue. In my capacity, I
respect that both are entitled to their opinions, and I defer
to the judgment of the General Counsel as to the proper
jurisdiction between them, and that is what is going on.
Mr. Meehan. OK. Well, you have a willingness on the part of
SIGTARP to engage in this particular activity. If it is
determined that the Inspector General from Treasury is the
entity by you, are we assured that the Inspector General from
Treasury would conduct that same audit?
Mr. Massad. Well, again, it is not my determination; it is
a question of interpreting what the law requires and provides
for, both as to the Small Business Lending Fund law as well as
TARP, and I would say that I think both the Special Inspector
General's Office and the Inspector General's Office are very,
very excellent operations that have conducted thorough audits,
and I would be happy to work with both of them as we have.
Mr. Meehan. Well, thank you. Well, then I understand that
is a little issue that will have to be resolved, but it will
give us a chance to follow that, and I thank you for your
observation because I didn't understand why there would have
been any reluctance.
As we look at the larger question of not just where we have
been with TARP, because there is a lot of analysis and
information on both sides, much of it credible, about the
successes of TARP, but there is a real issue about where we are
going, and part of the problem has been, I think, in some ways,
the unintended consequences, or presumably unintended
consequences, with the bigger banks getting bigger; as my
colleague, Mr. Quigley said, a lot of the oversight going
toward the institutions that perhaps were not really the target
of this initial effort.
And what I am concerned about is the perception that now we
have rating agencies that are factoring in the likelihood that
somebody is going to step in to cover these banks in shoring up
their position. So I am dramatically concerned about the
consequences, as Mr. Bernanke said, sort of it creates almost
limited market, it limits the market discipline in this kind of
a context.
So how do we check the ability to be assured that we aren't
going to see this again? And one of the factors that I see that
you have been looking at has been the idea of the living will.
Now, what is going to happen in practice with that living will?
Are we enforcing this and are we requiring that a real effort
be made to compel these organizations to explain how they are
going to get out of it?
Mr. Massad. Absolutely, Congressman. It is a very good
question, and I was rather surprised by Mr. Barofsky's comment
that somehow Treasury was opposed to this. It is a requirement
of Dodd-Frank. Implementation of living wills is left to the
FDIC and the Federal Reserve. They are working on it; they have
until January 2012. But it was part of the original proposal
that Treasury made, and we have backed the concept the entire
time. But you are absolutely right that is a critical tool, and
how thoroughly that is enforced, I think, and how thorough
those plans are will make a critical difference.
Let me just add, also, in terms of the rating agencies,
they are obviously watching this very closely, as well they
should, but I think, again, they have made it clear that what
they are doing is monitoring it. They are seeing how we
develop----
Mr. Meehan. They are not just monitoring, they are making
calculations, and the calculations they are making is that we
are rating these banks, giving them a preferential position
with respect to the rest of the market based on their
confidence that effectively somebody else is going to step in.
Mr. Massad. That is correct, and they are doing that
worldwide. But they have also said we are closely monitoring
the situation to see how these resolution regimes are
implemented and to see if there is the political will to ensure
that there aren't bailouts in the future.
Mr. Meehan. What would that political will take? What
should be requiring of them in order for them to be able to
pass the scrutiny of that living will analysis?
Mr. Massad. Well, again, I think we are at the early stage
of the implementation. This law was passed 8 months ago, and to
sort of say it is not going to work is a bit like saying, when
we passed the Securities and Exchange Act in 1933, that, well,
because they didn't fix our markets within 6 months, they
didn't work. In fact, we set up the SEC, we took a lot of
actions.
We now have the most vibrant, robust capital markets in the
world. It is the same thing as saying, well, we passed the
Civil Rights Act and it didn't end discrimination overnight.
There is some time needed to implement these things. We are
busy working on it; it involves many, many agencies, not just
Treasury. And I welcome Mr. Barofsky's suggestions, if he has
suggestions on how to implement it, but I haven't heard any
specifics.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mr. Massad.
At this point in time I turn to the gentleman from
Maryland, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me ask you this, Mr. Massad. You heard the testimony of
Mr. Barofsky, did you not?
Mr. Massad. Yes, I did.
Mr. Cummings. And when you were here before us before, you
said that there was going to be some retooling with regard to
the HAMP program. Basically, if I were to sum up what Mr.
Barofsky said with regard to the HAMP program and your
retooling is that it is a little late, but at least it seems
like you are aiming in the right direction, but he doesn't seem
to have a lot of confidence, based on the past, that your
department is going to do very much of anything, even under the
threat of demise of the program. And I am just wondering what
is your reaction to that?
Mr. Massad. Certainly, Congressman. Thank you for the
question. I guess my reaction was once again to be a little
puzzled. I felt like there was strong criticism, but I didn't
hear a whole lot of specifics. SIGTARP has made about 18
recommendations to us on the HAMP program. We have implemented
14 of those. The ones we didn't implement basically would have
made it harder for people to get assistance; it would have
required us to thumb print anyone, it would have required more
documentation about income, comparing their income today to
when they got their mortgage, and other things like that. And
the last specific recommendation we got was in April of last
year.
Now, lately he said the program is a failure, but, again,
we haven't seen anything specific. We made an announcement
yesterday that we are expanding our compliance reporting and we
will withhold incentives. Again, on that, what we did from the
outset was we had a very strong compliance program to try to
get servicers to fix the problem. There wasn't, frankly, we
only pay money when they actually enter into the permanent
modification. They weren't entering into the permanent
modification, which is why we focused on remedial actions
initially.
Mr. Cummings. But you understand there is a lot of
frustration on both sides of the aisle, and the question is
what can we do passed the conversation to really effect more
people. Is there something that we need to do differently? I,
for one, and I know many of my colleagues voted against the
bill yesterday to end the HAMP program, but most of us said to
ourselves and to each other that Treasury has to do better. I
mean, that is just real.
So I am just wondering what is going to happen. We can't
keep going down this road the way we are going, because there a
lot of people suffering. And with all of that money out there,
I think it just gives the opposition more ammunition to not
only destroy the program, but also not replace it with
anything. And that goes against everything that we are trying
to accomplish. So I just want to know what your reaction is to
that.
Mr. Massad. Well, you are absolutely right that those
people who want to end the program have not offered any
alternatives. We continue to look at ways that we can improve
it, but it is a very difficult issue. We have a lot of people
who have spent a lot of time on this and, believe me, if there
was a silver bullet, if Mr. Barofsky knows of a silver bullet,
he certainly hasn't told us. It is not easy. At the same time,
the program is continuing to help tens of thousands; it is
affecting people indirectly through the standards that we are
setting.
Mr. Cummings. Do we need to raise the standards?
Mr. Massad. Yes, absolutely. We need national servicing
standards, and there is a lot of activity going on in that
regard, as you know, both through the discussions on the
foreclosure problems and otherwise, and I think we will see
that coming. We are very committed to that. And we have also
met with Members of Congress about the specific things that
need to be in those national servicing standards.
Mr. Cummings. One of the things that Mr. Barofsky said,
too, with regard to too big to fail, he said that in Dodd-Frank
there are the tools there, and I think you agree with that. But
he said that he does not believe that the administration has
the will to really carry it out, and I want you to comment on
that. But I also want you to comment on this other issue that I
brought is, which is that if we take substantial funds away
from your budget, how would that affect and that market
perception that he talked about so much?
Mr. Massad. Congressman, I agree 100 percent that taking
away funds from implementation at this time, whether it is
Treasury, SEC, FDIC, CFTC, because they all have
responsibilities here, would not be a good thing. We need to
make sure we vigorously enforce this.
As to Mr. Barofsky's comment, again, I don't know what
specifics he is referring to. The implementation process is an
open one. There are a number of rulemaking proceedings going
on. If he has comments on those, he can make them. If he thinks
that certain things aren't happening fast enough, he should
point that out.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mr. Cummings.
At this point the gentlelady from New York, Ms. Buerkle.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Massad, for being here this morning and
your willingness to testify. I am looking at your opening
statement and I just wondered if we could flesh out a couple of
items that are in your comments here this morning. In reference
to Dodd-Frank you listed three points for us. The first one is
Dodd-Frank gives the government the authority to shut down and
break apart large non-bank financial firms. To what extent,
what is the scope of that, and should we be concerned that the
government has that kind of power that they can just shut down
a private entity?
Mr. Massad. It is a good question, Congresswoman. There is
a process that has to go on. There is a determination that has
to be made by the Treasury, with also the vote of the FDIC and
the Federal Reserve, and in consultation with the President,
and there are criteria that have to be met in order to do that
in terms of when you can use that authority. Those criteria
include that there is not another way to deal with the
situation, that the firm in fact does pose a threat to our
financial stability, and there are others. And, again, there is
rulemaking going on to further explicate that because it is
important for there to be clarity as to those rules.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you. And I guess the second point for
identifying and responding to risk, I think that would tie back
to the first point. Are there certain benchmarks that you are
going to look for that will identify that someone is in trouble
that then the government needs to take this aggressive action?
Mr. Massad. Sure. And again there are standards in the law
that now have to be implemented and flushed out more. But I
think the key thing to remember here is that prior to the
passage of Dodd-Frank we regulated entities based on the type
of entity, and we didn't have a comprehensive way of looking at
risk to the system, and that is what we have now and that is
why this law is so important and that is why implementation of
it is so important.
And we can take proactive measures to impose prudential
standards, whether it be capital, leverage, liquidity. We can
limit risky activities, and there is a whole process where even
before you exercise the liquidation authority you can impose
restraints on firms. So it gives us a lot of tools but, again,
they need to be implemented.
Ms. Buerkle. I guess going along with that gives you the
tools, at what point what is the concern that the government--
many feel Dodd-Frank is an overreach, and while we want to
prevent what happened in the meltdown, we want to still
maintain free market. So what point does the government step
back and say we are not going to get involved?
Mr. Massad. Sure. Well, obviously, there is a balance
there. I think Congress struck the right balance in the Dodd-
Frank Act in giving us those tools, but the answer to your
question really gets into the details of how it is implemented,
and that is why, again, it has to be implemented thoughtfully
over time, and that may change over time. As our financial
industry changes, we are going to have to change how we look at
it and how we think about risk.
Ms. Buerkle. Then just one more question regarding your
testimony. You talk about Dodd-Frank, you say but much work
remains to be done. Can you just expand on that briefly?
Mr. Massad. Certainly. There are about 250 rulemakings that
have to happen; there are about 70 studies, one-time studies
that have to happen; it involves efforts of many agencies, not
just the Treasury, not just the FDIC, but also the Federal
Reserve, the SEC, the CFTC and others. So that is the work I am
referring to. A number of those things have already been done
or are in process; a number of proposed rules are out there,
but there is a lot more work to be done.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you. In my few seconds that are
remaining here, I just have one last question. The government
now is a player and a referee. Do you see a conflict in all of
this?
Mr. Massad. Well, I don't think we want the government to
be a player in the sense of having interest in firms; that is
why we are trying to unwind the TARP program so quickly, for
example, and get out of the business of owning stakes in
private companies. And, as I said, we have been very, very
successful in doing that quickly. I think the government needs
to stick to its role of regulating risk and monitoring risk and
taking action when firms pose risks to the system. But clearly
we have to have a system where there is no firm that is too big
to fail and that firms fail as a result of the actions they
take.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Ms. Buerkle.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Mrs.
Maloney.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you and welcome to the committee again.
Mr. Massad. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney. During the financial crisis some firms became
so risky, they were so risky and so interconnected that their
failure was a threat to the broader economy, and I know
Congress tried to address that and Treasury in Dodd-Frank. Can
you describe the progress being made under the authority
granted under Dodd-Frank to prevent companies from becoming so
interconnected and so risky that they could be a danger to the
broader economy?
Mr. Massad. Well, yes. Thank you for the question. There
are a number of efforts going on in that regard looking at the
riskiness of activities. For example, the FSOC will make
determinations about which firms pose those sorts of risks
based on not just their size, but also their
interconnectedness, their leverage, the nature of their
activities; and that work is ongoing. Those determinations
haven't been made yet; they will be made by the FSOC, which, as
I noted earlier, is comprised of all these various agencies.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you. One of the factors that led to the
financial crisis was the evolution of what we call the shadow
banking system, where the purchase, sale, and trading of
derivatives had grown to a trillion dollar business, but it
became very evident during the crisis that people, Treasury,
even the companies did not understand the scope, location of
the risk, the size of it. I can recall AIG coming before this
committee, saying the threat was only $50 million, and then
later it became billions and billions and billions. There was
no control, no understanding of even the location, the size.
Can you comment on what advances you have made on the
derivative market and bringing them to the light of day to
ensure that it can exist without posing a threat to financial
stability?
Mr. Massad. Certainly, Congresswoman. As you know, Dodd-
Frank does provide provisions for greater transparency and
regulation of the derivatives market, and we did not have those
previously, and there is a lot of work going on in that regard.
Mrs. Maloney. Can you specify?
Mr. Massad. Congresswoman, I am not directly involved in
that work. Again, I would be happy to get back to you. That
involves Treasury, but also the SEC, the CFTC. But I would be
happy to arrange that for you.
Mrs. Maloney. And the growth of the shadow banking system
also illustrates the fact that Federal regulators had in many
ways failed to keep up with market innovation and development.
Regulation couldn't keep up with the innovation and dynamic
action taking place in the markets. Can you ensure us that
Dodd-Frank and the regulations that you put in place are going
to be able to keep pace with innovations in the financial
markets?
Mr. Massad. That is a very good question, and, again, what
Dodd-Frank does is gives us the tools to do that. We have to
implement them. But previously we didn't have a system where we
could look at risk across our entire system; we regulated
banks, we had certain regulation of other type of entities. But
as you have noted, the had an entire shadow banking system
developed; we had all this risk being taken on by firms that
weren't subject to regulation.
AIG is a classic example. There was no Federal regulation,
effectively, of AIG, and it did engage in these derivatives
that were terribly destructive. Now, as to AIG, for example, we
have now wound that down. That is part of the reason why they
are going to be able to repay the government every dollar that
we gave them.
Mrs. Maloney. That is good news. Earlier, we heard
testimony from Special Inspector General Barofsky, and one of
the points that he raised and has raised is that the act does
not reach far enough to fully address international firms that
operate globally, and we are in a global economy, a global
market. Are U.S. regulators working with their foreign
counterparts to address the issue of cross-border resolution
authority and are our financial institutions at a competitive
disadvantage because we have regulation, yet many of these
other areas in the financial global market do not? They don't
have the capital requirements; they don't have the risk
restraints; they don't have the oversight that American firms
will be having.
Mr. Massad. Congresswoman, thank you for that. The
international coordination piece of this is very critical. We
are dealing in a global world; we have these large institutions
who aren't just national institutions, they operate worldwide,
and that is why that coordination is important. It is going on;
I know the Federal Reserve is involved in that, the Treasury is
involved in that. I would be happy to get you more details on
what is taking place in that regard, but obviously Congress
couldn't legislate something that mandates what our foreign
counterparties do; it requires us to engage in cooperation and
coordination with them.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, the Basel talks, where do they stand?
They are going to have international capital requirements.
Mr. Massad. They will.
Mrs. Maloney. Where does that stand now?
Mr. Massad. That is right, and that will result in higher
capital requirements that will be phased in over time that are
badly needed. Fortunately, many of our institutions are better
capitalized today than their foreign counterparts, but we need
to phase in those tougher standards.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, my time has expired. Thank you for your
service.
Mr. Massad. Thank you.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mrs. Maloney.
Let me turn now to the gentleman from Illinois.
Mr. Walsh. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Massad, thank you for your testimony today. Let me
ask you just a brief question or two related to the insurance
industry. I have heard from a number of people of late who have
expressed concerns with how Dodd-Frank has and will affect the
insurance industry. You know that insurers are already heavily
regulated at the State level, including an industry-funded
State guarantee system that helps secure policyholders in the
event of an insurance company failure.
Most insurers are not engaged in significant unregulated,
interconnected off-balance sheet, highly leveraged activities,
and so designations such as systemically important would appear
to be unwarranted in this industry. Overlapping and conflicting
rules between State and Federal regulators adds an additional
costly layer of regulation that would significantly
disadvantage these insurers and their customers.
As you know, in the event of another large financial
company failure, companies with assets over $50 billion could
be on the hook to pay for the resolution of these failed firms,
even though they exhibited no bad behavior of their own.
Insurance companies who, according to the Dodd-Frank Act, will
continue to be resolved in the existing State system, are never
resolved by the orderly liquidation process, and yet have to
pay to resolve banks and other bad actors in the financial
industry. These costs will inevitably be borne by the consumer.
So if insurance companies are already regulated at the
State level and if it is clear that they don't participate in
systemically risky behavior, why do they have to bail out other
failing financial service companies that do participate in this
risky behavior?
Mr. Massad. Congressman, your question raises a number of
very, very important issues. Let me try my best. I guess where
I would start is that we have come out of a period where in
fact we did have a very large insurance company that was
regulated at the State level, but which posed huge risks to our
system because it wasn't regulated beyond that, and that was
AIG. And we didn't have the tools to deal with it and its
potential failure could have brought down our entire system. So
obviously that has animated the provisions of Dodd-Frank that
in part address the insurance industry.
But I recognize your point, that we have to make sure that
these provisions are implemented in a way that which is fair to
those companies that don't pose those risks and that don't
engage in those activities. I think that is a process that we
have to focus on as we go forward. The FSOC is very focused on
those sorts of issues because we, again, need to do this in a
way that imposes standards and restrictions on those firms that
pose the significant risk to the system, while at the same time
level the playing field for the others.
Mr. Walsh. You would acknowledge, though, that with regard
to AIG, it wasn't their insurance business that in effect got
them in trouble or brought them down.
Mr. Massad. Well, it is a complicated question. There were
things going on with their insurance business that did pose
some risks, but you are correct that AIG was involved in a
number of activities that went outside of the traditional
insurance area.
Mr. Walsh. And outside of the traditional insurance
activities, which really didn't get them in trouble. What
activities did get AIG in trouble?
Mr. Massad. Well, again, I think it is a complicated
question. They had, obviously, a derivatives business that
posed a lot of risks, but they were also engaged in some
activities with the capital through their insurance business
that posed liquidity challenges, and that was one of the
reasons why they had liquidity problems and the Fed had to step
in.
Mr. Walsh. But even using AIG as an example, is there a
part of you that thinks, again, it is a bit of a stretch to
want to lump the insurance industry into Dodd-Frank as well?
Mr. Massad. Well, again, I think the regulation of large
firms that pose a risk to the system is designed to recognize
that we can't achieve our goal by doing that by type of entity
or by particular business line today. We have to have the
ability to look across the entire financial industry and
determine where are the risk coming from and take appropriate
action. At the same time, as you have pointed out, we have to
make sure that those regulations don't impose unfair burdens on
other companies that aren't engaged in those activities.
Mr. Walsh. Right. And I would second that point and just
reiterate that fact that, in general, the insurance industry
did not at all engage in systemically risky behavior. But, Mr.
Massad, thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. McHenry. I thank my colleague.
In your testimony you say outright that Dodd-Frank was
necessary because of the moral hazard created ``when government
provides emergency assistance to private firms.'' So you
believe that Dodd-Frank answered the too big to fail question?
Mr. Massad. Congressman, yes. I believe Dodd-Frank gives us
the tools to address the too big to fail problem.
Mr. McHenry. And so too big to fail is no longer
permissible?
Mr. Massad. Well, Congressman, Mr. Chairman, as I said when
you were out of the room, you know, we have to implement the
law. The law is not a magic wand, it is a bit, as I said, like
saying, when we passed the Civil Rights Act, that didn't
eliminate discrimination. We have a lot of work to do.
Mr. McHenry. That is a heck of an analogy. In today's
financial times, Alan Greenspan wrote, ``The financial system
on which Dodd-Frank is being imposed is far more complex than
the lawmakers, and even most regulators, apparently
contemplate. We will almost certainly end up with a number of
regulatory inconsistencies whose consequences cannot readily be
anticipated.'' Do you agree?
Mr. Massad. No. I guess what I would say is the question is
what are we saying would be the alternative. I don't think
anyone would say that we would be better off without the tools
that we have now provided for through Dodd-Frank to regulate
risk, to impose higher prudential standards, to be able to
prevent a firm from threatening our entire system. The question
is, again, we have to implement those wisely.
Mr. McHenry. Are we doing that?
Mr. Massad. I think we are doing that.
Mr. McHenry. OK. To continue with Mr. Greenspan's piece in
today's Financial Times, ``Under Dodd-Frank, the regulators are
being entrusted with forecasting and presumably preventing all
undesirable repercussions that might happen to a market when
its regulatory conditions are importantly altered. No one has
such skill.'' Do you agree or disagree?
Mr. Massad. Well, I think, again, we have to try. I don't
think any of us want to be in the situation that we were in in
the fall of 2008, where because we had a regulatory system that
had been outgrown, we had a financial industry where there was
a huge amount of risk being taken on without transparency,
without adequate regulation, and that is what contributed to
the crisis we had. I think because of that we learned the
lesson that we need to overhaul our regulatory system. That is
the judgment Congress has made, and I think the task is now to
implement that judgment.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Barofsky and a number of folks have
testified that during the last financial crisis, in 2008, that
the laws that we had then we could have prevented the crisis.
Do you agree?
Mr. Massad. That is news to me. I would be happy to discuss
that with Mr. Barofsky.
Mr. McHenry. OK. So basically it is your view that Dodd-
Frank has ended too big to fail.
Mr. Massad. As I said, Mr. Chairman, Dodd-Frank gives us
the tools to address the problem.
Mr. McHenry. OK. Now, moving back to HAMP, I want to give
you an opportunity to respond now in our second round here. You
know, you made an interesting face when I was saying that we
have 740,000 homeowners who have actively been harmed by this
program. Do you disagree?
Mr. Massad. I do, sir, and I appreciate your----
Mr. McHenry. So the folks that have fallen out of this
program, that enter into the program, you tout 1.4 million, is
that the number?
Mr. Massad. Trial modifications? That is correct.
Mr. McHenry. Trial modifications. Now, do you understand
that when they are entered into a trial modification they are
told verbally that oftentimes they are going to make a lower
monthly payment going forward? Are you aware of that?
Mr. Massad. I am, sir.
Mr. McHenry. OK. Now, in a trial modification that is
verbal, as all these are verbal, when you are paying less than
what is contractually obligated by a homeowner, that harms your
credit. Are you aware of that?
Mr. Massad. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. McHenry. Are you aware of that, yes or no?
Mr. Massad. Mr. Chairman, if I can answer how the trial
modification works, because I think it is important to have all
the facts on the table. The trial modification provides a 3-
month period in which payments are lowered temporarily, and
during that time we have to determine if someone qualifies for
a permanent modification. What we did at the outset was we
allowed people, we allowed servicers to accept people into
trial modifications on the basis of what we called stated
income; you could basically raise your hand and say this is how
much I make, I qualify. Because it was a terrible crisis,
because we had a lot of people who were in need.
Mr. McHenry. I understand; I read your editorial. The point
I am asking--and I know you are trying to go through all this.
I understand how this works operationally. I want to make sure
that you understand how this works. So when you are given that
verbal modification, this temporary modification, does that
hurt your credit?
Mr. Massad. Mr. Chairman, I think----
Mr. McHenry. You are not answering the question.
Mr. Massad. Well, I don't----
Mr. McHenry. It either does or it doesn't. If it doesn't
hurt your credit----
Mr. Massad. I think the answer can't be given as a simple
one without, again, looking at what happens to those people. If
I may answer--can I answer the question in this regard, if you
will allow me? You refer to all these 750,000 people being
hurt. We actually----
Mr. McHenry. It is 740,240 according to your last report.
Mr. Massad. Thank you. We actually publish statistics on
what happens to those people. Now, those statistics are based
on servicer surveys, but it is in our monthly report, and it
shows what happens. The majority of them ended up in
alternative modifications or alternative payment plans or are
current. Very few of them went to foreclosure.
Mr. McHenry. Do you believe that HAMP has harmed any
borrower?
Mr. Massad. I am sure there are people who were harmed.
Mr. McHenry. How many?
Mr. Massad. I don't know the answer to that.
Mr. McHenry. I thought you publish statistics about what
happens.
Mr. Massad. Mr. Chairman, we publish a lot of statistics,
and I am trying my best to address your concern. I think it is
important to remember that whenever you implement a program
like this on a massive scale in a crisis, what we were doing
was buying time for people. Most of those people ended up in
better situations. There are----
Mr. McHenry. How many?
Mr. Massad. Well, again, based on the servicer surveys, the
majority, the vast majority of them were clearly in better
situations; only a small number went to foreclosure. But the
point even about those is----
Mr. McHenry. How many went to foreclosure?
Mr. Massad. About 5 percent. But the point is----
Mr. McHenry. How many? What is that number? I don't have
the report in front of me.
Mr. Massad. Foreclosure completions is 58,000. But the
point is that their loan wasn't increased; they owed the same
amount.
Mr. McHenry. And so when the servicer comes back in, when
they are not given a permanent modification, they owe those
missed payments or the difference between the payment they were
making and the payment they were obligated to make.
Mr. Massad. That is correct, sir.
Mr. McHenry. Right. And there are penalties and fees
associated with that, as well as additional interest.
Mr. Massad. There may be in some cases.
Mr. McHenry. So, therefore, that temporary modification has
left them worse off than had it not been given originally.
Mr. Massad. Sir, if, again, you are talking about a pool of
people who are given that breathing room, and the majority of
them, the vast majority of them end up being in better
situations, I still think it was the right policy judgment to
make.
Mr. McHenry. Even if this program is actively harming
individuals and leaving them worse off?
Mr. Massad. Well, again, it is not that the program is
actively harming them, sir, it is that they have a mortgage.
They owe the same amount. It should have been explained to them
that if they didn't get the permanent modification, they would
still owe what was previously due.
Mr. McHenry. OK.
Mr. Massad. Now, if that wasn't explained to them, that was
a mistake. But that should have been explained to them. But the
program didn't make them worse off.
Mr. McHenry. Well, I have numerous examples from
constituents that I could read to you. The program has harmed a
large number of individuals, and the Treasury Department--you
know, the Special Inspector General's report on HAMP has been
out there for quite a while; you have had plenty of authority
to go in and fix this program. You haven't fixed it. So you are
touting some of these statistics. The other thing I just wanted
to make sure to ask, while you have the survey there, or your
statistics there, you quoted the foreclosure number. How many
are in pending foreclosure? Do you have a statistic similar to
that?
Mr. Massad. Foreclosure starts, those not accepted for
trial modifications is 163,000. Now, a lot of those could have
been in foreclosure starts even before they went into the
trial.
Mr. McHenry. OK. Well, look, I wanted to give you an
opportunity to respond. If you would like to add anything else,
I would be happy to give you the opportunity right now.
Mr. Massad. I would be happy to. Again, I think we faced
the worst housing crisis of a generation. We were trying to
roll out a program that could help a lot of people. A lot of
people were already delinquent for months, so we were trying to
create some breathing room. Most of those people are in better
situations. Those that are not I think, again, their mortgage
didn't increase because of HAMP; they simply weren't accepted
into the permanent modification because we have very prudent
eligibility criteria so that we spend taxpayer dollars wisely.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you. First of all, Mr. Deputy
Secretary, could I request to have your op ed, your editorial,
placed in the record?
Mr. McHenry. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

Mrs. Maloney. And I would like to say that at meetings with
the HPD department in the city of New York, they are very
grateful, as are the 35,000 families that were able to stay in
their homes because of the HAMP program.
I would, with all respect, say that it is very easy to
throw stones and criticize. It is harder to come up with a
program that addressed this crisis, which a large part of it
was the housing crisis. And for every person who stayed in
their home, not only did it help that person, it helped their
community, because vacant homes bring down the value of housing
for their neighbors; it helped their communities, it helped
their city, and it helped with the overall financial stability
of our country.
Mark Zandi and other economists have testified that housing
is roughly 25 percent of our economy. So if we do not stabilize
housing and grow in housing, we are not going to stabilize out
of this great recession.
Now, I am very concerned that the Republican majority in
the past 3 weeks have eliminated four critical housing programs
that helped people stay in their home, and I would say that it
is very, very dishonest to criticize a program for not helping
people that had no help to begin with, and they didn't get in
the program because they did not meet the high criteria that
the program had, that tax dollars would not be spent unless
people had a job, had a credit record, and were believed to be
able to meet that commitment going forward.
So I want to congratulate the Treasury Department and
really the Obama administration for not just criticizing and
saying we have a problem, but getting out there and doing
something, like FDR. When FDR had a problem, he didn't just
look at it, he started working on it. And, granted, not every
program works, but come in with some ideas of how to make it
better. But to come in and criticize a program when you have no
ideas of your own, when you haven't come forward with a
program, when you haven't done anything to help the people and
I would say the overall economy.
So I want to congratulate you on the work that you have
done. I support the HAMP program. I hope that President Obama
has a lot of veto ink in his pen, and if the Republican bill
gets to his desk, it is my hope that he will veto it.
And I respectfully ask the if they will have a hearing
where we can bring in HPD directors from across the country,
people on the front line that were working with our government
to help people stay in their home. In the city that I
represent, the officials that do this every day, the not-for-
profits that are committed, and the banks that have voluntarily
stepped up to the plate to help have said this program works.
So instead of just being critical, come up with ways to
improve it if you think there is a problem. But to criticize
because people didn't get into the program because the criteria
was so high--and I agree with the proposal from Treasury to
keep that criteria in a way that protects taxpayers' money.
Now, I would like to move on to the TARP workout. I really
want to quote from an article that was written recently,
October 20, 2010, in Bloomberg. It is one of our big papers and
media experts there. They testified, and I would like your
response to this, Mr. Massad, that TARP investments have
actually provided taxpayers with ``higher returns than yields
paid on 30-year Treasury bonds, enough money to fund the
Securities and Exchange Commission for the next two decades.''
The article also states, ``The government has earned $25.2
billion on its investment of $309 billion in banks and
insurance companies, an 8.2 percent return over 2 years.''
Now, that beat out U.S. Treasury's high yield savings
accounts, money market funds, and certificates of deposit, am I
correct?
Mr. Massad. Congressman, you are correct that we have had
some good returns on the programs. I am not familiar with those
exact numbers, but the bank program is making a profit and some
of the other----
Mrs. Maloney. Well, could I ask could you describe
generally the ways in which Treasury is seeking to maximize
taxpayers' investment under TARP and ensure that our country
and taxpayers are made whole?
Mr. Massad. Certainly, Congresswoman. Let me first just say
that, obviously, the purpose of TARP was to stabilize the
system, not to make money. But it is terrific that this program
will not cost the taxpayers very much, and we are looking to
maximize the returns on the various programs. As I say, we have
earned about, we estimate we will earn about $20 billion on the
bank investments. AIG right now is at a profit. We will have
some loss on the autos.
Let me just note one other thing, though, going back to
HAMP, and I apologize to the chairman; I misquoted the numbers.
In terms of those who were in trials and didn't make permanent
mods, they were actually about half of what I said. The
foreclosure completions are only 28,000 and the foreclosure
starts at only 84,000.
Mr. McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired and, with
that, I gave the gentlelady 6 minutes and I will give the
ranking member 6 minutes, since I went well over my time, out
of fairness to all that are here. I am sorry, I will give the
ranking member, I am sorry, Mr. Cummings, 6 minutes now.
Mr. Cummings. Very well, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much.
I do want to associate myself with every syllable that Mrs.
Maloney just said. I think part of the frustration, Mr. Massad,
and I think you are well aware of this, we want even more
people to be helped because there are so many people suffering.
Mr. Massad. Absolutely.
Mr. Cummings. And I guess the reason for the criteria was
the dilemma that people didn't want a program--I mean Congress
didn't want a program that standards would be so low that there
would be a lot of people failing. Is that part of the reason?
Mr. Massad. Well, I think it is a few things. You know, we
did have what we felt were very prudent eligibility criteria.
We don't, for example, provide modifications for vacation
homes, for vacant homes; we don't provide assistance for those
people who can afford their mortgage without it; we don't
provide assistance for those who need to move on to another
situation. And we make sure that the modification economically
makes sense.
And as a result of that, the pool of people that we
currently estimate are eligible, as you probably know, is about
1.4 million today. That is a pool of families. We have reached
a lot of those. We want to continue to reach more of them. But
it is a very difficult problem. We have had a lot of people
looking at whether there are other ways we can do this. Our
authority to implement new programs, as you know, has expired.
We did take funds and reallocate them to the States so that the
States can come up, particularly those States that are hardest
hit by these problems, so those States can innovate with some
programs that in particular address the needs of the unemployed
and the problem of falling house prices.
Mr. Cummings. Now, early on much has been made with regard
to the whole issue that it was projected by the President that
more people would be helped by HAMP than was. Is there
something that happened along the way that caused you all to
look at this thing and say, wait a minute, maybe we cannot
accomplish those numbers that we really wanted to accomplish?
And, if so, what was that?
Mr. Massad. We recognized that, No. 1, the eligibility pool
wasn't as big as we originally thought it might be; it was very
hard to know when the program was launched. And, again, we were
in a crisis; people had no sort of historical basis to say,
well, you know, this is how you should do it. That was No. 1.
No. 2 was servicers were not equipped to deal with this
crisis; their business model was set up to basically collect
payments on performing loans, so it was very, very difficult to
implement. We have tried to take a lot of actions to improve
that. As we discussed earlier, we need more. We need national
servicing standards. There is a lot of work going on a lot of
fronts to address the servicer performance.
And No. 3 was it is hard to reach people sometimes. People
don't necessarily want to talk on the phone when they get a
call from their mortgage servicer; they don't even want to hear
what it is about. It was hard to reach people.
Mr. Cummings. And so going back to this issue of the trial
modifications, so that we will have a clear picture, so you are
saying--and this is a very important point--that a lot of the
people who did not end up with permanent modifications were
able to resolve their problems in other ways, is that right?
Mr. Massad. That is absolutely true, and it is important to
remember that before we launched our program there were no,
there were very, very few modifications getting done by the
industry, and many of those that were being done increased
people's payments. HAMP set standards that the industry then
largely adopted in its proprietary programs, what we call the
affordability standard in terms of the ratio of the payment to
one's income.
And as a result of that, and as a result of other borrower
protections we have put in place, HAMP's effect has also been
very indirect in terms of helping a lot of people. There have
been about two million modifications done outside of HAMP since
we launched this program, and I think our standards helped
cause that. We have put in, as you know, a number of
protections that now the industry is following in terms of
prohibitions on dual track, where someone who is in the process
of being considered for a modification could otherwise be
foreclosed upon; other types of appeal processes for people who
are rejected. And we require the servicers to not only evaluate
someone for HAMP; we require them to then look at other types
of assistance, to make sure that person can't qualify for
something else, before they are allowed to foreclose upon them.
Mr. Cummings. Now, I don't know whether you have--I assume
you do--have some type of access to information or maybe you
are a part of these negotiations with the Attorney Generals.
Are you a part of that?
Mr. Massad. I am not directly.
Mr. Cummings. Not you, but do you have access?
Mr. Massad. I am aware of what is going on, yes.
Mr. Cummings. And I am not trying to get into any
confidentiality on the part of those negotiations, might HAMP
be affected by anything that comes out that?
Mr. Massad. Well, it certainly will be. What is going on in
that, and again I appreciate the question. As you know, I can't
comment on the details of it because it is an enforcement
matter, but clearly this is another example of the fact that
this industry is broken. It didn't have the standard that we
needed and it didn't have the ability to cope with this crisis,
and we saw that through HAMP, we saw that through what they
were doing on foreclosures, which was outside of HAMP. And I
think what is emerging from this is clearly a push to get
national servicing standards. And, yes, those will have an
effect across the whole industry, and that is what we need.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McHenry. I appreciate the ranking member's questions,
especially the last question is of interest. So it is a push
for national servicing standards.
Mr. Massad. Mr. Chairman, what I said was I think what we
need, what is evident by what has been found as to foreclosures
and what we found as to HAMP is that we do need national
servicing standards.
Mr. McHenry. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Massad. As to what comes out of----
Mr. McHenry. Go right ahead, go ahead and finish your
sentence.
Mr. Massad. As to what exactly would be in a settlement, I
wasn't commenting on that.
Mr. McHenry. Oh, OK.
Mr. Massad. That would be determined by the various parties
to the settlement.
Mr. McHenry. OK. Well, thank you for your testimony. Thank
you for being here today.
At this time, I ask unanimous consent to submit for the
record three written testimonies of what would have been a
panel today, testimony by Joshua Rosner, testimony by the
Independent Community Bankers, and, finally, testimony by
Anthony B. Sanders. I ask unanimous consent they be submitted
for the record. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Today's hearing was certainly interesting; we
had two oftentimes dramatically different views of the facts,
views of the lay of the land, but certainly stimulating and
interesting for us to inform Congress's thinking on how the
implementation of Dodd-Frank is progressing, the impact of the
TARP program and the bailouts, and whether or not bailouts
continue to be the rule of the day.
A couple of interesting points in terms of Mr. Barofsky's
testimony. He refers to HAMP as a broken promise, as well as it
being poorly designed and executed, and that the Main Street
goals of TARP were not followed through with. Finally, he also
testified that what he said was ``resolution authority is a
joke,'' and that goes to the heart of really what many of us
here, in terms of Congress, believe is one of the lasting
impacts of Dodd-Frank, is that we have codified the bailouts in
terms of calling it resolution authority.
Now, that was Mr. Barofsky's testimony. Now, Mr. Massad did
an able job of defending the administration's actions, in
particular HAMP. We simply disagree on the impact it has in
terms of those that it is hurting. I appreciate your testimony
and your willingness to be here. Thank you.
This meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[The prepared statement of Hon. Gerald E. Connolly
follows:]


