- THE ADMINISTRATION'S BET ON ABOUND SOLAR: ASSESSING THE COSTS TO THE AMERICAN TAXPAYERS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ADMINISTRATION'S BET ON ABOUND SOLAR: ASSESSING THE COSTS TO THE
AMERICAN TAXPAYERS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON REGULATORY AFFAIRS,
STIMULUS OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT SPENDING

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 18, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-167

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
75-588                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs, Stimulus Oversight and Government
Spending

JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chairman
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York, Vice    DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio, Ranking
Chairwoman                           Minority Member
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JIM COOPER, Tennessee
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              JACKIE SPEIER, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on July 18, 2012....................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Craig Witsoe, Former Chief Executive Officer, Abound Solar,
Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    10
Written Statement............................................    12
Mr. Tom Tiller, Former Chairman of the Board Abound Solar, Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    17
Mr. David Frantz, Acting Executive Director, Loan Programs
Office, U.S. Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    21
Written Statement............................................    24
Mr. Jonathan Silver, Former Executive Director, Loan Program
Office, U.S. Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    29
Written Statement............................................    32
Ms. Veronique De Rugy, Senior Research Fellow, Mercatus Center at
George Mason University
Oral Statement...............................................    72
Written Statement............................................    74
Mr. Gregory Kats, President, Capital E
Oral Statement...............................................    85
Written Statement............................................    87

APPENDIX

Continuation of this Committee's oversight of the Department of
Energy's effort to promote green energy........................   105

THE ADMINISTRATION'S BET ON ABOUND SOLAR: ASSESSING THE COSTS TO THE
AMERICAN TAXPAYERS

----------

Wednesday, July 18, 2012,

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs, Stimulus
Oversight, and Government Spending,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jim Jordan
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Jordan, Buerkle, Labrador,
DesJarlais, Guinta, Kelly, Kucinich, and Welch.
Also Present: Representatives Issa, Gowdy, and Cummings.
Staff Present: Will L. Boyington, Majority Staff Assistant;
Molly Boyl, Majority Parliamentarian; Lawrence J. Brady,
Majority Staff Director; Drew Colliatie, Majority Staff
Assistant; John Cuaderes, Majority Deputy Staff Director; Adam
P. Fromm, Majority Director of Member Liaison and Committee
Operations; Linda Good, Majority Chief Clerk; Tyler Grimm,
Majority Professional Staff Member; Christopher Hixon, Majority
Deputy Chief Counsel, Oversight; Mark D. Marin, Majority
Director of Oversight; Laura L. Rush, Majority Deputy Chief
Clerk; Jeff Solsby, Majority Senior Communications Advisor;
Jaron Bourke, Minority Director of Administration; Ashley
Etienne, Minority Director of Communications; Susanne Sachsman
Grooms, Minority Chief Counsel; Jennifer Hoffman, Minority
Press Secretary; Nicholas Kamau, Minority Counsel; Chris
Knauer, Minority Senior Investigator; Adam Koshkin, Minority
Staff Assistant; Brian Quinn, Minority Counsel; Dave Rapallo,
Minority Staff Director; and Donald Sherman, Minority Counsel.
Mr. Jordan. The hearing on the Administration's Bet on
Abound Solar: Assessing the Cost to the American Taxpayers will
come to order.
You guys know the routine; we do our opening. You have to
listen to us for a few minutes and then we will give you each
five minutes for your testimony. I know we have several other
members coming. We had conference meetings this morning, so
they will be here shortly. But we will get started. I will do
my opening statement, then we will turn to the gentleman from
Ohio for his.
Today's hearing continues this Committee's oversight of the
Department of Energy's efforts to promote green energy. After
Solyndra went bankrupt in August of last year, major questions
arose about the nature of the decision-making process at the
Department of Energy and how safe American taxpayers were in
light of the risks associated with the decisions made by
political appointees at the Department.
It is becoming abundantly clear that billions of dollars of
the public's money was put at undue risk. The Committee's
investigation has revealed a pattern of incompetence,
carelessness, and cronyism at President Obama's Department of
Energy. The DOE Inspector General has testified that the money
given to the Department via the stimulus was akin to attaching
``a garden hose to a fire hydrant.'' DOE was flooded with cash
and did not have the infrastructure to spend it in a sound
fashion.
Abound Solar received a $400 million loan guarantee from
DOE and is the third major bankruptcy within the loan's
portfolio. This decision to grant this company taxpayer support
will end up costing taxpayers up to $70 million.
Had it not been for the attention drawn to problems with
the loan program, DOE officials could have continued running
the office in a cavalier fashion and the losses may have been
much greater.
As defenders of the Administration's green energy agenda
are likely to point out, letters were written by both Democrats
and Republicans to the DOE supporting Abound. Ultimately,
however, the decision to issue this loan guarantee, despite
overwhelming evidence that the company was a bad bet, fell on
the shoulders of the Department of Energy.
To a large degree, this decision rested with the two
individuals testifying here today, the former and current heads
of DOE's loan program office, Mr. Silver and Mr. Frantz. These
two political appointees at the front lines of the loan program
were responsible for safeguarding taxpayers from undue risk,
and they failed in that task. In the case of Mr. Silver,
instead of protecting taxpayers, evidence has emerged that he
actively aided companies in pushing through their loan
guarantees, despite the risk to taxpayers.
The close political and financial ties many of these
companies had to the Obama Administration are remarkable. We
have a trillion dollar deficit, sky-high unemployment, and
instead of getting people back to work, taxdollars were
directed to friends and political allies. Allowing the DOE to
play venture capitalist gods with the people's money is a
mistake we should never allow to happen again.
For nearly two months, Chairman Issa and I have been
requesting that Secretary Chu come back to testify before the
Committee to explain developments uncovered in our
investigation. So far, Secretary Chu has been unwilling to come
and explain these developments. In fact, the Department of
Energy has obstructed our efforts at every step of the way.
Just this week the DOE actively interfered with our efforts
to obtain documents from Mr. Silver prior to this hearing. Many
people don't realize that the Obama Administration is not the
first to experience the folly of loan guarantees. When
President Carter authorized $20 billion for an alternative
energy loan guarantee program, taxpayers lost a tremendous
amount of money. Afterward, many agreed we should never issue
loan guarantee for clean energy projects again. That debacle is
detailed in the Committee's report released in March of this
year.
However, there are another three companies in bankruptcy
and, unfortunately, it seems safe to say that Abound will not
be the last to fail.
I did not vote for the stimulus which provided these funds
and, frankly, I find it absurd that the President is trying to
force expensive so-called green energy down the throats of the
American people. However, despite my disagreements on the
policy, I think we can all agree that there is something
fundamentally flawed about the implementation of this policy by
the Department of Energy and its Loan Program Office, which has
rewarded friends of the Administration at the expense of the
American people.
With that, I will yield to the gentleman from Ohio for his
opening statement.
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I welcome
the opportunity to hear from the witnesses today, and although
I am sure that each of you will provide the Subcommittee with
valuable testimony, I am concerned that my colleagues in the
Majority have other interests.
And even before we received a single document from the
Department of Energy or one of the loan guarantee recipients,
our Chairman called the 1705 program a broad scandal,
characterized by allegations of pay-to-play relationships, and
yet we found no evidence of such a scandal or cronyism. And I
think it is really important for this Committee to proceed from
facts. We may assume some things, but we shouldn't be making
statements based on our assumptions; we should be making
statements based on facts that the Committee process uncovers.
I think that is a much more serious way to proceed with the
work of this Committee.
What this Committee has discovered is that Democrats and
Republicans alike have consistently supported the loan
guarantee program, whether here in Congress, in State Houses
across this Country, or in the private investor community.
Meanwhile, throughout this investigation, there is a real
scandal that has been underneath it that we need to address,
and that is the systematic, illegal dumping of subsidized
Chinese solar panels in the U.S. So we are attacking our own
business people here. Meanwhile, the Chinese are eating our
lunch in this market while we are fighting with each other. It
doesn't make any sense at all.
In December 2011, the United States International Trade
Commission found that the American solar industry ``materially
injured by reason of imports from China.'' In May the
Department of Commerce reached a preliminary determination that
China was dumping solar panels in U.S. markets. Now, this is in
violation of U.S. trade law. Now, there is an effort to level
the playing field, so the Commerce Department proposed a 30
percent tariff on Chinese solar panels.
Today you will hear from the former heads of Abound Solar
about how illegal Chinese dumping hurt its ability to compete
and ultimately contributed to the company's bankruptcy. We will
also hear again from Greg Kats, a venture capitalist with
substantial experience in the renewable energy sector, who will
tell us that China's aggressive actions threaten U.S.
businesses and job creation, and we should be investing more,
investing more, not less, in green technology to promote our
economic and environmental future.
I mean, think about it, Members. If we direct our attention
to attacking each other and wipe out opportunities for American
businesses to be able to grow in this sector, China then seizes
the market and we basically open the door for it to happen
while they are dumping. So we have anti-competitive conduct
happening with one of our major trading partners, and instead
of focusing on that, which they are still trying to do, and I
would urge my colleagues on this Committee we should spend some
time looking at this. This is something we should be able to
work together on. And if we are able to do that, then we might
look at the question of the U.S. solar industry in a different
light.
Do they have troubles? Yes. Is it our responsibility to
look at those troubles? Absolutely. I have never said that this
Committee doesn't have an obligation to look at the problems
within the U.S. solar industry and the financing packages. We
should do that. That is what we should do.
But there is another issue going on here that needs to be
addressed, because if we wreck the opportunity for
entrepreneurs in the solar industry to be able to succeed, and
ignore what China is doing with their dumping of subsidized
solar panels in the U.S., we are going to wake up someday and
ask, hey, what happened, how come America isn't in this solar
panel business and China has the whole game?
So just a few thoughts for my friends today before we start
this hearing. Thank you.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
I will now yield to the gentleman of the full Committee,
the gentleman from California, Mr. Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My good friend from Ohio, Mr. Kucinich, points out that
China cleaned our clock in the solar panel business. The
question that this hearing is not on is why is anyone
surprised. China wasn't a new competitor. China effectively
dominates fabrication of chips and other affordable
semiconductors. You don't get your toys or your clothing from
Cleveland, my hometown, Mr. Kucinich's hometown.
So we could have a discussion, as this Committee has, on
how Secretary Chu's folly of believing that mandating a market
and then funding a market of production in the U.S. somehow was
going to stop the market forces that had done so well in so
many other areas of the electronics industry from taking
effect. We can have that discussion, but not as long as this
Administration continues to have an attack on unsubsidized
forms of energy, continues to attack every possible way in
which we could compete against China with affordable energy.
The fact is this hearing today is on freedom of
information. This is on the Presidential Records Act. This is
on every law that requires that the Executive Branch maintain
records that are available to Congress, to the public, and to
the Archives of the President.
Jonathan Silver is not the first, nor is he likely to be
the only, person that we will discover decided that Gmail or
Hotmail was a convenient way to keep out of the limelight, if
you will, and the accountability their communication. Certainly
today, as we look at some of the loan-related emails, Jonathan
Silver and others were scheming to ensure that the right people
got their loan guarantees and, in fact, many of the emails are
clearly outside the element of pure merit and public
accountability.
Mr. Chairman, this loan guarantee scandal will go on and we
will discover, as we already have, that Secretary Chu,
Secretary Bryson, and others actively created a market and
falsely allowed it to appear as though it would succeed,
ultimately leading to the inevitable bankruptcies.
But today the most important, thing, Mr. Chairman, that I
want you to get out of this hearing, and that we all need to
get out of this hearing, is the idea that Gmail or Hotmail is a
great way to circumvent laws that make your communications in
the Executive Branch public record can be abrogated simply by
opening a free account. That is what I am concerned about here
today. That is ultimately a scandal that did not begin on the
watch of this President.
There is no question that with Chairman Waxman there were
questions about emails. I remember some about emails to the
Republican National Committee and the Chairman, when he sat in
your chair, Mr. Jordan, in fact, Chairman Waxman issuing
subpoenas.
But in this case we are not looking for some backdoor
communications on politics with a political entity; we are
looking at the day-to-day business of political and career
individuals at key cabinet positions, key administration
positions routinely circumventing the very laws that are in
place to create accountability.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the work you did in getting the
compliance for today's hearing.
Quite frankly, Mr. Silver, I appreciate you and your
attorney's willingness to quickly act and produce documents
directly to us.
I will, once again, look at the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee and say when are you going to say shame on your
Administration for trying to block our legitimate discovery?
The Secretary and the Department of Energy specifically tried
to prevent us from getting these documents, asking Mr. Silver's
attorney, ordering him, effectively, to deliver the documents
to them so that they could limit and redact them, so they could
decide what Congress was entitled to.
The imperial presidency must end. The imperial presidency
must end, and it will not end until my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle recognize that it is not acceptable under
this President, and if we don't stop it under this
Administration, we can count on administrations to come of
either party simply ignoring Congress and the oversight, and
running by executive fiat a government.
That is not the America I grew up in; Mr. Kucinich, it is
not the America you grew up in; Mr. Cummings, it is not the
America you grew up in; and I don't want it to be the one that
our children grow up in.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Kucinich. I ask unanimous consent to respond to my
friend.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Ohio is recognized.
Mr. Kucinich. I think most members here know that I am not
someone who reflexively defends the Administration. I mean, you
are looking at one of the few Democrats who actually took this
Administration to court on a constitutional issue. And I defend
the right of this Committee to get information. We are in a
partisan climate here that makes it a little bit testy and I
understand that.
So I am here with the intention of saying, on the bigger
issue, not the Chair's right to get information, not the
Committee's right to inquire; on a larger issue here. We have
China wiping us out on the solar industry and I am just
concerned that we be sensitive to American business interests.
And there is one other thing that my friend mentioned to
me, Mr. Jordan, and ceertainly not the topic of this hearing,
but look at how bad this is. I mean, when you have China even
supplying the uniforms for the U.S. Olympic team, it shows you
we are missing out something here. Why couldn't they have been
made in America?
So we want to make solar panels in America. How can we do
it? I would say that given the business acumen of the Chair,
and it is severely extraordinary, I am sure that you could
provide some suggestions to the Administration on how they
could run the program better. But as far as inquiring and
providing documents, after a while I don't know where this
goes, but I am glad to be here. We have the right to ask
questions and I am hopeful we will pursue this question about
China.
Thanks.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Maryland, the Ranking Member of the full
Committee, is recognized.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I thank
you for calling this hearing and I am looking forward to the
testimony of the witnesses. I have already heard the word
falsely; I have heard the word scandal; even heard you, Mr.
Chairman, say the President rewarded contracts to friends of
the Administration at the expense of the American people. We
have not heard one syllable yet from the witnesses, and I
refuse to draw conclusions before I hear from them, and I think
that is what this hearing is all about.
I do say to all of the gentlemen who are seated that you
have heard the words uttered here, and I hope that you will
have a response to them.
I want to emphasize one point, which is that one of the
most significant struggles Abound faced involved the alleged
dumping of Chinese solar panels into the market. While some may
play that down, I think that is very significant.
I want to highlight what this allegation actually means. It
means that China is accused of selling solar panels into the
United States at prices lower than their actual cost to make
them. Why would they do that? They would do that to undermine
United States businesses, you know, the job creators that we
hear about so often.
In my opinion, this is the main issue we should be focusing
on today, instead of turning this into an election year
campaign issue.
One argument used to attack the Department's Loan Guarantee
Program has been that it exposed taxpayers to excessive risk as
a result of DOE's bias towards approving loans without regard
to warning signs. These conclusions are contrary to the facts.
Today we will hear from an industry expert who will explain
why, despite the failure of some projects like Abound, the
risks of the Department's Loan Guarantee Program are
substantially lower than Congress expected when they created
the program. Current and former employees will testify about
the Department's effort to minimize these risks both in the
overall portfolio and in the individual transactions.
The Department structured its program to protect the
taxpayers. For example, Abound's loan guarantee was structured
to require the company to achieve certain milestones before it
could draw down funds in allotted amounts. When it could not
meet some of these milestones, it was prohibited from receiving
additional payments. As a result, Abound's draws were limited
to about $70 million on a loan guarantee of $400 million.
As indicated in the chart behind me, the total value of the
loan program Congress created was about $16 billion.
Recognizing that there were risks involved in the program,
Congress set aside about $2.5 billion to cover any potential
losses in the portfolio. To date, however, losses have been
only a small fraction of that amount. Certainly, we wish that
there were no losses. There have been $648 million, or about
one-quarter of the amount Congress anticipated.
Contrary to the Majority's repeated claims, the Committee
has identified no evidence of political cronyism within the
Department's loan program. Abound's project received support
from the entire, and let me repeat that, the entire Indiana
congressional delegation, that is, Republicans and Democrats;
and the Majority has not involved Indiana Governor Mitch
Daniels to testify today regarding his personal, personal
support for Abound, including his offer to provide tax credits
so Abound would house the manufacturing plant in his State. So
when I hear words like, rewarded, President Obama rewarded
contracts to his friends at the expense of the American people,
well, I guess Mitch Daniels must be one of those friends.
The failure of Abound is a disappointing reality, but a
close look at the program reveals that applicants received wide
bipartisan support, that very little taxpayer money has been
lost, and that the program has resulted in some of the largest
renewable energy projects in the world.
I go back to what Mr. Kucinich said a few minutes ago. You
know, when we talk about taxing the rich, what we constantly
hear is we have to protect the job creators. You hear that over
and over and over again as talking points. Well, you know,
these businesses are job creators, and some businesses do not
do as well as others, but I want us to keep in mind this
Chinese issue; it is significant and hopefully the testimony
today will shed more light on this so that we will be able to
draw some conclusions based on facts, and not allegations.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman. I would just say only in
Washington would the loss of taxpayer money be viewed as a
success when it wasn't quite as much as we thought it might
have been.
Mr. Cummings. Would the Chairman yield?
Mr. Jordan. I would be happy to yield.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Chairman, nobody said that. I didn't say
that.
Mr. Jordan. You didn't say that, but that is what the chart
said.
Mr. Cummings. All right, fine.
Mr. Jordan. Said we lost money----
Mr. Cummings. Let me----
Mr. Jordan. I would just make one point: the program isn't
over yet. We just had the third--we may have a lot more coming,
we don't know. That is what we are trying to get at.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Chairman, I understand that and I agree.
The fact is what I was trying to say is that Congress
apparently anticipated that there would be losses, and you are
right, the program is not over. In business, and I have been in
business, sometimes you do have to take risks; and
unfortunately we had some factors in this situation that I
think hurt this company. Certainly, all of us wish that there
would be no losses, but in any business you are going to have
some losses.
If you are talking about a whole group of businesses you
are going to have some losses at some point. I am not saying
that it was great. Nobody wants to lose a dime. But Congress
apparently anticipated losses, and all I am saying is that only
a fraction of that has been used, that money set aside for the
guarantee.
Mr. Jordan. I think the gentleman underscores the
fundamental point: in business, when there are losses, the
people who suffer the losses are the people in the private
sector, not the American taxpayer; and that is a key
distinction between this program and what happens in the
marketplace.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania wishes to make an opening
statement and is recognized.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this. I think the key to this is we are talking about
protecting job creators, but basically it is protecting the
American taxpayers. That is who has underwritten all these
different loans. So when we talk about that, I think it is
fascinating, and we will get a chance, maybe, later on to look
at what their status was as they were being considered for
these loans. In the real world, no bank, no lender would have
given these monies out.
So how do you navigate that territory? I think it is going
to be fascinating, but we will take a look at it and take a
look at how ratings actually are reflected and what an A status
means, what a B status means, as you go down the line and see
the number of these companies that, really, in the real world
would not have been able to receive funding.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate you holding the hearing and it
is about protecting taxpayers' investments.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlelady from New York, the Vice Chairman of the
Subcommittee is recognized, Ms. Buerkle.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning to our panelists this morning.
Just a couple of brief opening remarks.
I want to just respond to the gentleman from Ohio and his
comments. We are not here attacking our own businesses. That is
not what this hearing is about. This hearing is the legitimate
role of the Oversight Committee, and what we are doing here
this morning is protecting the American taxpayers. We are in a
climate right now where there is so much discussion about
raising taxes on the American people, and if anyone can justify
raising taxes on the American people, when we are throwing, at
this point, $70 million out the window, it is inexcusable. It
is just, we cannot raise taxes on the American people when this
kind of waste is going on and we are abusing and misusing the
American taxpayers' dollars.
I also want to make just one other comment, and that is why
we want to emulate China. This is the United States of America.
We believe in free enterprise. We believe that an individual
can grow a dream and should be able to do that without the help
of the Government, and it is that individual who will grow that
dream. It is his hard work, it is his staying up at night,
worrying about a bottom line. That is the essence of the United
States of America.
So it is not my desire to ever wish for, hope for, look at
China and say that is what we want to look like. We are the
United States of America, the greatest nation in the history of
mankind.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentlelady.
Any other member wish to make a statement?
[No response.]
Mr. Jordan. If not, we will get to our panel. Eight members
of Congress, we got that done in half an hour. That is a pretty
good clip, Mr. Ranking Member.
We will start with Mr. Craig Witsoe is the former Chief
Executive Officer of Abound Solar. We welcome you to the
Committee today.
Mr. Tom Tiller is former Chairman of the Board at Abound
Solar. Thank you for being with us.
Mr. Davis Frantz is the Acting Executive Director of the
Loan Programs Office at the U.S. Department of Energy; and Mr.
Jonathan Silver is the former Executive Director of the Loan
Program at the Department of Energy.
You guys know the deal. We have to swear you in per the
rules of the Committee, so if you would please stand and raise
your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Mr. Jordan. Let the record show everyone answered in the
affirmative.
We will go down the line, starting with Mr. Witsoe. You
guys know you get five minutes, more or less, but keep it at
five if you can, and then we will get to the Committee's
questions.
So, Mr. Witsoe, you are recognized for your five minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF CRAIG WITSOE

Mr. Witsoe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you said, my name
is Craig Witsoe. I served as the CEO of Abound Solar for the
eight months prior to July 2nd, when the company,
unfortunately, suspended operations under the Chapter 7
bankruptcy filing.
First, I would like to say that we are very grateful for
the dedication and the hard work of our talented employees; the
support and the integrity of our investors and the board
members; and, of course, for the support granted under the DOE
Loan Guarantee Program. We do hope that today's discussions
will be beneficial to better understand how the U.S. can best
compete in this important, but also very challenging, global
solar panel market.
Abound was formed as a startup company in 2007 based on
advanced research started in the late 1980s at Colorado State
University, in collaboration with the National Science
Foundation, as well as the National Renewable Energy Lab. We
had research and development, along with advanced manufacturing
in Colorado, and had planned an additional manufacturing
expansion in Indiana.
Abound produced thin-film Cadmium Telluride, or Cad-Tel,
solar panels, and this was important because many agree that,
if produced in large quantities, at large scale, Cad-Tel panels
can be made in America at lower cost per watt than the
traditional crystalline-silicon modules produced by many
Chinese companies today.
At the time our DOE loan was originated, Abound and First
Solar were the two companies in the world with significant Cad-
Tel production experience. In October of 2011, General Electric
also announced that they would build the Country's largest U.S.
solar panel manufacturing plant, also based in Colorado, and
that they would use Cad-Tel technology as well. In recent
months, Abound was cooperating with the U.S. Photovoltaic
Manufacturing Consortium and NREL to encourage industry
collaboration which could further accelerate the U.S.
advancement of Cad-Tel.
Abound's funding came from more than $300 million in
private investment and the $70 million that we have mentioned
today from the potential $400 million authorized under the 1705
DOE Loan Guarantee Program. Funds were used to complete and
start up two production lines in Colorado, which enabled a
nearly doubling of panel efficiency, from 45 watts per panel in
2009 to 85 watts per panel in 2012.
Abound's technology and business had made solid progress
until about the second half of 2011, when the panel prices
dropped by 50 percent in a year due to very aggressive price
cutting from Chinese competitors using the older crystalline-
silicon technology. With a reported over $30 billion in
government subsidies, Chinese panel makers were able to sell
below cost and put Abound out of business before we were big
enough to pose a real competitive threat to China's rapidly
growing market share.
Given these challenging market conditions, the DOE didn't
release any further funds to Abound after August of 2011,
including reimbursement for significant funds Abound had
already spent to complete its second manufacturing line in
Colorado. While we understood the increasing market risk
driving this decision and understood the technical
justifications in the loan documents, we also knew that it put
enormous financial strain on our small company.
In February of 2012, Abound made the very difficult
decision to cease production of its first generation of panels,
conserve our cash, and focus our resources on accelerating
development of a higher efficiency, next-generation module.
This module had already been verified by NREL to produce a very
competitive 85 watts per panel.
We believed that this next-generation product, along with
further private financing, could keep the company competitive
and enable a restart of production in Colorado. Abound hired a
reputable outside firm to lead a process of soliciting the
needed private financing and, from a large pool of identified
potential investors, made final management presentations and
facility tours to interested parties in mid-May, as well as
late June of this year.
Unfortunately, in the end, the involved parties were unable
to agree upon terms and negotiations were ended, and on June
28th we announced to our employees that Abound would have to
suspend all operations.
This very fast and severe decline in the market conditions
for solar panels has affected many U.S. companies, ranging from
startups like Abound to even the largest U.S. corporations. The
same week that Abound announced its closure, GE, also citing
market price declines due to Chinese competition, unfortunately
announced that it would delay its own Cad-Tel solar panel
production plans by at least 18 months while it worked on a
next-generation, higher efficiency module.
Around the world there are similar accounts of the impact
of aggressive actions by China. While Abound was in agreement
with the recent Commerce Department decisions to place U.S.
import tariffs on Chinese modules, these actions were simply
too late for our company.
This isn't the way that any of us wanted Abound's story to
end, certainly, but we hope that the technology we have
developed can still, in some form, help the U.S. to better
compete in the next generations of solar panel manufacturing.
We are very appreciative of the investments of our investors,
as well as the DOE.
Our former employees should be proud of their technical
innovations and their personal courage to pursue new technology
for American manufacturing and not give up until all reasonable
paths were exhausted. Abound believes that competitive solar
energy can be important to the U.S. energy security and job
creation, and that the longer-term consistent renewable energy
policy can encourage further private investment.
I hope that today's discussion will be constructive and
helpful to our common goal that the U.S. regain competitiveness
in this sector and prevent the loss of technology leadership.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Witsoe follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.003

Mr. Jordan. Thank you.
Mr. Tiller?

STATEMENT OF TOM TILLER

Mr. Tiller. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Kucinich, and members of the Committee. My name is Tom Tiller.
From January 2010 until June 2012 I worked for Abound Solar,
first as Chief Executive Officer and then as Chairman of the
Board.
Abound, as you know, filed for bankruptcy on July 2nd,
2012. On June 28th, 2012, when we suspended operations, I also
resigned as Chairman. Declaring bankruptcy was extremely
disappointing for all of us who cared deeply about Abound and
who had invested our own time, our own money, and our own
effort in trying to make this company a success. The Department
of Energy was our partner in that effort, and I am personally
disappointed that the company was not able to provide the DOE
and the American taxpayers with a positive return on its
investment. I appreciate the opportunity to appear this morning
and speak to you about my time at Abound.
I came to Abound after spending nearly 10 years as CEO of
Polaris Industries, a $2.4 billion global leader in the power
sports industry. During my time at Polaris, we successfully
introduced more than 150 new products and tripled the value of
the company. Prior to Polaris, I had worked at GE in a variety
of engineering and senior leadership positions. All together, I
have spent nearly 30 years running and supporting American
manufacturing operations of technology-based companies.
The opportunity to join Abound was unique and exciting. The
company was involved in the cutting edge of solar energy
innovation and had a proprietary manufacturing technology that
has the potential to significantly reduce the cost of solar
power. The culture of the company was also infectious. People
were excited to do something that mattered for the Country. I
believed in the technology and, more importantly, the
outstanding people that the Company had at all levels, enough
to make a professional commitment and a personal financial
investment in the business.
It is my view that for any company to be successful in the
solar industry, it needs two things: winning technology and the
scale necessary to drive down cost. At Abound, that meant the
company needed to develop and execute an aggressive growth plan
that would enable it to quickly develop its products at large
scale.
Most of the capital that Abound raised to fund this plan
was equity financing raised from professional investors.
Indeed, in addition to obtaining a loan from DOE, we raised
approximately $300 million of equity. I can assure you that
with every round of equity financing, informed outsiders
conducted their own independent analysis of the current state
of the company in an effort to ensure they would receive a good
return on their investment. Many times teams of investors and
engineers met Abound's people and went through the plant, the
patents, the manufacturing process, and the financial plans.
Ultimately, these seasonal professionals made the decision that
investing in this company was a good bet.
The DOE's review of the Abound loan application was well
underway when I joined the company in January of 2010. During
my time with the company, there were many inquiries, visits,
data requests, and technical and financial evaluations from
DOE. The company prepared and revised detailed financial models
and answered hundreds of questions.
In the end, it took nearly two years to complete the
application and approval process for the Abound DOE loan, which
closed in December 2010. Although the total DOE loan amount was
for $400 million, Abound only drew down about $70 million,
which was used for the construction of manufacturing lines in
Colorado. The company stopped drawing down DOE funds entirely
in the third quarter of 2011.
Any investment in a new business carries risk. Some may ask
why Abound ultimately succumbed to that risk, even with
approximately $300 million in private investment and $70
million from the DOE. In my view, the single most important
reason was that there was an abrupt and major change in the
market for solar panels which reduced the selling price of
Abound's products and made it extremely difficult for an early
stage company like Abound to scale in these changed market
conditions.
Over the past 25 years or so, the solar market has grown
rapidly and consistently, with a considerable acceleration in
2009 and 2010. Things changed when the Chinese government
reportedly provided approximately $35 billion in subsidies to
the major Chinese solar producers. These investments resulted
in substantially more production capacity than could possibly
be absorbed by the market, so the price of solar panels fell
dramatically, by more than 50 percent in just one year. Such a
severe market change made it difficult for Abound and others to
survive.
No one is more disappointed than I am that Abound was not
successful. I am saddened by this result for the nearly 400
employees who made such a tremendous contribution to the
company, the investors who invested hundreds of millions of
dollars, the communities that supported and believed in
Abound's vision, the suppliers who partnered with the company
at every stage, and the customers who trusted the company to
provide a long-term energy solution.
I appreciate the chance that the private investors and DOE
took when they chose to support the company and its role in the
future of American renewable energy technology. Unfortunately,
we were not able to succeed.
With that overview, I am happy to answer any questions that
the members of the Subcommittee may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Tiller follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.007

Mr. Jordan. Thank you.
Mr. Frantz?

STATEMENT OF DAVID FRANTZ

Mr. Frantz. Chairman Jordan, Ranking Member Kucinich, and
members of the Committee, thank you very much for the
opportunity to testify before you today. My name is David
Frantz and I am the Acting Executive Director of the Department
of Energy's Loan Programs Office, the LPO. In the way of an
introduction, I would emphasize the point that I am a career
member of the Senior Executive Service of the U.S. Government;
I am not a political appointee.
I was the first employee of the LPO. Prior to joining the
Department to stand up the program, I previously served over 10
years with the Overseas Private Investment Corporation as
Senior Management Project Finance Position, underwriting and
structuring major energy infrastructure projects around the
world. Prior to this government service, my 40-year career has
been entirely devoted to project finance in the private sector.
Previously, I served as a U.S. Naval officer and I am a Vietnam
combat veteran.
Before highlighting the progress we have made over the past
five years, I would also like to acknowledge and commend the
LPO staff for their unswerving commitment and diligent work
associated with accomplishments of the program. The staff is
one of the finest project finance teams assembled in the world
today, and its record over the past years unprecedented by
world standards.
I would hasten to add that the GAO, in its recent audit of
the DOE Loan Guarantee, has acknowledged that commercial
lenders interviewed by GAO stated that LPO's underwriting and
due diligence standards are as rigorous as or more rigorous
than those in the private sector.
As of today, the LPO has committed or closed $35 billion in
direct loans or loan guarantees, which finance nearly three
dozen projects, with total project costs greater than $55
billion. When the Section 1705 program ended, on September
30th, 2011, it included a portfolio of over $16 billion and 28
renewable projects. Collectively, the LPO projects are expected
to support approximately 60,000 jobs.
Earlier this year, an independent consultant, Herb Allison,
evaluated both the monitoring efforts of the Loan Programs
Office and its portfolio. Mr. Allison's report concluded that
the estimated long-term cost of outstanding portfolio is $2.7
billion, roughly $200 million lower than the Department's most
recent estimate.
As the global energy opportunity grows, so does the
competition. Countries throughout Europe, Asia, and the Western
Hemisphere have decided that energy technologies are critical
to their national economic security in the 21st century. Many
countries have established supportive policies and are making
major investments in everything from renewables to electric
vehicles to smart grids and the next generation of biofuels. In
2010 alone, China provided more than $30 billion in credit to
the country's largest solar manufacturing through the
government controlled China Development Bank.
Through the Loan Program, the Department is working to
answer the challenge from China and other countries by
supporting a large number of solar projects.
With respect to the Abound transaction specifically, in
December 2010, as you have heard, the Department issued a loan
guarantee to Abound Solar Manufacturing to manufacture the
next-generation solar panels. It was intended to partially
finance construction of two solar panel production lines in the
existing facility in Colorado and the acquisition and buildout
of a second facility in Tipton, Indiana.
Abound developed and demonstrated a process for producing
thin-film solar panels at a cost that was expected to be
substantially less than the traditional solar panels. When the
cost of polysilicon was high, Abound's technology offered the
promise of a lower cost alternative that would be built here in
the United States. As of December 2011, Abound had raised more
than $300 million, as the officers have indicated, in private
equity from large and established investors and venture capital
firms.
By the time DOE offered Abound a conditional commitment in
the summer of 2010, the price of polysilicon had begun to fall.
However, prior to financial close, the Department's independent
market consultant for the transaction believed, as did the
Department, that the price of polysilicon would continue to
drop, but only by approximately 2 percent a year over the next
10 years.
Instead, prices continued to fall much more than projected,
including a 47 percent decline in 2011. So while the market
experts concluded that the average selling price for PV cells
would decrease approximately 20 percent, they actually
decreased 47 percent last year alone.
As Mr. Allison's report noted, DOE has the ability to
reduce or mitigate risk in a portfolio over time and has robust
tools for protecting itself from elective risk. One of those
tools is financial and technical milestones that must be met
before additional funds are disbursed. When the price of the
solar panels dropped, Abound's product was no longer cost-
competitive and the company was unable to meet some of those
financial milestones.
Accordingly, in August 2011, the Department halted
disbursement on the loan and of the $400 million loan Abound
was originally approved for, the Department disbursed
approximately $68 million. Because of the strong protections
DOE put in place, the Department has already protected more
than 80 percent of the original loan and expects to recover a
portion of outstanding loan through the course of bankruptcy
proceedings.
Securing America's economic leadership in the future
requires that we support innovation and deployment today. The
troubles of some segments in the solar manufacturing market
should not overshadow the great work the Department's loan
programs have done to date, or the need to continue to find
ways to support clean energy development in this Country.
That said, developing a robust clean energy manufacturing
sector in the United States is crucial to our long-term
national interests and would help enable American companies
work to attain tools needed to succeed in this competitive
space. And one of the most important tools, as our global
competitors have learned, is financing on reasonable terms,
wisely targeted and responsibly deployed.
The question is whether we will take advantage of this or
whether we will simply cede leadership in clean energy to other
nations and watch as tens of thousands of jobs are created
overseas. We were once the leaders in this field and we can be
again, all the while with the interest of the U.S. taxpayer as
its foremost concern.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to your
questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Frantz follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.012

Mr. Jordan. Thank you.
Mr. Silver.

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN SILVER

Mr. Silver. Chairman Jordan, Ranking Member Kucinich, and
members of the Subcommittee, my name is Jonathan Silver. I am
the former Executive Director of the Loan Programs Office at
the Department of Energy. Currently, I am a senior visiting
fellow at Third Way, a centrist think tank where I work on
energy policy and energy finance. I am also a senior advisor on
energy investments for a leading private equity firm and sit on
the board of several energy companies.
My work on the Loan Program was based on more than 25 years
of business experience as a management consultant at McKinsey &
Company, an executive with experience in managing complex
organizations, a managing director of one of the Country's
largest and most successful hedge funds, and as the cofounder
of a successful venture capital firm. In addition, I have
served in government before, as a senior policy advisor to both
the Secretaries of Commerce and Interior, and have testified a
number of times before Congress.
Although I have not been with the program for close to a
year, it is my privilege today to join Mr. Frantz in
representing the efforts of the nearly 200 program
professionals and the many private sector advisors who worked
day and night over the past few years to successfully implement
this congressionally mandated program. I remind the members
that the Loan Program Office is an implementing agency, not a
policy making group. Its work is driven by congressional
legislation.
We are proud of the program and, on the whole, the Loan
Program has been a success. While acknowledging the inevitable
and expected losses, we should remember that this program also
provided financing for such projects as the world's largest
wind farm, the world's largest PV solar plant, the world's
largest concentrated solar power facility, a new generation of
electric vehicles, and the first nuclear power plant to be
built in the U.S. in the last 30 years. These projects will
generate enough clean energy to power millions of homes and
businesses, save hundreds of millions of gallons of gas a year,
and generate tens of thousands of jobs.
Even more important, the portfolio is actually in good
shape. Nine solar projects and several wind farms are already
generating power. To date, total losses on the portfolio are
under 3 percent. This compares favorably to loss ratios in the
private sector for far less innovative energy projects. The
loss on the Abound project represents a fraction of 1 percent
of the total 1705 financings. No losses are desirable, but the
dialogue around the early outcomes is out of proportion to the
actual results.
Because I am no longer at the Department, I do not have
access to the analysis done for the Abound project. As a
result, I cannot comment in detail about the transaction. What
I can do, however, is give you a flavor for what we tried to do
on this and every project.
Abound had a unique manufacturing process which, at scale,
would significantly lower the cost of producing thin-film
panels. The technology was analyzed multiple times, including
by the Bush Administration, which thought highly enough of it
to award the company millions of dollars for development. The
Abound loan team would have included finance, technical,
scientific, legal, and environmental career professionals,
supplemented by independent engineering, legal, financial, and
accounting firms.
The loan would have gone through multiple reviews
independent of the Loan Programs Office, including detailed
reviews by career credit professionals at DOE and career staff
at OMB, Treasury, and the National Economic Council. The
transaction structure, known as production line financing, was
created to manage the risk in this transaction.
Among many other requirements, applicants had to
demonstrate sufficient financial backing from the private
sector. Abound raised over $300 million in private equity
before the Government issued its loan. The loan was designed
with significant technical and financial milestones. When
dramatic changes in the solar panel market made it impossible
for the company to meet some of those, the remainder of the
loan was frozen.
Congress clearly understood that these projects would
entail risk. That is why it initially set aside $10 billion to
cover potential losses before a single loan was ever made.
Three independent analyses of the portfolio have now been done,
including reviews by the Congressional Research Service,
Bloomberg Energy, and a comprehensive review of the portfolio
by Herb Allison, a former Bush Administration Treasury
official. All of them concluded that the transactions were well
structured and that potential losses were likely to be
meaningfully below the loss reserve established by Congress.
Even though Congress planned for losses, losses hurt. These
are taxpayer dollars and we worked hard to ensure that they
were protected to the fullest extent possible. Applicants will
tell you that our term sheets were tough and were designed to
protect our Government.
When a loan fails, we can, and should, seek to understand
what happened, and oversight is an important tool in doing
this. We should start with the facts. Industry dynamics change;
other countries compete with us, sometimes unfairly; new
technologies and new business models emerge.
This loan, like all the loans underwritten by career
professionals supported by us as specialists. It was reviewed
by career professionals from multiple Executive Branch offices.
It was not rushed; the review took place over several years. It
was not given to friends.
Indeed, no one in the loan program had any idea what
individuals were involved in this or any other transaction, nor
did we care. And, as has been reported, there were a large
number of Democratic and Republican investors in these deals,
which ultimately is not surprising. Investors care about
returns, not politics, and after they did their own independent
analyses, they committed billions of equity dollars to these
projects. Our work followed and built on theirs.
Investors care about profits, but all Americans care about
ensuring that the Country remains strong and competitive in the
21st century. The next decade is about energy competition, and
clean and renewable energy is the global market battleground.
Other countries understand this. China, Korea, Japan, India,
the UK, Germany, Italy, and a host of others are moving rapidly
to seek a piece of this vast new market. The winners will enjoy
more and better jobs, lower energy prices, greater energy
security, and better health and environmental outcomes.
If the United States is to compete successfully in next-
generation energy, we need to support it, just as we have
traditional sources of energy in the past. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Silver follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.019

Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Silver. Mr. Silver, let me start
with you. We are going to start with when you first got the job
at the Department of Energy.
If I could have the staff put up the first email.
[Slide.]
Mr. Jordan. It may be tough to see, but we can bring you a
copy if we need to. This is the interview schedule, it says
Interview Schedule for Jonathan Silver. This is back in 2009.
You were going to interview on a Tuesday with Mr. Steve
Isakowitz; Wednesday you had a couple interviews with Dan
Poneman, Rod O'Connor; and then Friday with Matt Rogers. So
this was when you were applying for the job, you were going to
interview with these important folks at the Department of
Energy.
Let's go next to the second email.
[Slide.]
Mr. Jordan. So that was an email on Monday, September 28th.
The next one is one that you sent to Mr. Isakowitz, where you
say, at the risk of seeming presumptuous, I want to mention
that my wife and I are holding a small event for Al Gore at our
home this coming Thursday evening, October 1st. So you are
applying for the job and yet you are inviting the very folks
who are going to be interviewing you for the job to come to a
party you are hosting with the former Vice President. Is that
kind of a normal practice or do you think maybe someone might
think that is a little unusual?
Mr. Silver. Congressman, I can't answer the question as to
whether or not it is unusual or not for others; it would be
typical for my wife and I to host events and to invite people
to them.
Mr. Jordan. But the people who are going to decide whether
you get the job or not, or they already told you you had the
job?
Mr. Silver. Well, I don't know the date of this and I don't
know exactly when I was----
Mr. Jordan. I will tell you the date. I will tell you the
date. It is the day before you got the interview schedule. So
you probably knew that you were applying for the job. This was
September 27th you sent these guys who were going to be
interviewing you. In fact, Mr. Isakowitz was going to be
interviewing you two days later, and you sent him an email
saying, hey, come on over to a party we are having, Mr. Gore is
going to be there.
Mr. Silver. Just to clarify, obviously, I was talking to
them about the job, but I didn't actually apply for the job;
they reached out to me. Having said that----
Mr. Jordan. Wait, wait, wait. You wanted the job. You had
an interview schedule that comes out two days after you were
inviting them to a party.
Mr. Silver. Right.
Mr. Jordan. So obviously you knew Mr. Isakowitz for a time
before this? Was he a friend of yours?
Mr. Silver. No, I had not--his name is Isakowitz.
Mr. Jordan. So he wasn't even a friend. So that is why you
said this seems presumptuous, because you didn't know him.
Mr. Silver. Right.
Mr. Jordan. But you invited him to a big party you were
having?
Mr. Frantz, when you applied for the job, did you invite
the folks who were going to hire you? Did you have a party at
your place and, I don't know, did you have Derek Jeter or
some----
Mr. Frantz. Mr. Chairman, the Department reached out to me
based on my background already in government service with the
Overseas Private Investment Corporation.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. And when they reached out to you, did you
say, well, the guys who are reaching out to me, was there an
interview process?
Mr. Frantz. There certainly was, yes.
Mr. Jordan. Did you invite the folks who were interviewing
you and decide whether you would get the job, did you invite
them to a party before you got the job?
Mr. Frantz. I did not.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Okay.
I want to follow up. Let's go to the next one, where Mr.
Isakowitz says thanks for the invite, but I need more details.
In fact, our general counsel--which is good--would need to look
at this before we decide to do this. And then you send him back
a more lengthy email, you said it is a reception, not a fund-
raiser. And then you say, in the second paragraph of the email
you sent back to him on this correspondence, I expect there
will be about 40 people or so, generally folks we know who are
interested in this issue and have the capacity to write
significant checks.
So who were some of those folks at this party, if you don't
mind me asking? Was Mr. Tiller there?
Mr. Silver. No, Mr. Tiller wasn't there.
Mr. Jordan. Was Mr. Witsoe there?
Mr. Silver. No, Mr. Witsoe wasn't there either. To be
candid, I don't remember who was at this party.
Mr. Jordan. What about Ms. Pat Stryker, was she there?
Mr. Silver. I doubt it. I don't know Pat Stryker.
Mr. Jordan. The head of Bohemian Industries, biggest
investor in Abound Solar, bundler----
Mr. Silver. We didn't----
Mr. Jordan. She was not there?
Mr. Silver. We didn't actually create the invitation list.
This was not a fund-raiser, and what I was trying to do with
this email, as I recall, was to give Mr. Isakowitz some
background information----
Mr. Jordan. Was Joe Zimlich there, the CEO of Bohemian
Industries? Was he at the party?
Mr. Silver. I don't think so, but I don't know him either.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Okay. So the fact that Pat Stryker, who
is the founder of this Bohemian Companies and a major donor and
bundler for the Obama campaign, over $100,000, that did not
influence your decision to give the loan to Abound Solar?
Mr. Silver. Not at all. I did not know who those people
were then and I do not know who they are now; I have never met
them.
Mr. Jordan. Did anyone at this party that you invited folks
at the Department of Energy to while you were trying to get the
job, did any of those folks lobby you, talk to you about the
Abound Solar project?
Mr. Silver. No, sir. I knew nothing about the Abound Solar
project.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Okay. Let me ask you this. While you were
head of the loan program, how many times did you visit the
White House?
Mr. Silver. I don't know. I certainly went over on numerous
occasion to attend staff meetings of various kinds with the
staff at OMB and other agencies.
Mr. Jordan. And at any of these meetings at the White
House, were you there when either Pat Stryker or Joe Zimlich,
big investors in Abound Solar project, while they were at the
White House?
Mr. Silver. Not to my knowledge. I don't know those people,
sir.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. I see I am out of time. I have a lot
more, but I will yield to the--okay, let me do this. I will go
to the gentleman and we will come back for the second round. I
yield now to the gentleman from Ohio.
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think you
established that Mr. Silver wanted the job. The real question
here is whether he was qualified.
So, Mr. Silver, it has been suggested that you were
appointed to lead this DOE Loan Program solely as a result of
political connections. The fact is that Mr. Silver had a wealth
of experience that made him uniquely qualified for the role.
Now, you were cofounder and managing director of Core Capital
Partners, a successful early stage investor in alternative
energy technologies, is that correct?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kucinich. And you graduated from Harvard University
with honors and did post-grad work in Paris and Geneva, as well
as receiving both a Fulbright and Rotary Graduate Fellowships,
is that right?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kucinich. Did you have any leadership experience in
large organizations?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir. I was either the chief operating
officer or the senior executive vice president, which is
essentially the same job, two different companies with complex
production operations.
Mr. Kucinich. You were with Tiger Management, is that
right?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kucinich. One of the Country's largest and most
successful hedge funds. And is it true that, while at Tiger,
the assets grew from $400 million to over $8 billion, is that
correct?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kucinich. And you served as a policy advisor to several
U.S. cabinet secretaries, is that correct?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kucinich. And isn't it true that, while at the Commerce
Department, you helped negotiate the first clean car agreement
with the Nation's auto manufacturers?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kucinich. Now, look, in this era of Citizens United,
you know, and pay-to-play, what really is extraordinary is that
we brought somebody in front of this Committee who is actually
qualified for the job that he did. That is a story. Hold the
presses.
Now, Mr. Silver, you were a highly successful investor and
financier in the private sector before you started at the
Department of Energy. You put those business skills to work in
government to build up the renewable energy technology industry
in the U.S., as Congress intended. Why do you believe
government has a role to play in developing renewable energies
like solar? And how important is that role in helping America
gain energy independence?
Mr. Silver. The U.S. Government has a long and storied
history of backing critical technologies of all kinds,
including energy technologies, for hundreds of years; it has
been instrumental in developing these industries. We have
backed oil, gas, coal, and other kinds of industries for
decades in order to bring them forward because they are so
essential to the underlying economy. I don't believe that clean
and renewable energy is any different.
Mr. Kucinich. Well, here is my concern. I go back to what I
was saying at the beginning. You know, we want trade with
China, but we better look at the rules here. According to
Brooking's study, China now leads the world in clean energy
investment, and in 2010, when DOE awarded a loan guarantee to
Abound, China put into place a staggering $54.4 billion in
clean energy investments.
In the first quarter of 2011, Chinese investments in clean
energy were $10.9 billion, as compared to just $2 billion in
the United States. Wake up. We are losing market share here
from people who are subsidizing their exports and crushing our
industries.
Now, Mr. Silver, what impact will this investment disparity
have on American industry and job growth if it continues?
Mr. Silver. Well, let me give you just one concrete
example, Congressman. We invented the solar panel in the United
States, we invented it here. Today, eight of the ten largest
solar panel manufacturers in the United States are
headquartered outside the United States.
Mr. Kucinich. So look at what we have here. China not only
leads the U.S. in investment, but also has a policy of
illegally dumping below-cost solar panels in the U.S., and the
ITC found, in a preliminary decision, ``reasonable indication''
that the U.S. solar industry was materially injured by reason
of imports from China that allegedly subsidized and sold in the
United States at less than fair value. This is about fairness.
Our solar industry is getting decimated.
Now, Mr. Frantz, what impact are illegally dumped Chinese
solar panels having on the U.S. solar manufacturing industry?
Mr. Frantz. I can only further elaborate on Mr. Silver's
comment and add to the point which has not yet come before the
Committee, that we just have learned that General Electric, one
of the largest corporations in the United States, is in the
process now of delaying their new production facility in
Colorado as well. So this is epidemic, certainly, and it is
having profound and lasting effects across the whole United
States manufacturing capability.
Mr. Kucinich. Listen. Listen to this, members. You have a
businessman here. You have somebody who understands the
industry and he is telling us it is in trouble.
Now, Mr. Witsoe, your company was impacted by those
subsidized and illegally dumped Chinese imports, was it not?
Mr. Witsoe. Yes.
Mr. Kucinich. And you state in your testimony, ``Abound's
technology in business made solid progress until the second
half of 2011, when solar prices dropped by 50 percent in a year
due to aggressive price-cutting from Chinese competitors using
older crystalline-silicon technology.'' Is that true?
Mr. Witsoe. That is correct.
Mr. Kucinich. And can you tell the Committee what role
these events played in your company's eventually bankruptcy?
If he can answer, I would appreciate it.
Mr. Witsoe. I think those were the key drivers of----
Mr. Kucinich. What does that mean?
Mr. Witsoe. Well, simply, they had dropped prices so far
below----
Mr. Kucinich. Who? Who is they?
Mr. Witsoe. China had dropped prices below even their own
cost that we were unable to compete in that environment, and we
certainly never expected prices to fall that fast and that far.
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
I just request from Mr. Silver if you are the smartest,
most qualified guy, as Mr. Kucinich alleges, then why did you
approve the loan guarantee? Why did the Department of Energy
approve this loan guarantee to Abound Solar when Fitch's two
reports, which were both very negative? Fitch's first report
set a dismal B credit rating and warned the Department of
Energy that the product had only a 45 percent chance of
recovery.
So Fitch, even before, you can talk about what happened in
China, I get that, but Fitch told you guys, hey, this has got a
less than 50 percent chance of making it, this is a bad risk.
But you guys said, oh, it's all right, we are using taxpayer
money, we can do that.
Mr. Silver. Thank you for the question, Congressman,
because I think it is an important one and it gets to the
essence of what we are doing here today. I am going to give you
my best recollections because, as you know, not being at the
Department, I don't have access to the underlying data, but
what I can tell you----
Mr. Jordan. No, no, no, no, no, this is when you were
there. This is when you made the----
Mr. Silver. But I don't have access to it to refresh my
memory. What I can say is that the program itself was intended
to support clean energy technologies at commercial scale, and
Abound fit that model. It was a major opportunity to reduce
costs in solar manufacturing. The application met the program
criteria and goals, and, as I recall the structuring, it was
very aggressive in protecting the U.S. taxpayer.
The solar panel prices at the time had fallen, but even
then the project worked. It is the second year when the
project----
Mr. Jordan. No, no, no, no. Fitch gave you another report.
Mr. Silver. Right.
Mr. Jordan. The second report said Fitch stated that the
cost of the project for taxpayers had become significantly more
expensive, and yet the estimated efficiency of the panels--some
of the first panels you put in didn't even work. The estimated
efficiency of the panels has decreased significantly. So the
cost went up, the quality went down in the second report, and
you still said let's give them taxpayer money.
And here is the interesting thing: everything Fitch said
came true. So if you are going to have a credit report come to
you--we just heard that you are the smartest guy in the world
in this area, so what I want to know is, if you are the
smartest guy in the world, why didn't you listen to Fitch, two
reports, what they said, which absolutely beared out, became
the fact; and you add in Beacon Power and Solyndra, which have
both gone bankrupt, and my guess is there are more coming.
What figures? You don't pay attention to Fitch? We always
come back to this point in these hearings. Did you give the
loan guarantee because political connections persuaded you to
do it, or did you give it based on the merit? And that is
certainly not there. So it is either you did it for your
buddies or you were incompetent and said we are not going to
pay attention to what Fitch says, even though it all came true,
and we are just going to give the money anyway? It has to be
one or the other because there is no other conclusion you can
reach.
Mr. Silver. Well, Congressman, I am not the smartest guy in
the room, but I am also not incompetent, so I guess I will
answer the question by saying that we did market analyses, we
did financial analyses, we did technical analyses, we did legal
analyses, we did regulatory analyses----
Mr. Jordan. And Fitch didn't do that?
Mr. Silver. Well, actually, we have more resources on this
project, to be candid, than Fitch does, but nonetheless----
Mr. Jordan. You have more resources, and they were right
and you were wrong?
Mr. Silver. There is no right and wrong in an assessment of
what out-year production prices for solar panels are going to
look like. We worked with the data from----
Mr. Jordan. When Fitch says costs are going up--I mean,
this is before you give the final guarantee.
Mr. Silver. And it is also----
Mr. Jordan. Costs were going up and the quality is going
down. The first report we were skeptical; now we are telling
you, hey, it is going to cost more and this is not as good as
we thought, you might want to think about this. And you guys
said, no, $400 guaranteed, $70 million out the door, loss to
the taxpayers.
Mr. Silver. We obviously incorporated the data from Fitch
into the analysis. I don't have it in front of me and haven't
had a chance to review it, but----
Mr. Kucinich. Would my friend yield?
Mr. Jordan. I would be happy to yield to the gentleman.
Mr. Kucinich. I think this is easily explained, because
Fitch couldn't predict China's illegal dumping and the impact
that it has.
Mr. Jordan. This report came out before all that was taking
place, that is the point.
Mr. Kucinich. But it is a practice that is in process, and
it is the aggregate effect of it. It is not just that it is
happening one day; it is an aggregate effect that at some point
makes it impossible for a business to go forward. Look, we
knew, when these loan guarantees were passed, Congress built in
a factor that some of them were going to be in trouble, some of
these businesses were going to have trouble surviving. But if
you know that when there is a level playing field, imagine how
difficult it is when somebody is essentially trying to break
your legs when you are running in a track meet.
Mr. Jordan. I want to yield to Ms. Buerkle, but I would
just say this. Fitch understood there was a level playing field
and they still said this is a bad bet.
Mr. Silver. If I may----
Mr. Jordan. I have to go to the gentlelady from New York,
then the gentleman can respond if he would like.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of
issues.
Mr. Silver, you mentioned that your role was to implement,
not to establish policy, and we get that. But when you tell me
that so many of these companies are now overseas and their
corporate, I think that that is an opportunity for this
Administration to understand the policies of this Country with
regards to our corporate tax rate, the cost of regulations.
There is a reason why companies go overseas; not because they
don't want to do business here, but because this Administration
and its policies have created such a hostile environment for a
company to do well.
So I think that that is something we all need to
understand, and this Committee has looked at, especially this
Subcommittee, the regulatory scheme coming out of this
Administration is stifling our businesses. The uncertainty, the
question about what our tax rates are going to be in the
corporate tax structure, that is why our companies are going
overseas.
I also want to just mention, because I have so many nuclear
power plants in my district, that is a clean, safe energy
source, and you mentioned it in your opening remarks. Has in
fact that program, has that money been given to and the plan
been implemented to that nuclear power plant that you
mentioned?
Mr. Silver. Let me address those questions in order, and
with your permission, Congresswoman, let me defer the answer to
that to my colleague, Mr. Frantz, because I am no longer at the
program and haven't been there for close to a year.
Ms. Buerkle. Okay.
Mr. Silver. First, with respect to your comment, Mr.
Chairman, about Fitch ratings, I just did want to take a moment
to----
Ms. Buerkle. I apologize, Mr. Silver, because I only have
five minutes, and I am sure----
Mr. Silver. Then let me say I certainly share,
Congresswoman, your concern that we ensure that we have the
most efficient and effective regulations possible to support
business. The entire goal and intent of the loan program is to
support American business. I would just point out what I said
in my opening remarks, which is that the Loan Programs Office
is not a policy-making shop; it is an implementing agency.
Ms. Buerkle. I understand that. Thank you. We have such a
short period of time, I need to get on with my questions.
The next series of questions is for Mr. Frantz. If I could
ask the Committee to play a short video clip, please.
[Video played.]
Ms. Buerkle. Mr. Frantz, this is a re-election ad that the
President played and has used. It uses a map from the
Department of Energy's Loan Program Office. Would you comment
whether or not this map is disingenuous with regards to the
jobs that were created from those energy initiatives?
Mr. Frantz. Well, I can comment on precisely what we have
done, and I did so in my oral testimony, Congresswoman. We have
created over 60,000 jobs. The interesting thing is that, on the
positive side of the ledger, all of our projects represent new
construction, and that is a huge multiplier, a huge dynamic in
the job creation picture.
Ms. Buerkle. Okay. Now that you brought that up, let's just
pull up the first slide here.
[Slide.]
Ms. Buerkle. All of the dots in red on this map, Mr.
Frantz, represent Project AMP project sites. Now, Prologis
hasn't drawn down on its loan and no construction has occurred
at any of these sites. So there is a map out there and it is to
show all the jobs it has created, but in fact, where you see
the red dots, there is no construction going on, no jobs have
been created yet, whether it is in the construction business,
as your are mentioning, or with regards to the solar panels.
Mr. Frantz. To the best of my knowledge, Congresswoman, the
contrary is in fact true, and that is that Prologis has spent
millions of dollars in what they call roof preparations, and
that is legitimate commencement of construction under our
program; and they are working based on equity, not our debt. We
have not disbursed, you are correct in that.
Ms. Buerkle. Now, the DOE, they gave the money or where did
that money came from?
Mr. Frantz. No, it came from equity.
Ms. Buerkle. Okay. And are you confident in saying that
every one of those red dots that the project has started and we
have put people back to work?
Mr. Frantz. I would have to look at the specific sites by
specific address, but I can assure you that Prologis is working
on roof preparations on a number of projects in the millions of
dollar range.
Ms. Buerkle. I think the important point in showing the
President's ad and then we show this ad is that no DOE money
has been given for these projects. So when DOE talks about we
are creating jobs--and that map that the President used came
off the DOE website, so it is disingenuous, because if that
money didn't come from DOE, then I don't know how he can tout
those job creations.
Mr. Frantz. Well, I think, with all due respect to the
Committee, often the equity is employed once a loan guarantee
has been given; there is a quid pro quo. So I can't comment;
the senior management is not here, I have not talked with them,
but clearly an incentive for them to begin construction on roof
preparation was the fact that they were holding a loan
guarantee.
Ms. Buerkle. But wouldn't you agree it is a little
disingenuous that the President is taking credit for that?
Mr. Frantz. I wouldn't comment; I don't think it would be
appropriate for me to do so.
Ms. Buerkle. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentlelady.
I recognize the Chairman of the full Committee, Mr. Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Silver, as I said in my opening----
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Chairman, I am sorry. I have to go to the
minority.
Mr. Issa. Oh, Mr. Cummings, certainly.
Mr. Jordan. I apologize.
We will go the Ranking Member, and then we will go to the
full Chairman.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Witsoe, is there anything Republican or Democratic
about the solar energy industry?
Mr. Witsoe. No.
Mr. Cummings. And you had some $300 million invested in
this project, is that right?
Mr. Witsoe. That is correct.
Mr. Cummings. By private industry.
Mr. Witsoe. That is correct.
Mr. Cummings. So the private folks must have seen something
in it. In other words, they invested $300 million; they saw
something there. Earlier it was stated that perhaps you all
should have foreseen this China situation. I take it that you
did not foresee this, is that right?
Mr. Witsoe. No, certainly not.
Mr. Cummings. You know, in my city there is a cleaners a
few years ago that started charging $1 per garment, and they
charged $1 per garment and got all this business; people were
lined up. You go somewhere else, a pair of pants cost you $6.
Here they were charging $1. And then, after a while, they upped
the price, upped the price to what everybody else had been
charging, but then they had all the business. Is that sort of
what China is trying to do here, do you think?
Mr. Witsoe. It feels like a similar strategy.
Mr. Cummings. Yes.
So, Mr. Tiller, in 2007, during the Bush Administration,
your company, Abound, which was then known as AVA Solar,
received DOE funding for a different solar project, is that
correct?
Mr. Tiller. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Isn't it a fact that many prominent investors
in solar energy, even in your own company, were prominent
funders of Republican candidates, is that correct?
Mr. Tiller. I believe that is correct, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Investors in solar energy are Republicans and
Democrats. It turns out members of Congress who supported these
projects were also both Republicans and Democrats. In 2009,
members of Congress from Indiana wrote a letter of support for
the Abound project, touting the project's important economic
benefits to Tipton County, the State of Indiana, and, indeed,
the Nation at this critical juncture.
Mr. Witsoe, can you tell us, were those Indiana members of
Congress who supported your DOE application, were they just
Democrats or were they also Republicans?
Mr. Witsoe. I wasn't with the company at the time, but I
believe they were also Republicans.
Mr. Cummings. And, Mr. Silver, when you were at the Loan
Programs Office at DOE, did you hear from both Republicans and
Democrats in support of project applications?
Mr. Silver. Constantly.
Mr. Cummings. So it was not unusual to have bipartisan
efforts in an effort to help these job creators, is that right?
Mr. Silver. It wasn't unusual to have bipartisan support
for them and it wasn't unusual for individual Democrats and
Republicans, members of Congress and State legislators, to call
on individual projects.
Mr. Cummings. Now, did you meet with any members of
Congress about DOE projects?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Both parties?
Mr. Silver. Yes, regularly.
Mr. Cummings. So that was nothing unusual?
Mr. Silver. Not at all.
Mr. Cummings. Were the Republicans, as well as Democrats
you met, what kind of conversations would you have with them?
They just kind of let you know they were interested in the
project? Was there any pressure or what?
Mr. Silver. Well, they were interested in knowing about the
project; they were interested in updates; they were interested
in letting us know that they were interested in the projects.
These would be typical and regular interactions.
Mr. Cummings. Now, we have identified nearly 500 letters
sent by both Republican and Democratic members, including our
Chairman, Chairman Issa, seeking funds for clean energy
projects in their districts. I am not saying there is anything
wrong with that, but more recently Chairman Issa has been
calling the Department of Energy's entire Loan Guarantee
Program a ``broad scandal'' that has been driven by political
favoritism and accusations of pay-to-play relationships.
Did you see any evidence of that during your tenure?
Mr. Silver. None whatsoever, sir. As I say, almost nobody,
and certainly nobody that I am aware of in the loan program,
even knew who the individuals were who had invested, either
directly or indirectly, into these companies.
Mr. Cummings. Now, could you have predicted the extent of
this China factor here? Is that the main issue, do you think,
with regard to the problems that this company experienced?
Mr. Silver. It is certainly a key driver. China has devoted
billions and billions and billions of dollars in not just
solar, but every clean and renewable energy space to build out
those industries. But it is also true that that work is
continuing and growing aggressively all over the world.
Mr. Cummings. But you never anticipated it would be to this
degree, where they were actually putting product out there and
charging less than the product cost to produce the product?
Mr. Silver. No. One couldn't, one would not imagine that
because fundamentally what you are describing, Congressman, is
predatory pricing.
Mr. Cummings. And that is illegal, is that correct?
Mr. Silver. I am not qualified to comment on that.
Mr. Cummings. Very well. Thank you very much.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the Chairman of the full Committee.
Mr. Issa. Thank you very much. This is in fact a vast
scandal, Mr. Ranking Member. I don't run away from those
statements. The American people know it. I would hope that you
would soon join us and realize that the amount of dollars lost,
you cannot blame it all on China and you certainly cannot stand
here, sit here and blame China as though you didn't know that
they would be a fierce competitor.
I, for one, spent over 20 years in the electronics
business. I think it was pretty well known by the time I came
to Congress 12 years ago, that China would compete and would
compete fiercely for this kind of business.
Mr. Silver, when you were at a Department of Energy
employee, did you have a BlackBerry?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir.
Mr. Issa. Did you have a Government-issued BlackBerry?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir.
Mr. Issa. Did you also have a private phone of your own
expense?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir.
Mr. Issa. Did you have a Government-paid for computer at
your office?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir.
Mr. Issa. Did you have a computer at home, either permanent
or a laptop that was paid for by the Government?
Mr. Silver. No, sir.
Mr. Issa. Did you have any secure ID capability of logging
in?
Mr. Silver. Yes, but the system is so antiquated and the
technology, which you will appreciate given your background,
sir, is so cumbersome that it is virtually impossible to work
with documents and long form pieces in that fashion.
Mr. Issa. Okay. But they did give you a fob and tell you
how you could get into the system remotely and securely, right?
Mr. Silver. Well, they didn't give me a fob, but there is a
mechanism for----
Mr. Issa. Okay. Did you use it on occasions?
Mr. Silver. The fob----
Mr. Issa. The mechanism.
Mr. Silver. Very rarely.
Mr. Issa. Okay. Did you receive training as to the Federal
Records Act and your responsibility in communications?
Mr. Silver. I honestly don't recall. If it is part of the
normal protocol, then I would have, but I just don't remember.
Mr. Issa. Okay. Now, you have kindly provided us with over
2,000 records from your Gmail account, and I want to thank you.
My question to you is, why is it clear from these emails that
you were communicating often with other, to be honest, other
employees? In other words, it was DOE employee to DOE employee
regularly through Gmail; both of you were using Gmail rather
than your official mail.
Mr. Silver. Well, I want to try to put this in context. We
were working 16-hour days, 7 days a week against the sunset
dated legislation in order to move these projects through.
Mr. Issa. Okay. I understand that was part of it. But did
you ever send a Gmail or did you ever access your Gmail account
while you were at your desk at your office?
Mr. Silver. On occasion I would try, particularly because I
was traveling as much as I was, I would prepare to take things
I needed, and that was from time to time a mechanism. As you
mentioned in the provision of the documents, the vast majority
of the material that I delivered, as you can see, are industry
reports, they are white papers on technologies, they are draft
presentations for the loan program and the like.
Mr. Issa. Well, I don't want to characterize them wrongly,
but I am seeing things like a discussion between you about
BrightSource concerning a PPT outlining consequences of sending
a memo to the White House. Now, to me, this is something that
should have been made available, clearly should have been--this
is the March 8th. This is a government document that is
concerned, concerned about the politics and the policy of it.
Was this retained or delivered upon your termination, or prior
to your termination, into the Government's hands?
Mr. Silver. First of all, I apologize, Congressman, I can't
actually read that, so I can't comment on what it says, but----
Mr. Issa. Well, let me rephrase it. Did you deliver your
Gmail account back and forth for ones like the one I just
characterized, did you deliver them to the Department of Energy
before departure?
Mr. Silver. We delivered--everything that has been
requested----
Mr. Issa. The reason I am asking and I think it is an
important question is these were government documents. They
were not produced in duplicate on your official side. You
departed DOE. In realtime or at any time prior to your leaving
DOE, did you deliver these for archival purposes to the
Department of Energy?
Mr. Silver. I am not sure that I was aware that I needed to
do that. But as soon as we received a request from the
Department of Energy we complied.
Mr. Issa. And isn't it true that request came only after we
asked for those documents? They didn't ask for them until we
were already seeking them, is that correct?
Mr. Silver. I don't know the timing of that, sir.
Mr. Issa. When did they ask for them?
Mr. Silver. In the fall. I am told it was in the November,
December time frame.
Mr. Issa. Okay. Last quick question just for the record.
You had a BlackBerry. Couldn't you have BlackBerried official
to official in the case of most of these? In other words----
Mr. Silver. As I said to you, sir, the vast majority of
that material are documents, so there is no easy way, when you
are trying to work with documents in a short time frame, to
make that happen.
Mr. Issa. Let me just make something for the record.
Mr. Silver. Yes. But let met just say----
Mr. Issa. Sure. Of course. Ask unanimous consent I be
granted an additional minute. Thank you.
Mr. Silver. I certainly wish, in retrospect, that I had
handled these documents somewhat differently, but there was
certainly no--the documents that I have actually already exist,
by and large, on the Government--because they are these
reports.
Mr. Issa. Right. And to be honest, we are not terribly
concerned about documents attached; we are looking mostly at
the content of the email.
Mr. Silver. No, I understand.
Mr. Issa. But isn't it true that you could have sent to
Gmail these things before leaving your office and, in fact,
using your BlackBerry, you could have simply, if you had the
ability to Gmail, you could have Gmailed it, you could have
still sent them from your government account? In other words,
you chose, out of apparently convenience, as did your
colleagues, to use Gmail and had no knowledge, no training that
you remember that would have caused you to know that these not
being maintained, at a minimum, violated the intent of the
Federal Records Act, which is that these be retained by the
agencies and available to the American people.
Mr. Silver. Well, first, I apologize, I don't actually have
a Gmail account. That is not what--but in any event----
Mr. Issa. Oh, no, you actually have a special account. But
everyone you communicated with were Gmail.
Mr. Silver. Right. But we certainly have made available all
of----
Mr. Issa. And I apologize. We blacked out deliberately so
that what you do have in the way of a personal url is yours to
deal with.
Mr. Silver. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. I want to thank the Chairman for his indulgence.
Yield back.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the Chairman.
Now recognize the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Gowdy.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Silver, the email account that ends in .net, is that
your personal email account?
Mr. Silver. I'm sorry, which?
Mr. Gowdy. I am happy to give it. I thought we were making
some concerted effort not to share with the rest----
Mr. Issa. Please do not give it.
Mr. Gowdy. Is it safe to say it ends in .net?
Mr. Silver. Yes.
Mr. Gowdy. All right. Now, you just testified, I think this
is a direct quote, you wish you had handled the documents
somewhat differently. I would argue to you you did handle it
somewhat differently. The fact that you forwarded what I am
sure you will concede is a decidedly work-related email to your
personal email account does strike some of us that are familiar
with the Federal Records Act as being somewhat different.
So you get an email at 2:50 a.m. in the morning on a
Monday; you respond to that email from your personal email
account at noon. Were you at home when you responded to it;
were you at work when you responded to it?
Mr. Silver. The answer is I don't know, Congressman,
because I don't have access to my records from being----
Mr. Gowdy. But you would have had to have forwarded that
email from your work account to be able to respond to it on
your personal account.
Mr. Silver. That is true. What I don't know is what I was
doing that day and where I was headed. As I said, as a matter
of preparation for trips----
Mr. Gowdy. Well, let me ask you. Help me with this. Why did
you feel the need to respond to it from your personal account?
Mr. Silver. Well, that answer is easy, and that is because
any document over the size of a short email is very hard to
read and manipulate, as you well know, I am sure, in classic
library fashion.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, we are going to get to whether or not you
used this practice with other emails. This one had no
attachments, it was just an email.
Mr. Silver. Right. But it was requesting that I review it
and look at it and comment on it.
Mr. Gowdy. Did you make a practice of forwarding all emails
that had attachments to your personal email account?
Mr. Silver. No, just ones that were long and complex.
Mr. Gowdy. And how many would that be?
Mr. Silver. I don't know. But as I said, we turned over
virtually everything that we have available, and the vast
majority of it are these documents.
Mr. Gowdy. Would you have deleted any emails before you
turned them over?
Mr. Silver. Certainly not intentionally, no.
Mr. Gowdy. I am not asking. If you had done it
intentionally, this would be a conversation you would be having
with another member of the Federal Government; it would be with
the U.S. Attorney's Office, not with a congressman.
Mr. Silver. Right. But the reason I said that is I can't
answer that question because, as it turns out, I have no backup
mechanism on this.
Mr. Gowdy. How pervasive was this practice of forwarding
emails to your home email account?
Mr. Silver. Not terribly.
Mr. Gowdy. What does not terribly mean?
Mr. Silver. I don't know how to quantify that.
Mr. Gowdy. More than 100; less than 100?
Mr. Silver. Well, I received tens of thousands of emails
while I was with the program.
Mr. Gowdy. Then what percentage would you have forwarded to
your personal email account to then answer from your personal
email account?
Mr. Silver. I don't know the answer to that, Congressman.
Not an enormous number, but any that would require me, while I
was traveling or working, to review documents and comment on
them.
Mr. Gowdy. Is it your testimony that you were traveling
when you received this email from Mr. Willard?
Mr. Silver. I don't remember if I was or not.
Mr. Gowdy. If you were not traveling, what would be the
other explanation for why you would have forwarded it to your
personal email account?
Mr. Silver. Well, I might well have been out of the office,
but not traveling.
Mr. Gowdy. What is the purpose of the Federal Records Act?
Mr. Silver. I am not qualified to--obviously, to retain
records, but I am not qualified to give you----
Mr. Gowdy. And why would it be important to retain records?
Mr. Silver. It is certainly important to retain records for
the purpose of ensuring that there is an archive of what
happened, and the records, just to be clear, Congressman, if I
forwarded something from my Department of Energy computer, it
is on the Department of Energy computer database.
Mr. Gowdy. Is your response on it?
Mr. Silver. It depends who it goes to. In many cases it is.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, if your response was from your personal
email account to someone who doesn't work for government, then
how are we ever going to get that, unless you give it to us?
Mr. Silver. Which is exactly what we----
Mr. Gowdy. That is wonderful, Mr. Silver. We are so
grateful that you evidenced that civic duty of turning it over.
What do we do with people who don't evidence that? That is the
reason we have a federal set of rules and regulations, agreed?
Mr. Silver. I am sure that is correct.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, of course it is. I mean, it is for people
who might have more nefarious motives than yours, because it
strikes me that just like convenience may be an explanation for
why people answer things on their personal account instead of
their work account, would you also agree with me that
concealment might also be a motive for folks who want to use
their personal account and not their official account?
Mr. Silver. Well, it certainly was not my motive, sir.
Mr. Gowdy. I wasn't asking about you, Mr. Silver. I am
asking in general. If everyone adopted this somewhat different
process that you adopted, it would thwart both the letter and
the spirit of the Federal Records Act, agreed?
Mr. Silver. I am not qualified to comment on that,
Congressman.
Mr. Gowdy. What qualification do you need to answer that
question? If everyone used their personal email account, we
wouldn't be able to do our jobs in Congress because we wouldn't
know what documents we didn't have. Agreed?
Mr. Silver. I would think it would make sense to keep as
many documents as possible, yes, I agree.
Mr. Gowdy. All of them.
Mr. Silver. All of them.
Mr. Gowdy. I yield back to the Chairman.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Kelly. I thank the Chairman.
If we could, I would like to put up the slide that Ms.
Buerkle had talked about. Mr. Silver and Mr. Frantz, you, of
course, will recognize this. And, again, it is the President.
And while we say we are trying to make this political, this is
what the President is using in his re-election campaign, and I
think we would look at that and would agree there is a lot of
jobs being created. Look all over the map, look at all those
dots. Now, a lot of them are Prologis and I know that some of
that is happening and some of it is not happening.
I want to show you another slide, that maybe you are not
familiar with, that also shows you where jobs are being
created. Now, this is actually China. So we went from shovel-
ready to Shanghai. I think it is kind of neat that we show one
map that shows how good this policy is working, but we do leave
out a very important part of job creation. I think it is just
kind of fascinating to see that, so we will leave that up for a
little bit.
Mr. Frantz, Mr. Silver, the Department of Energy gave
Sempra, which has a BB+, which is a high-risk rating, a $337
million loan guarantee for its Mesquite Solar Project, which is
also a high-risk project, to build a solar plant in the Arizona
desert. The plant uses solar panels manufactured by Suntech, a
Chinese solar panel company. How many jobs do you think this
loan guarantee created in China? Any idea? I mean, I know we
say we created 60,000 in the States. How many do you think we
created in China using taxpayer money?
Mr. Frantz. Congressman, I don't have information relative
to the chain and supply chains.
Mr. Kelly. Okay. Well, how about Suntech? How about
Suntech? We are using their panels, right? That is whose panels
we are using for this project?
Mr. Frantz. I would have to take the question for the
record, and I will certainly respond in the details of the
supply chain to the specific project. I don't have that right
at the moment.
Mr. Kelly. Well, because we have been talking about
creating American jobs, we have been talking about made in
America, and we have been talking about everything that we are
going to invest money in should be invested here, so all those
dollars that, by the way, came from taxpayers or are backed by
taxpayers should be used the right way, and I think we would
all agree with that.
Mr. Silver. Congressman, the only thing I would add to your
earlier slide is that the initial map of the United States
probably does not show other cites that it might show, for
example, the supply chains that provided materials, for
example, to Abound and others.
Mr. Kelly. And I understand that.
Mr. Silver. And it also does not----
Mr. Kelly. Okay, reclaiming my time. Reclaiming my time.
The Arizona facility that we are talking about, they don't
manufacture those panels here, do they, their assembly? Because
what they are doing is they get stuff shipped in from China and
they assemble them in the United States, so we kind of do an
end run and we say, wait a minute, no, no, this is working in
Arizona.
So I just think we need to be completely honest with what
is going on here, because the theme of this hearing today is
about where are we investing taxpayer dollars for a great ROI.
And I understand that private investors would have looked at
this and said, you know what, that is a risk I will take,
especially if it is backed by DOE loans. I don't know the
timing of when they invested, but I would say that probably had
something to do with it also.
Let's talk about Shepherds Flat, a $1.3 billion investment.
American? It is a wind farm. Are you familiar with it?
Mr. Silver. Yes.
Mr. Kelly. Either of you, Mr. Frantz or Mr. Silver.
Mr. Silver. It is the largest, it was at the time and it
may still be the world's largest wind farm. It is in Oregon.
Mr. Kelly. And it is an American project.
Mr. Silver. Well, it has American investors, American
components, American labor, American----
Mr. Kelly. The towers that the wind mills are put on? They
come from China. They come from China. So we are talking about
investing billions and billions of dollars, and yet we find out
that the money we are investing isn't really creating American
jobs, it is creating jobs in China.
We have them shipped here and we manufacturing them here
and we say--and I understand renewables, I really do. I get
that.
Let's just put up one last slide, if we could, on Project
AMP, if we have it available, the list of the suppliers that
are approved. Do we have that? The list of suppliers, the
approved suppliers for Prologis.
Okay, all right. Well, I think you will find out that quite
a few of the suppliers are Chinese.
Mr. Silver. Again, Congressman, please, with your
permission, I am no longer close enough to the details, but I
can say this, and perhaps Mr. Frantz can respond for the record
at a later date, there are undoubtedly Chinese suppliers on
there, because most suppliers are Chinese. However, if you
actually go into the terms of that particular transaction, you
will find that we required them to preference American panel
manufacturers deliberately as part of the negotiation.
Mr. Kelly. And I understand that. I understand that. But I
think it is a little bit disingenuous to say that the whole
process, because this initiative was about creating American
jobs, looking at green energy and being able to go to
renewables, and then we make it impossible for the fossils to
stay in business; we regulate them out of business and we say,
well, by mandate, the electric has to be supplied from
renewables. So I understand all that.
The Department of Commerce right now is imposing tariffs,
are they not, on the Chinese?
Mr. Silver. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kelly. Okay. Don't you think it is a little bit
disingenuous for the Department of Commerce to go ahead now and
impose tariffs on the same people that the Department of Energy
is subsidizing to make these, and then turn around and say,
well, this is the way we are going to handle it? It makes no
sense to me. I am so tired of hearing about these pesky Chinese
that buy a lot of our debt, that also profit from taxpayer
dollars, U.S. taxpayer dollars, and then turning around, trying
to make it something else than what it is.
It really comes down to when we spend American dollars,
these are hard-earned American taxpayer dollars, and we find
out that a lot of these things are going overseas--listen, I
would like to have seen this money, instead of going to
Shanghai, go to the Shenango Valley, when Tubiz, a company that
is in the district that I represent. They are doing an awful
lot. They have a lot of people working. And I am talking about
red, white, and blue jobs right now in western Pennsylvania
that are being held up and not being looked at the same way as
some of these other projects.
So I thank you all for appearing here today. I know
sometimes it gets a little laborious for you, but at the end of
the day, at the end of the day we have to make sure that every
single taxpayer dollar that we spend is going for the right
reasons and we are getting a good ROI on it.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
Before we get to Mr. DesJarlais, the Ranking Member is
recognized.
Mr. Kucinich. I want to thank the gentleman for his
indulgence.
At what point do we get to the deliverables and a big
scandal here? I mean, I don't see it yet. I respect members on
the other side; many of them are good friends of mine, but when
we get to the point of where we are talking about a big scandal
and we are down to talking about whether somebody used Gmail or
a government account, come on. I mean, really. And bottom line,
Mr. Silver turned over his Gmail accounts to the Committee, so
we have that. So there is no concealment here.
Now, again, we have identified about 500 letters from both
Democrat and Republican members that are seeking funds for
clean energy projects in their districts, which is what we
should be doing. That is what we are supposed to do. But when
we want to say, well, the Department of Energy's entire loans
program is a broad scandal, political favoritism, pay-to-play.
We have our friends in the Majority party, many of them
supported these projects before they opposed them, so what
changed?
The evidence hasn't changed. I haven't seen substantiation
in evidence of the accusations that have been made. And I
really think that this Committee, which is so important to the
people of the United States, always functions best when we
gather the information first, and then make the assessment,
instead of making the assessment before we gather the
information.
So what has changed? Well, we are in an election year. And
I understand that. Because at the beginning of this
Administration, when the election was three years and more
away, we had my friends in the Majority, many were supporting
the solar industry. Election gets closer, we have something
else happening.
So stop the presses again; we have politics that are
entering into this. That isn't meant to demean the Committee's
responsibility to ask questions, because every one of these
witnesses, and I also want to say including the Secretary--we
have a right to ask questions. But we should have to know what
we--the idea is that before you ask the question, when you are
sitting on this side of the table, you already are supposed to
know the answer. We are not operating in that way in this case.
So I am not sure what this so-called investigation amounts
to, and it is true, it is true that China is using illegal
trade practices to cripple American businesses. Instead of
investigating potential solutions to the problems, we are
attacking the companies that have been undermined by this.
Doesn't make any sense. If I know anything about the
Republicans, Republicans are pro-business.
How did you end up being switched here, where I am the one
arguing in favor of a major industry and my friends on the
other side of the aisle have basically taken the position that
has been imputed to me in the past; how did this happen?
So I thought I would clarify that, Mr. Chairman.
Unfortunately, I have a meeting over at the Republican Club
right now.
Mr. Jordan. Well, I thank the gentleman. I would just point
out this before yielding to the gentleman from Tennessee. We
have established today that Mr. Silver, when he first got the
job, in the process of interviewing for the job, in that same
time frame, has a party at his house where he invites the very
people who are going to decide whether he gets the job to come
to the party. He says in his email I expect there will be about
40 people, folks we know are interested in this issue and the
capacity to write significant checks.
We have a $16 billion program; 26 companies got tax
dollars, 22 of those companies had a credit rating from Fitch
of BB-, junk status, three of them went bankrupt: Solyndra,
Beacon Power, Abound Solar. Abound Solar, the one we are
focused on today, had a B rating, even worse. We have two
reports from Fitch which say this is a bad bet; second report
went from a bad bet to even a worse bet. The quality went down,
the cost went up. We have the guy who has run the program who
consistently moves communication from his government account to
his personal account, doesn't turn over the emails until we
respectfully ask for them.
So I think it is entirely appropriate, as the gentleman
said, that we ask questions about this, and, frankly, it is
important that we get the Secretary back in front of this
Committee, because there are certainly things that he said in
March that we want to ask him about now that we have had
several hearings on that I think are real important. So that is
why we are doing this. And we are certainly all pro-business;
we are just pro-business in the traditional sense of the word,
not taking taxpayer money and giving it to people who have
close connections with the White House.
Mr. Kucinich. If I may, Mr. Chairman, and I beg the
indulgence of the Chair. I do have to leave, but I just want to
comment. We absolutely have a right to ask questions, including
of the Secretary. I support this Committee's right to ask him
questions and to get the answers. I just don't see the scandal
yet. And if I did, look, whether it is a Democrat or a
Republican administration makes no difference to me. If there
is something there, I am ready to go after it. I don't see it
yet.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
Recognize the gentleman from Tennessee and appreciate the
gentleman's patience.
Mr. DesJarlais. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
And thank you all for attending today.
We have, unfortunately, lost the confidence of the American
people as a Congress. It doesn't matter whether they are
Republicans or they are Democrats. Only 7 percent approve of
the job we are doing. So we have an Oversight Committee to look
at where we have succeeded and where we have failed, and I
think that is why we are here today, is to reflect back on
maybe what we could do better and what we can do better moving
forward.
Right now we are debating whether or not to raise taxes on
all Americans, and if you are the taxpayer sitting out there,
which we all are, you want to know whether or not we are making
wise investments. So rather than blame people, let's learn from
our mistakes. And I think clearly there were some mistakes made
on this program.
So, Mr. Frantz, could you talk a little bit about the
purpose and nature of the Portfolio Management Division's watch
list?
Mr. Frantz. I would be happy to comment, Congressman. We
were blessed, when we stood up this program, to obtain the
director for the Portfolio Management Division from many years
of experience with the EXIM Bank. She brought with her a wealth
of experience and knowledge. The Division now is wholly stood
up. She imported with her an electronic management system
called Quick Silver, which is assisting what we call constant
monitoring, very proactive monitoring.
The monitoring on all these projects is done on an hourly,
daily, weekly, monthly basis with full reporting and
accountability and transparency. It involves our legal
division, our technical or engineering division in constant
consultation with her very senior investment officers who are
staffing that Division.
And I think I would commend to you, and I presume you have
seen or are aware of the Allison report. Mr. Allison went to
great lengths. In fact, the focus of that independent
investigation was largely focused on our portfolio management
division, and he gave many specifics as an independent
assessment of how we stood that program up and how it is
performing.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay, being as we are talking about Abound
Solar, was it put on the Portfolio Management's watch list? And
if so, when?
Mr. Frantz. I think I would prefer to call it an early
warning system. We don't really refer to a list, a specific
list as a watch list, it is a document, it is a working
document, but it is part of the early warning system.
Mr. DesJarlais. When did you realize----
Mr. Frantz. Yes, Abound was, of course, brought to the
attention----
Mr. DesJarlais. When did you realize that it was in
trouble?
Mr. Frantz. My recollection would be that it was in the, I
guess, summer of last year when we--we had had discussions with
them about the current marketing situation and we were in
constant conversations with them on a weekly, daily basis, so I
don't have a precise date right at my fingertips.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. Could you pledge to share with the
Committee the list of companies that are on the DOE's watch
list?
Mr. Frantz. I will take that for the record and will
respond to you, sir.
Mr. DesJarlais. All right.
Mr. Silver, you seem to think that Solar is a good
investment.
Mr. Silver. Well, not per se. Individual transactions
maybe.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. If you were investing, would you
invest in some of what you are selling here today?
Mr. Silver. I am not selling anything today, Congressman.
Mr. DesJarlais. Well, I mean, you are selling a concept.
Mr. Silver. I do believe that the solar industry will be an
important economic engine for future growth, yes.
Mr. DesJarlais. Do you think it is worth gambling taxpayer
money on?
Mr. Silver. I don't think it is worth gambling on anything;
I am not a gambler.
Mr. DesJarlais. We gave money to a company that, as the
Chairman noted, had a Fitch rating of abysmal, so to me that
would be somewhat of a gamble. If it was my money, I would
probably be very leery, but you did not seem to be reserved
about spending all these folks' money.
Mr. Silver. Well, sir, let me answer two ways. First of
all, the Fitch rating is actually physically incorporated into
the credit analysis that the loan program undertakes, so it is
baked into the results.
Mr. DesJarlais. Weren't 22 of the 26 companies that were
loaned money for solar rated as junk?
Mr. Silver. I don't know the answer, but I will answer
directly what I think you are asking, which is these are
innovative companies by definition. In fact, the mandate is to
ensure that companies with important potentially transformative
technologies that cannot easily find financing in the private
sector can be facilitated in doing that.
And I would just leave you with one thought, which is that
these are not grants, sir; these are loans. They are intended
to be repaid. Unfortunately, and no one regrets it more than
me, they cannot always happen. But they are structured as
underwritings; they are loans intended to be repaid, by the
way, with interest.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay, so you would agree, then, that this
maybe is what the President was talking about this Saturday
when he was saying companies and businesses don't get there on
their own; they need government to help them. Would this be a
good example of government's help?
Mr. Silver. I didn't see the President's comment, sir, I
don't know.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. I am out of time.
Thank you.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Frantz, when did you learn that Abound Solar was
totally done, they were going to go bankrupt?
Mr. Frantz. I can't give you, Mr. Chairman, the precise
date, but, as I mentioned, we had been in conversations, close
conversations and discussions with them.
Mr. Jordan. When did you know it was over, they were going
to close up the doors, they were going to lay off the people?
Mr. Frantz. We had established, in fact, written a
forbearance agreement that was crystallized, keeping us posted
on precise developments, which included----
Mr. Jordan. What date was that?
Mr. Frantz. I can't give you a precise date, but we know
that the determination was made just before their public
announcement. So that was a decision that was taken with----
Mr. Jordan. They announced on the 28th. How much lead time
did you have before the 28th?
Mr. Frantz. A matter of days, because we were aware that
they were in discussions with a prospective investor for the
transaction, so I can't give you a precise date, but I was not
involved in those discussions, so I can't give you the precise
date when it broke off and----
Mr. Jordan. Who was involved?
Mr. Frantz. Members of the staff, my staff.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. But you definitely knew before the 28th.
Mr. Frantz. I think----
Mr. Jordan. And how long did you know this company was in
serious trouble?
Mr. Frantz. We had been----
Mr. Jordan. Here is the point. Mr. Witsoe was in front of
this Committee just two months ago, and he didn't tell us
things were going south in a big way then, but did you know two
months ago that things were in big trouble?
Mr. Frantz. I didn't personally----
Mr. Jordan. No, no, no, did the Department of Energy?
Mr. Frantz. We were monitoring it, as I say, Mr. Chairman,
very, very closely on practically a daily to weekly basis, so I
couldn't----
Mr. Jordan. Did you guys----
Well, Mr. Witsoe, why did you pick June 28th to announce
that you guys were done?
Mr. Witsoe. Because the day prior to that, the 27th, is
when we got notice from that final prospective investor that
they would not----
Mr. Jordan. Was there any coordination with you and the
Department of Energy when and how this announcement would be
made?
Mr. Witsoe. No. No. We showed them the press release just
before it went out.
Mr. Jordan. So it is completely coincidental that this just
happened to be the day of maybe the biggest news on Capitol
Hill in the last year, when the Supreme Court announced its
ObamaCare or the Affordable Care Act decision, when the House
of Representatives was voting on a contempt resolution of the
attorney general? No coincidence, it just happened that day?
Mr. Witsoe. It is completely coincidental.
Mr. Jordan. Wow. Wow. This is amazing. Just amazing.
Mr. Witsoe. As I said, we learned from the investor the
prior day.
Mr. Jordan. Well, why didn't you tell us anything about
this two months ago when you were in front of us?
Mr. Witsoe. Well, two months ago we discussed that the
company, even with better technology, had severe risk in the
market, and we had just, unfortunately, had to have a number of
layoffs a couple months prior. So I think that we did inform
that. We thought at the time we certainly hoped that these
financing efforts would be successful.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. All right. Appreciate it.
Let's put up this one email.
[Slide.]
Mr. Jordan. We have had a lot of discussion about this
email between you and Mr. Woolard. This deals with the
BrightSource issue, which I just found this email to be
unbelievable.
Actually, I think we want the other one, guys, the one
where you are asked to edit a letter that is going to be sent
from the then chairman of the board of BrightSource, Mr.
Bryson.
[Slide.]
Mr. Jordan. So this is the March 7th, 2011, email from John
Woolard to Jonathan Silver. So you were asked to edit a letter
that Mr. Bryson, who was chairman of the board of BrightSource,
was going to send to then White House Chief of Staff Bill
Daley. Whatever happened to that, did you do the edits?
Mr. Silver. What happened to it, Congressman, is that that
letter was never sent, is my understanding.
Mr. Jordan. But that was not my question. Did you edit, did
you make additions, corrections, say it this way, don't do
that?
Mr. Silver. I did respond, in fact. If I may, with your
permission, here are my first sentences. It says, Jon, as
drafted, I must be honest and say I think it is off target. The
ongoing work does not speak to a lack of urgency; it speaks to
a need to ensure that there is limited risk to taxpayer
exposure. Those are the very first sentences in that memo, sir.
Mr. Jordan. But my question was did you edit it and make
corrections and suggestions, and did you send that back to him?
Mr. Silver. I did make some minor things. He had misspelled
White House, as an example. I don't remember, a couple of other
things.
Mr. Jordan. Okay.
Mr. Silver. But they were actually relatively modest----
Mr. Jordan. Did you send that to him from your government
account or from your private account?
Mr. Silver. No, I am told now that it came from my private
account, and that is why the question I can't answer as to
where I was, because I don't know the details.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. But it turned out--who made the decision
that--so you counseled them not to send the letter?
Mr. Silver. Well, I didn't counsel to send or not to send;
what I said was I think it--as I said, as drafted, I must be
honest and say I think it is off target. I even went on to say,
sir, that that said, there are two lawsuits, and while one does
seem to be a nuisance suit, the other may or may not be. The
project is tight enough that if a stay was issues, there could
be issues around the covenants. The General Counsel's Office in
DOE is drafting a memo on this issue and OMB needs this input
before determining an appropriate final credit subsidy score.
Mr. Jordan. Do you think it--is it unusual that--I guess I
shouldn't be surprised, knowing that you were inviting folks to
a party who were going to decide whether you get the job prior
to--let me just ask this. Do you think it is appropriate for
this kind of relationship to exist? Now it is the other way;
you are the one in government, someone is trying to get
approval of--$400 million tax and this BrightSource I think was
over $1 billion--several million dollars of taxpayer money, and
they are suggesting to you, hey, edit this letter that our
chairman of the board, soon to be Commerce secretary, is going
to send to the White House chief of staff? Do you think that is
unusual?
I have not been in the Federal Government that long, in my
third term, but I have not seen this before.
Mr. Silver. Two quick things. First, I do want to respond
to your question about the invitation to our home by pointing
out that Steve Isakowitz, who I acknowledge I did not know
before, was actually a Bush Administration appointee.
Mr. Jordan. That is not the point. The point was he was
going to decide whether you got the job or not and you were
inviting him to your house.
Mr. Silver. No, he was not the decision-maker, sir. But, in
any event----
Mr. Jordan. Well, why was he interviewing you, then?
Mr. Silver. I was interviewed by a dozen or so individuals
at the Department of Energy.
Mr. Jordan. So you went to an interview with a guy who had
no bearing on whether you get the job or not? That doesn't make
any sense.
Mr. Silver. The decision-maker, I assume, sir, although I
don't know definitively, would have been the Secretary of
Energy, and he was not invited.
Mr. Jordan. But that is the point. Four people were
interviewing you and they were going to talk to the secretary,
and what they say is going to determine whether you were going
to get the job or not, and you think it is appropriate, in the
course of that process, to invite them to your home to hang out
with Al Gore and other celebrities in this industry.
Mr. Silver. Let me respond, Congressman, if I may, to your
question about----
Mr. Jordan. No, no, no. That is what took place. You are
the one who brought this up. You said you wanted to clarify
what took place there.
Mr. Silver. Well, actually, because they appropriately went
to clear it with general counsel, who said that was not
something they could do, they didn't come.
Mr. Jordan. Okay, back to the BrightSource.
Mr. Silver. I believe, Congressman, that the BrightSource
story on this has been completely misunderstood. It is very
important to understand that there is a two-part process in the
loan guarantee program. The first is the issuance of what is
called, I don't mean to be technical, but a conditional
commitment. That is an intent to give the loan, to close the
loan, subject to whatever conditions may emerge. The final is
the closing of the loan.
When Mr. Woolard sent me this email, he already had a
conditional commitment, which means that the terms had already
been set and had been reviewed----
Mr. Jordan. I understand.
Mr. Silver.--and approved by multiple different agencies
and the career professionals.
Mr. Jordan. Yes, it is just not moving as fast as they want
and they want you to speed it up. That is why they are asking
will the White House quarterback this, will the White House do
this, can you edit the letter; we want to do this. John Bryson,
who is going to be Commerce secretary in just a few short time,
we have the White House log, is at the White House the very
next day.
Mr. Silver. I will say that I do think it is in the purview
of the Loan Programs Office, once a loan has been conditionally
committed and reviewed objectively, to assist the applicant to
move it expeditiously as possible. What was remaining was the
final credit subsidy score. And the reason this mattered to
me----
Mr. Jordan. Wait, wait, wait a minute. So what you are
saying is that it was a formality at that point?
Mr. Silver. It is not a formality, but as long as the----
Mr. Jordan. So there was still a chance you could say no.
Mr. Silver. Of course. You don't say yes until the close.
But one of the things that BrightSource needed to do, and I
know this sounds potentially amusing, is they actually had to
move some tortoises on this particular site, and there is--I am
no expert on this--there is a window in which you can move
tortoises during the hatching season, and if you miss that
window and it pushes it out six months, the project is at risk.
Mr. Jordan. Let me ask you this. So the letter wasn't sent.
Did you call the White House and talk to anyone in the White
House about the BrightSource, the final loan guarantee?
Mr. Silver. I have no recollection whether I did or not,
but----
Mr. Jordan. I think I asked you this. How many times did
you visit the White House?
Mr. Silver. Numerous times.
Mr. Jordan. What we have is, I think the White House log,
we have around 70 times you visited the White House. At any of
those meetings did you talk to Bill Daley, chief of staff,
about the BrightSource project?
Mr. Silver. To the best of my knowledge, I did not, and I
certainly----
Mr. Jordan. Well, let me ask you this. Was Bill Daley in
any of those meetings you had at the White House?
Mr. Silver. I don't recall, but certainly----
Mr. Jordan. Who did you meet with in the 70 times you went
there?
Mr. Silver. The vast majority of those meetings, and they
were regular and frequent, almost weekly meetings, were with
the career staff at OMB, NEC, and Treasury; and they were to
update those individuals and those agencies on where we were
with these projects because there was an independent review
process that they went through.
Mr. Jordan. So in those updating and review processes that
you were doing at the White House 70 different times, did you
say, you know what, we have already given the conditional loan
approval to BrightSource. In the back of your mind you are
thinking they decided not to send this letter that I edited for
them. Did you bring up BrightSource and say, you know what, we
need to push this through and get this done?
Mr. Silver. Again, Congressman, I don't recall, but if all
the conditions of the----
Mr. Jordan. You don't recall whether you ever talked about
BrightSource----
Mr. Silver. I am not sure.
Mr. Jordan.--with the future Commerce secretary as the
chairman of the board? You don't recall if you ever talked
about BrightSource at the White House?
Mr. Silver. Well, I know I didn't talk about BrightSource
with the future Commerce secretary.
Mr. Jordan. I am not saying that. I am putting it in
context. Here is the guy who was--you just edited a letter that
he was going to send to the White House chief of staff. It is
common knowledge a month later he becomes Commerce secretary,
and you did not ever bring up BrightSource in these 70
different meetings you had at the White House?
Mr. Silver. Again, I don't know. Undoubtedly, BrightSource
was brought up at meetings by staff. My 70 meetings were
supplemented by hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of meetings
by staff, all of whom were updating individuals at the Office
of Management and Budget.
Mr. Jordan. At any of these meetings you were at the White
House, was the secretary there with you, Secretary Chu?
Mr. Silver. From time to time, yes.
Mr. Jordan. And was he in any meetings with you and the
White House Chief of Staff, Bill Daley?
Mr. Silver. There may have been a meeting in which we
discussed some logistics. We were trying--this was a program
that we were standing up from a standing start----
Mr. Jordan. So there were meetings where you and Secretary
Chu were talking with the White House chief of staff about the
1705 Loan Guarantee Program?
Mr. Silver. There were meetings where we were trying to
ensure--there were a couple where we were trying to ensure that
the logistics of managing the review process was as streamlined
as possible, but there were not meetings where we were talking
about BrightSource, the deal; BrightSource, the terms of the
deal; BrightSource--any other configuration than that.
Mr. Jordan. But certainly meetings where you discussed with
the White House chief of staff the 1705 Loan Guarantee Program.
Mr. Silver. I have updated senior people in the
Administration on the 1705 Program occasionally
Mr. Jordan. No, I want to be specific.
Mr. Silver. Congressman, I just don't have my--I don't know
who was in these meetings or not. I don't remember.
Mr. Jordan. I am asking you this question: Were there
meetings at the White House where you and Secretary Chu talked
to the White House Chief of Staff, Bill Daley, about the 1705
Program?
Mr. Silver. There were meetings at the White House where we
tried to ensure, to make sure, to figure out the mechanisms by
which the interagency process----
Mr. Jordan. Okay, let me ask this. Were there meetings,
whatever you----
Mr. Silver. I just don't remember who were in the meetings,
sir. I just don't.
Mr. Jordan. You don't remember if the White House chief of
staff and the Secretary of the Department of Energy, who was
your boss, you don't remember if there were meetings where the
three of you were in the same meeting?
Mr. Silver. I honestly don't remember who was----
Mr. Jordan. Really?
Mr. Silver. I really don't. I cannot recall. Most of these
meetings took place with, as I say again, and I don't mean to
be redundant, staff from the National Economic Council, the
Office of Management and Budget, and the Treasury Department
about these transactions, about the economics and the terms of
the transactions, about the analysis of the transactions, and
significantly about the logistics for managing those analyses.
Mr. Jordan. I want to get one thing. I just want to make
sure. Earlier you said there were meetings at the White House,
you went 70 different times, there were meetings at the White
House where you and the secretary were at those meetings. Then
you seemed to indicate there were meetings where the White
House chief of staff was also present.
Were there any meetings where you, Secretary Chu, and Bill
Daley, White House Chief of Staff, that took place at the White
House, took place anywhere, were there any meetings where the
three of you were in the same meeting?
Mr. Silver. I am sure there was a meeting where the three
of us were in the same room.
Mr. Jordan. And in your role, obviously, is the 1705
Program, so if the three of you were in a meeting, obviously
you were going to be talking about the 1705 Program.
Mr. Silver. I am saying to you that we were talking about
the logistics and processes by which we would get these
transactions accomplished. There were an enormous number of
moving parts to get----
Mr. Jordan. Well, here is why it is important, because when
I questioned the secretary a couple months back, he said--let
me just read this. I think this is important for Mr. Cummings
and the Committee to know. Did the White House ever call you,
every talk to you about any of these? Did you get someone from
the White House Chief of Staff, someone from the White House to
talk to you about their respective companies involving these
individuals, involving the 17--and context earlier was
involving the 1705 Program, and Mr. Chu said, no, we didn't.
Mr. Silver. That----
Mr. Jordan. Now you are telling me----
Mr. Silver. No, Congressman, I am telling you exactly the
same thing. We did not have these conversations about deals or
deal terms; we had these conversations about logistics because
it was so difficult to get these projects moved.
Mr. Jordan. So, again, so your testimony is you edited a
letter that the chairman of the board from BrightSource was
going to send to the White House chief of staff, but in
subsequent visits to the White House you don't even bring that
up. It was important enough for you to edit; they had already
gotten the conditional loan guarantee; they are in the process
of getting the final approval; and you don't bring that up when
you are in a letter, even though you edited a letter that was
going to be sent from the chairman of the board to the very
individual you were talking to?
Mr. Silver. I am not saying, to the best of my
recollection, there were no meetings at all that I participated
in around BrightSource inside the White House except at the
staff level to talk about the transactions.
Mr. Jordan. You were at----
Mr. Silver. I don't----
Mr. Jordan. No, no. You were at the White House 70 times.
Mr. Silver. Right.
Mr. Jordan. You have told me you were in meetings where the
secretary, you, and the chief of staff were there. You edited
an email, and yet you don't even bring--maybe you were there to
talk about the general context of this program, I get that, but
you don't bring it up?
Mr. Silver. Correct.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. I just wanted to be clear.
I would be happy to--I guess is just down to the two of us.
If the gentleman has a further round, he is welcome to take as
much time as he would like.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
I have sat here. I had not intended to attend this hearing;
I was going to attend another hearing, but I am glad I did.
This seems to be an alleged conspiracy in search of the facts,
and I say that with great sadness. We have China dumping panels
illegally, illegally in our market and basically destroying a
company, one of the job creators that we always hear about, and
here we are today not dealing with China and what they are
doing to destroy our job creators, everybody wants jobs, but we
are here talking about emails and who used the BlackBerry. It
is interesting. People in my district, they want us to create
jobs.
And then we seem to be trying to say that this is some
political, some favoritism has been going on here, and I just
don't believe it.
Mr. Witsoe, the Republicans have mentioned several of
Abound's investors, and they are clearly trying to paint this
project as politically motivated, so I would like to ask you
about Abound's biggest investor. The project's single largest
outside investor was an entity called Invus Group, is that
right?
Mr. Witsoe. That is correct.
Mr. Cummings. In fact, the Invus Group put in more than
$100 million in financing, is that right?
Mr. Witsoe. That is correct.
Mr. Cummings. The CEO of Invus Group is Raymond Debbane, is
that----
Mr. Witsoe. I didn't--I never met him.
Mr. Cummings. Okay, you don't know him?
Mr. Witsoe. No.
Mr. Cummings. Boy, he put a lot of money in your company
for you not to know who he is. According to documents from,
well, I am telling you he is the CEO
Mr. Witsoe. I know him; I haven't met him.
Mr. Cummings. Oh, I see. According to documents from the
Federal Election Commission, Mr. Debbane has contributed tens
of thousands of dollars to Republican candidates and pacts over
the past two years. There is nothing wrong with that.
Were you aware of that, Mr. Witsoe?
Mr. Witsoe. No, I was not.
Mr. Cummings. Were you aware that he made donations to
presidential candidate Mitt Romney? Were you aware of that?
Mr. Witsoe. No.
Mr. Cummings. Were you aware that he made campaign
donations to our own Chairman Issa? Were you aware of that?
Mr. Witsoe. No, I am not aware of anything from our
investors.
Mr. Cummings. All right.
Now, Mr. Frantz, I understand that the entire Indiana
congressional delegation, including Democrats and Republicans
alike, supported the Abound project, is that right?
Mr. Frantz. That is my understanding.
Mr. Cummings. Yet, today my colleagues in the Majority seem
to be saying that all of those Indiana Republicans were wrong;
that the Department should have rejected the Abound project.
Mr. Frantz, I want to ask you this question because I have
sat on this Committee for 16 years and I have seen people come
before the Committee and so often they leave with their
reputations not intact. It pains me because we only have one
life to live. This is no dress rehearsal; this is the life. And
our reputations are so very, very important.
And I know that you know that you are under oath, but, Mr.
Frantz, let me ask you this question. To your knowledge, did
any political considerations on either side, on either side,
Democrat or Republican, govern the Department's decision to
approve a loan guarantee to Abound?
Mr. Frantz. Congressman, I can assert to the very best of
my knowledge, and as I indicated in my prepared remarks, I have
been with the program from its inception to today, that not a
single project has been brought forward, gone through the due
diligence process, closed, and been awarded a loan guarantee
with other than the pure merits of the project itself. There
has been no, to the best of my knowledge, political coercion on
any one of the single projects.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Silver, we on the Hill, we may not be
subject to the same rules about BlackBerries and official
records and all that, but we have a little problem here. We can
only use a certain BlackBerry for campaign stuff and a certain
BlackBerry for congressional stuff. A lot of us carry around
two BlackBerries.
So when you were being asked all these questions about your
personal account, your BlackBerry, whether you were traveling
and all this kind of stuff, the bottom line is were you in any
way, and I remind you that you are under oath. The media is
gathered here today, they are ready for the headline. Usually
the headline, by the way, comes out before the hearing. It is a
little different today; I don't know what happened.
But were you in any way trying to hide information or
trying to hold back information by using one instrument as
opposed to another, or one account as opposed to the other?
Because I think, I think this is what this was supposed to be
getting to. I notice the New York Times over there and all
those other papers. I guess that is what they are trying to
write about. So I am curious myself. Were you trying to do any
of that kind of stuff?
Mr. Silver. No, unequivocally not, Congressman, and it is
the reason I was able to and in a position to turn over several
thousand pages of documents in one day, as we did yesterday. I
had just come back in the Country from a business trip and we
pulled this together as quickly as we absolutely could. So, no.
I would even go further and say, in an effort to ensure that
there were no issues to this regard, after I left the Loan
Programs Office, I gave my computer to my attorney and have not
had access to it since.
Mr. Cummings. Now, you know, Mr. Witsoe, Chairman Issa said
something that I just found so interesting, when he was talking
about, he still said that we should have anticipated, that we
should know that China was going to do these kinds of things,
and I am just wondering if you had known that China was going
to illegally, and I emphasize that, illegally violate U.S.
trade law by putting these panels on the market below what it
cost them to produce, do you feel bad that you didn't
anticipate this like Chairman Issa is implying that you should
have anticipated it?
Mr. Witsoe. No. I have been part of many very competitive
industries that have competed with China and I have never seen
anything like this before.
Mr. Cummings. You just said something that I just want to
get into a little bit. You said you have never seen anything
like this before?
Mr. Witsoe. I have never seen price competition happen this
fast and this deep, even in very competitive industries that I
have been part, electronics and others.
Mr. Cummings. So when you went into this, first of all, you
have been in business for a while, is that right?
Mr. Witsoe. No, eight months.
Mr. Cummings. You have only been in business eight months?
Mr. Witsoe. I have only been in the business for eight
months.
Mr. Cummings. Oh, okay. But I assume that when you go into
a venture like this you don't go into it to lose money, do you?
Mr. Witsoe. No, certainly not.
Mr. Cummings. And you make assertions to your potential
investors that this is a good deal for them to invest in, or
they would not have put in the kind of money that they did, is
that correct?
Mr. Witsoe. That is correct. They put in $300 million.
Mr. Cummings. And someone on the Committee, I forget who
said it, implied that all of this money, or a substantial
amount of it, came after you got the DOE guarantee. I assume
that some of it may have come before and some may have come
after, is that a safe statement?
Mr. Witsoe. I don't have the exact numbers, but I believe
about half of it came prior to.
Mr. Cummings. So you would guesstimate that before you got
the DOE guarantee, about half of the $300 million they had
invested, is that what you are saying?
Mr. Witsoe. Approximately.
Mr. Cummings. But when you went into it, you anticipated
some shenanigans by China, did you not?
Mr. Witsoe. No, we always would anticipate competition by
China, but certainly not them selling below their own cost, in
which they would be losing money.
Mr. Cummings. So you expected them to, you must have had
some kind of calculation. You must have said, well, we are
going to sell, hypothetically, we are going to sell this panel
for $1,000. We know that China, it is costing them, say,
whatever, $800 to produce them, and we anticipate that they
will sell them for a certain amount.
So can you help me with that? Because I don't want the
public walking away from here thinking that some folks acted
irresponsibly. I am talking about the job creators acted
irresponsibly going into a deal like this. It makes no sense.
Mr. Witsoe. No. There was a lot of analysis done on what
our costs would be, where the market costs would be, and that
is why Abound was interesting, because we had a technology that
we felt could get to the lowest possible cost.
Mr. Cummings. So, Mr. Frantz, much has been made of the
Fitch report. You were aware of that report, were you not?
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir. The Fitch report and the other rating
agencies are just one tool that we use, it is not the only
component that we use in our evaluations. And, as a matter of
fact, in the course of our identification of risks and risk
mitigants that we employ, we even do a more extensive, it was
alluded to earlier, even a more extensive ultimate evaluation
than the individual rating agencies do.
We have the expertise of the entire Department of Energy at
our disposal, and we use them. And in this particular instance,
as a matter of fact, we had a number of different parties, both
within our expertise in the Department of Energy, as well as
outside independent consultants, who corroborated the fact that
Abound was exhibiting a technology that could withstand
enormous price compression in the marketplace and was clearly
prospectively a technology that would be a lowest cost producer
here in the United States, and that is precisely why we
supported it.
Mr. Cummings. Now, you heard my analogy about the cleaners
in my district, did you not?
Mr. Frantz. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. How they charged $1 per garment, get all the
business, and then up the price, but then they got all the
clients, the customers. You talked about price compression and
everything that was calculated. I am trying to figure out is
China just going off the cliff with this kind of deal? In other
words, Mr. Witsoe made it sound as if they didn't anticipate
it. You, being an expert in this area, apparently you had all
of this data and the data didn't pan out.
Tell me, looking at it in retrospect, and I know it is easy
for people to be the Monday morning quarterback to look at a
deal like this, but the question becomes if we were to do this
deal again, try to do a deal like this again, what lessons have
we learned from this and what would we do differently than what
we did? It sounds like you had all the resources for data.
I am sure you had the best minds, the best analysis and all
that, but apparently China has done something that threw the
whole damned thing, all the measurements for probability of
success, by what they are doing, they have thrown all that out
the window. Unless they are doing something that you all have
not mentioned to us so far.
Mr. Frantz. No. Congressman, I can say this about that in
terms of your assertions. As I mentioned in my prepared
testimony, I have literally worked all over the world and, in
fact, I have worked in China on projects, and I can tell you
that from years of experience doing that, that there is no way
you can ultimately predict the behavior of a specific
government anyplace.
In this case, with respect to China, it is clear that China
has made a decision and has enormously, very heavily subsidized
this specific industry way below the cost of the manufacturing
of their projects, and I mentioned that in my testimony as
well. Also, as you indicate, hindsight is always worth much
more than foresight. As hard as we work to try to predict the
future, we are not perfectly clairvoyant at all, and this, as
Mr. Witsoe just indicated, was a phenomena that none of us,
nobody, including our internationally oriented consultants,
predicted. It has been a precipitous price compression that the
experts, not only here in the United States, but all over the
world, could not have foreseen.
Mr. Cummings. This is my last question. So do we then say
that we are not going to get into this area? I mean, do we just
say, all right, we invented it. Someone on the other side
implied that, well, since China is doing what they are doing,
let them have it. I take it that you don't agree with that.
Mr. Frantz. Well, I think, as all four of us have indicated
to you this morning, and all four of us, in our own individual,
respective ways, are deeply committed, profoundly committed
professionally to see the success of this program, the program
was, of course, a bipartisan way established here in the U.S.
Congress to fulfill a need for support of our industries in a
very high-risk segment. That is deployment of new and
innovative and transformative technologies in which the private
sector and private markets, by the way, even today will not
readily support.
That is precisely why we are here and why, certainly, as
the officers from Abound have attested, that they made a
calculated investment, a calculated risk to bring a new and
transformative technology to the marketplace, which I have just
indicated would be, if not the only, one of the lowest cost
producers in the world. That is precisely the value of this
program, it is precisely the value of public support in this
domain, and it is why we all are deeply and profoundly
committed to assist the private markets, which are still, even
to this day, not totally responsive to these types of
investments.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jordan. I told you guys we would get out of here by
about 12:30, so I am going to be close to that.
One last thing. Mr. Silver, back to this email from Mr.
Woolard to you regarding BrightSource and editing the letter,
it was clear from emails and basically what you said earlier,
that you both wanted this to go through. You wanted
BrightSource, that had already gotten the conditional
guarantee, you wanted this to happen.
You switched to your personal account. You tell him, I will
make the edits, but I advise you probably not to send this
letter.
What took place between there, to your knowledge? Did
anyone from the White House call you guys? Did anyone from the
Department of Energy contact the White House? What took place
in the time, because a this is a March 7th email exchange,
2011, and then on April 11th, so just a little more than a
month later BrightSource got the thumbs up and got the final
loan guarantee approval. So what took place in that month? Did
anything happen?
Mr. Silver. Well, a number of things probably happened.
Again, I will have to go from recollection. But principally
what happens in that last month is the legal documentation
around the previously agreed upon terms for the loan, in
addition to the Office of Management and Budget assigning a
final credit subsidy score for the project. Those would be the
two sort of major milestones or things that would have to
happen.
Mr. Jordan. In this month-long time, did you personally
have any contact with Mr. Bryson?
Mr. Silver. With Mr. Bryson? No.
Mr. Jordan. April 11th is the day it was approved, the same
day, obviously, Mr. Bryson was going to the White House some
because he was looking to be Commerce secretary, I understand
that, but the very day he visits the White House, April 11th,
is the very day the loan gets approved. Do you think there is
any connection to that?
Mr. Silver. None. But I do want to say for the record that
I have known John Bryson for many years; there is no secret
about that.
Mr. Jordan. Okay, so you have known him for a long time?
Mr. Silver. I have.
Mr. Jordan. And you had no communication with him in this
one-month interval that was a critical time for the company
that he was chairman of the board of?
Mr. Silver. No.
Mr. Jordan. No contact? No email, personal or government?
Mr. Silver. Not to the best of my recollection.
Mr. Jordan. No phone calls?
Mr. Silver. Not to the best of my recollection, no.
Mr. Jordan. When he was at the White House, you didn't
visit with him?
Mr. Silver. The only time I----
Mr. Jordan. None of his visits corresponded with any of
your 70 visits?
Mr. Silver. I was at the White House for his swearing in.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Okay.
I want to thank you all for being here today. I know it was
long. Mr. Tiller, you got to really participate, didn't you?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Jordan. We thank you for being here nonetheless. This
first panel is dismissed. We will get ready for our second
panel.
[Recess.]
Mr. Jordan. The Committee will be back in order.
You know how we have to do it, we have to swear you in. Mr.
Kats, we are getting your nameplate. So if you guys would
please stand up, we will do that. Again, I apologize. I knew
the first panel was going to take a while.
Do you solemnly swear to tell the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Mr. Jordan. Let the record show that both witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
We still start with Doctor, it is good to have you with us
again. You have been in front of this Committee and several
committees. We appreciate your expertise.
And you as well, Mr. Kats.
So you are just stuck with me, I apologize. But, Doctor,
you are recognized.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF VERONIQUE DE RUGY

Ms. de Rugy. Chairman Jordan, it is an honor to appear
before you today to talk about the Department of Energy Loan
Guarantee. My name is Veronique de Rugy. I am a Senior Research
Fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University, where
I study tax and budget issues.
Advocates for renewable energy are right to be outraged by
subsidies going to fossil fuels. Yet, they are wrong to think
that in order to address subsidies they don't like, they should
demand large amount of subsidies for energy they like.
The Department of Energy's 1705 Loan Guarantee Program is a
cornerstone of the U.S. renewable energy policy. The policy is
often justified on two grounds: first, advocates argue that
renewable energy companies do not have access to sufficient
credit to support new projects. In addition, the DOE argues
that encouraging investment in green energy would create up to
5 million jobs. So now let's look at how these claims stand up
to scrutiny.
So looking at the flow of 1705 loans, we find that, first,
some of the loans have gone to companies that would have not
been able to get funded in the open market without the loan
guarantees because they were deemed too risky. Not all of them
were horrible bests, but many of them were. So far three
companies have gone under, and at great cost to taxpayers. So
let's take the Abound company that this hearing is about. In
the end, after the company has sold its assets, the price tag
for taxpayers will be roughly $50 million to $60 million, paid
by the American people at a time when they are hurting a lot.
It is possible that many of these companies that went under
may not necessarily be representative of the entire portfolio,
and that is another problem. That is my second point. Nearly 90
percent of the 1705 loan went to subsidized projects backed by
large companies that very likely would have had access to
capital if their project was indeed viable.
Third, under the 1705 loan program, 16 million loans were
guaranteed and, according to DOE, 2,388 permanent jobs were
created, and that means that taxpayer exposure for each alleged
permanent job created is 6.7 million jobs. So it speaks very
poorly to the quality of this loan program as a jobs program.
But understand that this is actually not even really
representative of what has happened because when the company
goes under, you have that exposure and you are left with zero
jobs.
So the data speaks for itself, but the real problem is
actually way worse than this. In fact, failures like Solyndra,
Abound, BeaconPower are only symptoms of problems much more
fundamental with loan guarantee programs, and in particular
this program, so they suffer from three particular failure
problems. Every loan guarantee transfers risk from lender to
taxpayer, which creates a moral hazard. Because the loan amount
is guaranteed, banks don't really have an incentive to do
proper scrutiny and proper diligence. What these loans do is
they privatize gains and they socialize risk. In other words,
the taxpayers bear the risk, but the profits, if there are
profits, are borne by the product company and the banks that
lent the money.
Second, every loan guarantee gives an incentive to lenders
to shift to subsidized projects and away from non-subsidized
ones independently of the merits of the project, and this has a
cascading effect. For instance, when the government subsidizes
a project, it is perceived as safe. That means that venture
capitalists, who are actually in the business of providing
money to high-risk customers, actually will leave that market.
But another thing happens which is much more
counterintuitive: other private investors will actually divert
resources from other non-subsidized projects towards subsidized
projects, again, independently of their merits. So, for
instance, in the previous panel we heard that Abound Solar got
some $150 million, I guess, after getting that guarantee. Some
of this may have come independently, but it is very likely, in
this example, that some of that money came only because of the
government guarantee, and that meant basically taking money
away from other maybe green companies that would have actually
succeeded.
Third, at their worst, every loan guarantee introduces
political incentives into business decisions, creating the
condition for businesses to seek financial reward by pleasing
political interests rather than customers. This is called
cronyism and it is a bipartisan problem and it entails real
economic costs.
So whatever the intention that motivated the program, the
evidence is clear; it just doesn't work. The 1705 loan program
does expose taxpayers to Solyndra, Abound, Beacon Power-like
waste, but more of a concern are the systematic distortions it
introduces into the market and the unintended consequences
those can have.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Ms. de Rugy follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.030

Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Doctor. Appreciate your testimony.
Mr. Kats, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY KATS

Mr. Kats. Thank you. Thanks for the opportunity to speak
with you today. I serve on the board of directors of four U.S.
clean energy companies and just served on the board of the
National Academy of Sciences study recommending to Congress
ways to strengthen U.S. competitiveness.
Abound Solar attracted broad support, including from
Indiana Republican Governor Mitch Daniels, for its $400 million
loan guarantee. Abound raised about $300 million from private
investors, including from British Petroleum. The DOE structured
its loan guarantees to Abound in tranches in order to reduce
its risk, so only $70 million of the $400 million is at risk,
and as noted by the Wall Street Journal, DOE could receive
about $30 million of that back, leaving a Federal loss of about
$40 million, or one-tenth of the loan loss guarantee. This
reflects prudent DOE lending risk management practices.
Overall, the DOE Loan Guarantee Program has had a 4 percent
default rate, which is just one-fourth of the losses projected
for and budgeted for. A 4 percent default rate means a 96
percent rate. In the real world, where facts matter, a 96
percent success rates get you an A.
The loan program has done exactly what it was intended to
do, help create over $35 billion in investments in renewable
energy, where the private sector lending was not available.
Congress set aside a credit subsidy because it knew there would
be job losses because the program supports innovation, and
these losses are proving far less than projected for and
budgeted for. In the real world, where U.S. companies are
invested in to build jobs and strengthen America's competitive
position in global markets, the DOE Loan Guarantee Program is a
big success.
U.S. success in clean energy matters a lot to the U.S.
military. Department of Defense is the largest energy consumer
in the world. Secretary of the Navy, Ray Mabus, put it this
way: Why the interest in alternative energy? The answer is
pretty straightforward: we buy too much fossil fuel from
potentially or actually volatile places on earth. Every time
the cost of a barrel of oil goes up $1, it costs the United
States Navy $31 million in extra fuel costs.
But it is costly in more ways than just money. For every 50
convoys of gasoline we bring in, we lose a Marine, we lose a
Marine killed or wounded. That is too high a price to pay for
fuel.
In the words of then Chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Admiral Mullen, energy is about not just defense, but
security; not just survival, but prosperity. Our national
defense infrastructure and systems hold the potential to help
stem the tide of strategic security issues related to climate
change.
The U.S. military, U.S. scientists, and the National
Academy of Sciences are unambiguous in their acceptance of the
reality and threat of climate change. So why is this Congress
undermining U.S. clean energy industry solutions to climate
change? Our major competitors, including China and Germany,
have invested heavily in expanding their domestic wind and PV
corporations.
Today, of the top 10 global wind and PV manufacturers, only
one of each is located in the United States. We should be
deeply concerned about the security implications of the U.S.
losing its global competitive leadership position in these
critical industries, that were largely invented here in the
United States in a multi-decade collaboration between U.S.
corporations, U.S. DOE, the U.S. military, and U.S.
universities.
Abdication of U.S. congressional support for U.S. renewable
energy industries that were largely created here in America is
a disaster for U.S. companies, for U.S. competitiveness, and
for U.S. security, but it is a big win for China.
Other governments support, rather than undermine, their
domestic clean energy industries. So why are members of this
Congress distorting and denying what is clearly a successful
American program? If the U.S. military is forced to import the
technology it needs to achieve its mission of shifting to clean
energy, U.S. security will be weakened. For financial
employment and security reasons, the U.S. DOE should use the
unused loan guarantee funds to support another $30 billion to
$40 billion in U.S. clean energy companies and programs.
If this Congress is willing to support America's innovative
corporations, the U.S. can regain its global leadership in
clean energy and address climate change in a way that builds on
U.S. ingenuity and creates American, rather than Chinese, jobs.
Most Americans know that climate change is happening. Most
Americans are in favor of renewable energy because it is clean,
U.S. grown, and getting cheaper. Most Americans understand that
the Government gives even larger subsidies to other forms of
energy. Most Americans understand that in supporting innovative
things, you are not going to bat 100 percent, but that 96
percent is obviously a success. And most Americans want this
Congress to use its common sense.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Kats follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.042

Mr. Jordan. If this was so good, Mr. Kats, why do you need
the taxpayer dollars? You talk about a 96 percent success rate.
Why do you need taxpayer money put at risk? Dr. de Rugy talked
about how most of these companies got private investment
dollars. If it was such a great thing, if it is so wonderful,
why do we need the taxpayers to put up millions of dollars and,
as we unfortunately know, lose several hundred millions of
dollars, as three of these companies went bankrupt?
Mr. Kats. The reason the U.S. provides subsidies for energy
across the board, and has done so for five or six decades, is
to promote American production of energy. A relatively small
proportion of that support has gone to renewables. The reason
it has gone to renewables: it is U.S. produced, it is cleaner,
it makes the U.S. competitiveness stronger, it creates
employment. The success of the program is illustrated by the 96
percent success rate. That is a terrific success.
Mr. Jordan. How much of that 96 percent--I think it is
actually less than that. Out of 26 companies, three of them
went bankrupt. But of that 96 percent, how many do you think
would have made it on their own?
Mr. Kats. So the 96 percent represents 96 percent of the
dollars that were spent are coming back. So from an investment
perspective it is a 4 percent default rate or less. That is a
big success.
Mr. Jordan. It would have been lower than that. I think the
last time you were here, a couple months ago, you stated that
the LPO needed to move faster and be more aggressive. You said
this while sitting next to Mr. Witsoe, with Abound Solar, whose
company has since gone bankrupt. So, obviously, if we had moved
faster relative to Abound, the taxpayers would have lost a lot
more money, maybe all of that $400 million.
Mr. Kats. A 96 percent success rate is really terrific by
any measure. It is much more successful than other programs
supporting energy. Sir, you asked a question about employment
impact, and I want to speak to that.
Mr. Jordan. Go ahead.
Mr. Kats. The U.S. nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office,
in its May 2011 report entitled Estimated Impact of American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economics
Output found that these investments, including the DOE
guarantee program, raised gross domestic product between 1.1
and 3.1 percent, and increased the number of full-time jobs
between $1.6 million and $4.6 million with what would have
happened otherwise. Again, that is the U.S. Congressional
Budget Office.
So the job creation impact has been large, and if this
Congress supports----
Mr. Jordan. But the question always remains, as Dr. de Rugy
pointed out, would it have happened anyway? How much can be
directly attributable to the fact that the taxpayers put up
money? And the only thing we know for certain--you can talk
about the success rate, but we know for--success rate would
mean for the taxpayers that every dollar that went out came
back. That is success. Right now we know that is not the case.
Three companies went bankrupt and we have lost hundreds of
millions of dollars of taxpayer money.
So how much of that would have happened anyway?
Mr. Kats. So----
Mr. Jordan. The point is you don't know, and no one knows.
Mr. Kats. The answer is----
Mr. Jordan. And how many companies that maybe were better
than these bigger companies, as Dr. de Rugy pointed out, who
got taxpayer dollars, how many of those companies out there
would have probably gotten investment from private equity,
private dollars, but for the fact they said, you know, what we
are going to put the money where it is a little safer, where
the Government has backed it up?
There is a company out there, I would bet, and no one can
prove, but you just know there is a company out there that may
have some technology that really could help our Country; really
could help Admiral Mabus, as you referenced; really could help
our national security; really could be beneficial. But they are
not getting financing because of this program.
Mr. Kats. That is not true--capital investor. And when we
look at companies, we look at their ability to scale and
compete internationally. I was actually on the board of a
couple companies that applied for funding. The process to get
federal funding is very rigorous. They would not have received
private funding had they not received it. Again, the three
companies that have had financial problems, there is only
partial exposure. We are talking today about Abound. Of that
$400 million loan, only $40 million will end up not being
repaid back. Overall, in this program----
Mr. Jordan. Only $40 million.
Mr. Kats.--there is a 96 percent----
Mr. Jordan. It is easy say, Mr. Kats, when it is not your
money. You said you were on the board of four different
companies. Any of those four companies, did they apply for
dollars in the 1705 program?
Mr. Kats. None of them did.
Mr. Jordan. Your company is Capital E, right?
Mr. Kats. Correct.
Mr. Jordan. I am looking at one of the things from your
company, marketing enabling measures. I assume this is from
your or something that is put out by your company. You talk
about government or private parties can provide full or partial
loan guarantees under default. You talk about things that you
do. So have you ever worked on behalf of any of the companies
that received taxpayer dollars?
Mr. Kats. I served on the board of a company that applied
for a DOE loan guarantee. After two years it ended up not
getting it. That company was then purchased by Saint-Gobain
France. It illustrates why, if all the other--their companies,
the United States needs----
Mr. Jordan. Have you ever consulted----
Mr. Kats. We should not cede the race on clean energy.
Mr. Jordan. Have you ever consulted, done consulting work
for companies who have applied for an received taxpayer dollars
in the 1705 program?
Mr. Kats. No, sir, I have not.
Mr. Jordan. Okay.
Dr. de Rugy, I want your thoughts on this idea that this is
a 96 percent success.
Ms. de Rugy. Well, first, we are just at the beginning.
Let's see where it ends.
Mr. Jordan. But are you like me? I don't accept that as the
definition of success.
Ms. de Rugy. No. I don't----
Mr. Jordan. Taxpayers only lost hundreds of millions, they
didn't lose billions, so that is a successful program.
Ms. de Rugy. I agree. And, by the way, some of that cost is
totally underestimated. Certainly, that is the cost for this
given program, but let's not forget that this loan guarantee
opens the door to a lot of other government subsidies. So, for
instance, NRG, who got $3.8 billion in subsidies over several
projects, is also eligible for a $430 million grant from
Treasury.
Mr. Jordan. And some of these were eligible for export-
import dollars too.
Ms. de Rugy. Exactly. And there is a gigantic amount of
double-dipping. The Export-Import Bank then goes and subsidizes
foreign companies in order to--and then local and State
governments that give taxpayers--so, I mean, I think the cost
to taxpayers is actually way bigger than what it looks. And we
don't know how big the failure will be in the end but, more
importantly, so many of these companies are actually backed by
very large companies that would have had access to capital,
very likely, maybe not at the price that they would have liked.
More importantly, I actually think is this process actually
tends to do a lot of the things that got us in the financial
mess, which is the private sector usually requires some 40
percent of equity for 60 percent debt, and because of the loan
guarantee, then companies now can get 80 percent debt and only
20 percent in equity, and I think this is fairly irresponsible.
Mr. Jordan. I just want to point out that we are going to
have a hearing in a couple weeks on the Export-Import Bank and
its relationship to this as well, so you made me think of that
in your answer.
One last question for both of you. I will start with Mr.
Kats. Do you think Dr. de Rugy made this point in her opening
statement, that there is the potential for political influence,
cronyism, whatever term you want to use. There is the potential
for that when you have this amount of money being available for
private companies to get hold of. You have sat through some of
these hearings, Mr. Kats. You have been here. I don't know if
you were here for the first couple hours of this hearing, but
do you think there is any political connections, cronyism had
anything to do with this program?
Mr. Kats. You know, there are hundreds of billions of
dollars and subsidies have gone to energy, fossil fuels,
nuclear----
Mr. Jordan. I am talking specifically about 1705.
Mr. Kats. Yes, 1705 is a relatively small amount compared
to that. I think there is potential. My impression is DOE has
done a very rigorous job in making sure that doesn't happen. I
know that the screening and due diligence process is extremely
rigorous; arguably too rigorous and arguably too slow.
Mr. Jordan. Doctor?
Ms. de Rugy. There is political connection. The existence
of government itself, I mean, the availability of government
money, whether it is in the form of a grant, means that
actually these companies are going to be seeking this
government's favor.
Mr. Jordan. In both your experience in watching government
and seeing this kind of stuff, these kind of programs, have you
ever seen what we have talked about this hearing, ever seen
where an email comes from the company who is trying to get the
loan, asking the person who is going to decide whether they get
the loan to edit a letter that is going to be sent to the White
House chief of staff? Have you ever seen that kind of stuff?
You referenced other forms of energy that get some kind of
help. Have you ever seen that take place with those other
forms?
Mr. Kats. I don't think that letter was actually sent.
Mr. Jordan. That isn't my point. Have you ever seen that
kind of coziness between the private sector and the person who
is deciding whether they get taxpayer money?
Mr. Kats. Yes. I think both Republicans and Democrat
congressmen weigh in----
Mr. Jordan. Specifically have you ever seen that? That is
the question.
Mr. Kats. Have I ever seen direct----
Mr. Jordan. That kind of coziness, where the person
deciding whether they are going to get billions of dollars in
the BrightSource example, where they are asked to edit a
letter, they actually do edit the letter that is going to be
sent to the White House chief of staff when they are trying to
get $1 billion in taxpayer dollars? Have you ever seen that in
any other energy area?
Mr. Kats. I don't think that letter was sent, sir.
Mr. Jordan. That is not the question. Have you ever seen
the person who is deciding whether the loan guarantee is going
to get approved, have you ever seen them actually edit a letter
that the company is looking to send to the White House chief of
staff? Have you ever seen them edit a letter? Have you ever
seen that kind of behavior in any other area other than this
1705 program?
Mr. Kats. I don't think it was appropriate. I haven't seen
a letter like that that was actually ever sent.
Mr. Jordan. Have you ever seen that before?
Ms. de Rugy. I haven't, but obviously I am not an expert. I
can just say that this is not, for instance, Mercatus does
fund-raising and we don't do this, we don't ask the people we
are asking for money, hey, can you please edit this.
Mr. Jordan. In your view, fine, because that is the public
sector. But this is the private sector asking the government,
trying to get taxpayer money. Seems kind of unusual?
Ms. de Rugy. It seems unusual.
Mr. Jordan. Very unusual?
Ms. de Rugy. But, I mean, the economic literature is
actually full of evidence that this is what you get when you
have the government doling out money.
Mr. Jordan. You have just not seen it up close. Mr. Kats
hasn't seen it before.
Mr. Kats. I actually worked at DOE on the level of
engagement on both sides of the aisle, and from CEOs, who I
assume were both Republican and Democrat; we never asked. In
terms of trying to find out information, make the case for the
plant being built in their district, that happens all the time;
it is standard business.
Mr. Jordan. It is standard business for the government
employee to tell the private sector, hey, if you are going to
send a letter to the White House, here I show you should write
it? That is standard business?
Mr. Kats. Again, I don't think that letter was sent, so you
are asking a hypothetical. I am just saying----
Mr. Jordan. No, I am not.
Mr. Kats. I am just saying that what happens----
Mr. Jordan. The letter was edited; it was going to be sent
to the White House. They chose not to after the fact. What I am
asking is--you are saying this is common practice. I am saying,
really, you have seen this before?
Mr. Kats. I have never seen a letter that was actually sent
that was--actually, I was unable to read the text; I don't know
what the letter said, but I would say it is very normal----
Mr. Jordan. Forget about what the letter said. Let's ask
this point. Have you ever, in your experience at the Department
of Energy, when you were there, did you know of anyone at the
Department of Energy who, when they were approving some kind of
loan for a private company and they are asked to edit something
that is going to be sent to the White House, have you ever seen
them actually edit that and advise them how to do it?
Mr. Kats. The level of involvement in the form of letters,
visits, and emails from corporate CEOs, from governors, both
Republican and Democrat, and from members on projects in which
businesses in their jurisdiction were being considered for
funding, that is a constant and unending stream; it takes up an
enormous amount of time at DOE to deal with that. That is
standard practice, yes.
Mr. Jordan. Okay.
Doctor, I will give you the last word, if you want. Where
does this all end, Doctor? Where are we headed if we keep going
down this road?
Ms. de Rugy. Well, I mean, it is hard to know where it is
ending, but I guess there are going to be more government
guarantees, probably some failures, more subsidies down the
road. But, more importantly, with respect to the--I actually
think that the fact that private industry needs the support of
the government is never a good sign.
And then where does it end? I mean, then you have
competition from abroad. Then what do we do? I mean, if price
falls, what is the next step the industry--what is the next
demand from the industry? Are they going to demand that the
government guarantee certain level of prices? It is likely
where we are heading, and we know what was done in other
industries such, as sugar and steel, and this is not good for
the American people.
Mr. Jordan. Well, thank both of you for taking the time
out. I apologize for your having to wait, but I appreciate your
patience and your expert testimony. Take care.
Mr. Kats. Thank you.
Ms. de Rugy. Thank you.
Mr. Jordan. We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:03 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 75588.044


