- THE REFUSE OF THE FEDERAL SPENDING BINGE II: HOW U.S. TAXPAYERS ARE PAYING DOUBLE FOR FAILING GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE REFUSE OF THE FEDERAL SPENDING BINGE II: HOW U.S. TAXPAYERS ARE
PAYING DOUBLE FOR FAILING GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 3, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-10

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-367 PDF                    WASHINGTON: 2011
____________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 3, 2011....................................     1
Statement of:
Davis, Thomas M., III, director of Federal Government
Affairs, Deloitte and Touche LLP; Gene L. Dodaro,
Comptroller General of the United States, U.S. Government
Accountability Office; and Ryan Alexander, president,
Taxpayers for Common Sense.................................     7
Alexander, Ryan..........................................    39
Davis, Thomas M., III....................................     7
Dodaro, Gene L...........................................    13
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Alexander, Ryan, president, Taxpayers for Common Sense,
prepared statement of......................................    41
Cummings, Hon. Elijah E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Maryland, prepared statement of...............     5
Davis, Thomas M., III, director of Federal Government
Affairs, Deloitte and Touche LLP, prepared statement of....    10
Dodaro, Gene L., Comptroller General of the United States,
U.S. Government Accountability Office, prepared statement
of.........................................................    15

THE REFUSE OF THE FEDERAL SPENDING BINGE II: HOW U.S. TAXPAYERS ARE
PAYING DOUBLE FOR FAILING GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 3, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Darrell E. Issa
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, Platts, Mack, Walberg,
Lankford, Amash, Buerkle, Meehan, DesJarlais, Walsh, Gowdy,
Ross, Guinta, Farenthold, Kelly, Cummings, Towns, Maloney,
Norton, Kucinich, Tierney, Clay, Connolly, Quigley, Welch, and
Murphy.
Staff present: Thomas A. Alexander, senior counsel; Michael
R. Bebeau, assistant clerk; Robert Borden, general counsel;
Will L. Boyington and Drew Colliatie, staff assistants; Molly
Boyl, parliamentarian; Ashley H. Callen, counsel; Sharon Casey,
senior assistant clerk; Benjamin Stroud Cole, policy advisor
and investigative analyst; John Cuaderes, deputy staff
director; Howard A. Denis, senior counsel; Gwen D'Luzansky,
assistant clerk; Christopher Hixon, deputy chief counsel,
oversight; Tabetha C. Mueller, professional staff member; Laura
L. Rush, deputy chief clerk; Jeff Wease, deputy CIO; Lisa Cody,
minority investigator; Carla Hultberg, minority chief clerk;
Lucinda Lessley, minority policy director, Scott Lindsay,
minority counsel; Leah Perry, minority chief investigative
counsel; Dave Rapallo, minority staff director; Mark
Stephenson, minority senior policy advisor/legislative
director; and Cecelia Thomas, minority counsel/deputy clerk.
Chairman Issa. Good morning. The committee meeting will
come to order.
As is the new tradition of this committee, we will begin by
reading the Oversight mission statement. We exist to secure two
fundamental principles. First, Americans have a right to know
their money Washington spends and takes is well spent. And
second, Americans deserve an efficient, effective government
that works for them. Our duty on the Oversight and Government
Reform Committee is to protect these rights. Our solemn
responsibility is to hold government accountable to taxpayers,
because taxpayers have a right to know what they get from their
government.
We will work tirelessly in partnership with citizen
watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American people and bring
genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy. This is the mission
of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee.
Today's hearing is the second time this committee has met
in 2 weeks to consider the effects of wasteful spending have on
the Federal Government, the economy and the taxpayers. This
week's GAO report exposes serious government breakdowns in
effective, efficient use of taxpayer dollars. By conservative
estimates, the duplication and fragmentation highlighted in the
GAO report represents over $100 billion in annual losses.
Yet, there was great consternation and 90 hours of hard
debate in order to propose just $62 billion in cuts. The GAO
report, unlike the cuts, is not about eliminating services. It
is about standardizing, combining, and eliminating duplicative
services that cost the American people money without serving an
additional use. Meaning, if we cut the bureaucracy, if we cut
so many of these programs that repeat and repeat, each of them
having high paid and high ranking individuals, and IT groups,
and separate publishing and, if you will, advertising
campaigns, we can eliminate costs without the American people
suffering one loss of the essential services believed to be
done by these programs.
I am sure in future times, we will have additional hearings
on programs that should simply go away, whether it is one or a
hundred within government. But today, we are going to meet with
three very talented and very educated individuals, who are
going to help us understand what should be a win-win for the
American people. Win-win, because we are not talking about
cuts. We are talking about cuts in bureaucracy. Cuts in
bureaucracy save money, while delivering a better product to
the taxpayers.
And with that, I would like to yield the remainder of my
time to the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Mack, for his comments.
Mr. Mack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the hearing
today, and I look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
But something strikes me as odd. That is, we have heard the
President say over and over again that he is ``going to conduct
an exhaustive line by line review of the Federal budget and
seek to eliminate government programs that are not
performing.'' That is something we can all agree with. Yet we
have seen no action on the President's words.
Then we have a hearing today where we invite the Director
of OMB, which is a Presidential appointee, and he refuses to
show up. So is the President serious about doing a line by line
review? Is the Director of the OMB trying to hide or duck the
questions?
It is outrageous that we find ourselves at a hearing where
we have an opportunity to do something good for the American
people, and that is, cut spending and cut this budget and get
rid of waste. Mr. Chairman, you talked about the duplication,
and $100 billion, and the Director of OMB won't show up to give
us an opportunity to ask questions and find out what we can do
to cut this $100 billion, to find another $100 billion to cut,
to try to bring this budget in line?
I think it is outrageous that the Director doesn't show up.
I think it shows a disregard to the legislative branch and the
separation of powers. It says to me that the administration and
the Director of OMB is more interested in talking a good game
out in the public, but doesn't really want to get to the hard
work.
So Mr. Chairman, I look forward to this panel. I look
forward to your leadership, but I am extremely disappointed
that the Director didn't show up. I am not sure that this
administration is serious about cutting spending, if they can't
even send the Director.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman. Reclaiming my time.
Our invitation to the Office of Management and Budget will
remain open. I thank the gentleman for his comment.
I now recognize the distinguished ranking member for his
opening statement.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
thank you for calling this hearing today.
I just want to go immediately to what Congressman Mack just
said. I don't think the President is hiding, or the OMB is
hiding anything. The fact is that the President, in his State
of the Union, made it clear that he is about the business of
addressing these issues. And OMB is currently in the process of
conducting its own analysis of effective ways of streamlining
the government, improve services and cut unnecessary costs.
This task is critical to ensuring Federal programs are
working as effectively and efficiently as possible. That is why
I signed the letter with the chairman requesting ongoing
updates, as OMB takes on this monumental task. It is my
understanding that letter will be going out as soon as we get
the signatures of two Senators, Collins and Lieberman, I think
it is.
But I want to make it clear, and I do believe that again,
one of the things about this chairman, I know he likes to do
things effectively and efficiently. So I would think that OMB,
there will come a time when OMB will appear before us and will
be in the best position to provide some testimony that will be
helpful.
Now, Mr. Chairman, it is certainly good to see all of our
witnesses here today. To Chairman Davis, it is a pleasure to
see you again. Your name has been evoked quite favorably around
here. So it is good to see you and Darrell.
Chairman Issa. His picture is shining down on us, too.
Mr. Cummings. Oh, my goodness. [Laughter.]
And Ms. Alexander, it is good to see you again.
Today we will hear the results of a report issued by the
Government Accountability Office on duplicative programs and
major opportunities to enhance Federal revenues. First, GAO's
report demonstrates that there are real opportunities to
streamline Federal programs, save taxpayer dollars and deliver
services more effectively and efficiently. For example, GAO
identified at least 31 entities within the Defense Department
that are supposed to address the urgent needs of war fighters.
GAO reported that there are challenges with the Department's
fragmented guidance. And GAO raised concerns about the numbers
and the roles of the various entities and processes involved.
Solving these problems will take dedication,
bipartisanship, but it will help both American troops and
taxpayers. GAO's report also describes numerous areas where we
can recover hundreds of billions of dollars in Federal
revenues. For example, GAO highlights that the United States is
essentially giving away up to $53 billion to oil companies that
are not paying royalties on certain leases to extract oil and
gas from Federal lands. That is our money.
A lot has been said about what the taxpayers said during
the last election. Well, one of the things they said is they
don't want to be cheated of their own money. Congress passed
legislation in 1995 to give oil companies so-called royalty
relief. The goal of the legislation was to encourage production
by exempting oil companies from paying royalties to the Federal
Government. The legislation was supposed to require companies
to start paying royalties when they recouped their investment
and began making a profit.
But the legislation was poorly drafted, and when oil
companies challenged it in court, they successfully avoided
paying any royalties at all. In its report, GAO concluded that
this problem could result in $21 billion to $53 billion in lost
revenue to the Federal Government.
This windfall is going to an industry that is making
staggering profits, despite the worst economic downturn since
the Great Depression. Mr. Chairman, we need to do significant
work on this, and you have. You have been a leader in this
area. As a matter of fact, in 2009 you issued a report warning
about what would happen if these companies won their lawsuit.
You said, any company that entered a similar lease between 1996
and 2000 could escape paying royalties. That was what you said.
You also said this: ``The Fifth Circuit decision may force
the Federal Government to reimburse companies who have already
tendered royalty payments. Depending upon the market price of
oil and natural gas, the total costs of foregone royalties
could total nearly $80 billion.''
Mr. Chairman, you warned about this problem, and I commend
you, I really do, for that. But now we need to fix it. We have
to fix it, and it is going to take a bipartisan effort. We just
had a vote in the House where we had an opportunity to fix it,
and we were not able to.
And so I think, as Mr. Davis has said many times, this is
one where we can come together, as Democrats and Republicans.
It is a win-win situation, but it is a win-win. It is not a win
just for Republicans, not a win just for Democrats, but most
importantly, it is a win for the American people. And I just
don't want to be sitting here 10 years from now saying the same
things, having lost even more money.
So I look forward to the hearing, Mr. Chairman. And I thank
you. With that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Elijah E. Cummings
follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. I thank the ranking member. All Members will
have 7 legislative days in which to submit their opening
statements for the record.
I now go to our distinguished panel. The Honorable Thomas
M. Davis, III, former chairman of this committee, as the
ranking member said. He looks down on us every day. Now the
director of Federal Government Affairs at Deloitte and Touche,
and the man who issued the subpoenas to the oil companies on my
behalf in order to begin the process of doing the oversight on
those flawed contracts that have cost the American people tens
of billions of dollars. I want to thank you for that today
publicly.
The Honorable Gene Dodaro, the Comptroller of the United
States, appearing I think for the second time as the confirmed
Comptroller versus the many times that you appeared before us
graciously as the Acting. Your work as a legislative branch
employee, spanning both the Executive and legislative branch,
providing more than 3,000 people who give us the non-partisan
reports and fact-finding that we absolutely rely on.
And Ms. Ryan Alexander, president of the Taxpayers for
Common Sense, an often contributor, and welcome back.
Pursuant to the committee's rules, all witnesses are asked
to be sworn in before they testify before this committee. If
you would please raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Issa. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
have answered in the affirmative. Thank you. Please be seated.
In order to allow time for discussion, and as my
predecessor would say, a longstanding tradition is that you
will have 5 minutes. There will be a green light for as long as
you may talk freely. There will be a yellow light to warn you
that your time is elapsing. And I will be understanding for you
to complete your sentence or paragraph, but not much more once
it turns red. And that will allow a healthy dialog afterwards.
The chair recognizes Mr. Davis for his opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF THOMAS M. DAVIS III, DIRECTOR OF FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, DELOITTE AND TOUCHE LLP; GENE L. DODARO,
COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES, U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; AND RYAN ALEXANDER, PRESIDENT, TAXPAYERS
FOR COMMON SENSE

STATEMENT OF THOMAS W. DAVIS III

Mr. Davis. Thank you, Chairman Issa and Ranking Member
Cummings and colleagues. Thanks for the opportunity to testify
before you today. I am doing so in my capacity as a former
Member of the House, and specifically chairman of this
committee.
I want to thank Gene Dodaro and his staff for putting
together an outstanding report that formed the basis of today's
hearing. Let me just say, I hope we can engage OMB before this
is done. Because we are in this together, Republicans,
Democrats, House, Senate, executive branch. We all caused the
problem, and I think we all need to be there to solve it, as we
look forward to this. At this point, they are not here today,
but I think in the future we need to make sure they are
engaged. They are doing some things over there we need to hear
about.
During my tenure, I examined how the Government could
operate more efficiently, focusing on governance issues,
procurement, IT policies, civil service, governmental
organization. In this process, I have long said the way we try
to extract savings from the Federal Government is to simply
cutoff fingers and toes, rather than go after the fat that is
molded throughout the body politic.
I still believe that is the case. But as we see in the GAO
report issued earlier this week, sometimes Uncle Sam does
indeed have a few too many digits, and some surgery may well be
in order.
So where does the blame lie? As I noted, there is plenty of
blame to go around. There are a lot of places to point the
finger. Let me start with Congress. Duplicative and overlapping
programs frequently exist because of the way that we in
Congress legislate. Indeed, one of the earliest and most
enduring lessons I learned upon my election to the House was
that jurisdiction trumps all. So while two different Members
believe there may be a need for a given Federal service, they
will surely write the authorizing legislation with their
individual committees in mind.
For example, if a member of the Education Work Force
Committee wants to enact a job training program, they will
write the legislation to ensure it falls under an agency in
that committee's purview. The same would be true of a member of
the Veterans Administration. A member of the Financial Services
might link job training to low income people in order to guide
such a program to HUD.
Thus, we find three different programs with essentially the
same goal, job training, under three different agencies. Under
this arrangement, they are all funded differently, measured
differently and administered differently. Common sense suggests
they should be combined to take advantage of economies of
scale, or even just to make it easier for the citizens to know
where the programs exist.
We can blame the bureaucracy, but in many ways, Congress
created the many-headed monster we bemoan in an attempt to
protect our jurisdictional prerogatives.
Another point that should be examined: in the quest to
corral duplicative or overlapping programs, or to implement
broad personnel reforms, the need to implement Government-wide
solutions is often discussed. But while the executive branch
has the ability to affect such efforts to a certain degree,
again, the compartmentalization approach that Congress takes
often prevents the type of holistic action required. This is
especially true of the appropriations process in which all the
subcommittees would have to agree to provide funding for a
given initiative, a task akin to asking a cat to take a bath.
Finally, there are areas where unnecessary duplication at
the Federal level has ramifications at the State and local
levels. Congress should examine the myriad reporting
requirements of Federal programs, human service programs,
educational programs and transportation programs, to see where
we can make better use of consolidated systems. With existing
technology, it seems unnecessary to have every State maintain
its own reporting system for a given Federal program, when
essentially the same information is required from everybody.
Government-wide, in the executive branch, the same culture
exists. Too many agencies have erected stovepipes for the
delivery of IT services, personnel rules, and internal
protocols. The result is that seamless congruencies in
communications and information sharing are rare among
government departments. Information gets lost, analysis becomes
disjointed and operability becomes hindered.
OMB can serve as an effective catalyst for establishing
cooperation and communication between agencies, which could in
turn lead to an exponential increase in efficiency. It has the
authority and the mandate to do so. Unfortunately, under
administrations of both parties, the Office of Management and
Budget simply becomes the Office of Budget. The concentration
falls on the budgetary aspects of agencies' spending, when in
fact a management review could yield much more long-term
savings.
The key to success is focusing how services are delivered,
how services are procured and how information is gathered and
analyzed. In these areas, the executive branch seems to be
deficient. Reorganizations, mergers and assimilation of
redundant programs are not Government skill sets. Often,
attempts to reorganize are thwarted by inadequate time
constraints, unwilling employee participants and skeptical
Federal managers, who know that a slow roll or wait it out
approach will always rump the most ambitious change management
efforts.
So what can Congress do and what can OMB do to improve the
situation? From the congressional standpoint, a complete
restructuring of the committee system is unlikely. A first step
to avoiding a program duplication or inefficiency, however,
might be a CBO-like review of newly proposed programs prior to
floor consideration.
In closing, let me just say, there are good, dedicated
people working in government. But upon examination of how they
are employed, it is clear that some of them are doing tasks
they don't need to be doing, performing under regulations that
didn't need to be written, filling out forms that should not
have been printed. I hope today's hearing marks the start of an
effort, and a sustained effort, to address these issues.
Again, I appreciate the opportunity to share my thoughts. I
look forward to your questions and ask that my entire statement
be put into the record.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Davis follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Dodaro.

STATEMENT OF GENE DODARO

Mr. Dodaro. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Cummings, and members of the committee.
I am very pleased to be here today to talk about the GAO
report which outlines opportunities to tackle overlap and
duplication, reduce costs and enhance revenue collections. Our
report discuss 34 different areas of overlap and duplication
and fragmentation. And it outlines a number of specific
activities that need to be reviewed.
I would highlight a couple of categories here this morning.
One, there are multiple programs in specific areas that have
developed over the years and that need to be tackled. For
example, there are over 40 programs in employment and training
areas. There are over 80 programs trying, at least in part, to
improve teacher quality. There are 80 programs intended to
improve economic development. Surface transportation has
multiple programs as well.
These programs have developed over the years, in some
cases, decades. And in many cases, there is really not a lot of
empirical evidence to show the outcomes of the programs or that
they are operating effectively. This is a perfect opportunity
for the Congress and the administration to look at these
portfolio programs that we have outlined in our report, and to
begin to rationalize the programs, prioritize what the role of
the Federal Government should be, and give clear directions as
to what is to be accomplished through the programs, how to
measure their results and how to streamline delivery systems
and also reduce administrative costs. I think there are a lot
of opportunities here.
We also outlined in the Defense area opportunities there,
in medical commands, urgent needs, as was mentioned in the
opening comments. And there are other areas where DOD and VA
can leverage their purchasing power, for example, in purchasing
of drugs. They are also pursuing parallel paths in developing
electronic medical records that there are opportunities to
conserve resources and get better results for less costs, we
believe.
In addition to the overlap, fragmentation and duplication,
we also outline a number of other opportunities for cost
savings and enhanced revenues, 47 areas are outlined in the
report. Many of the cost saving opportunities go to the nuts
and bolts of the Government and how it operates, as Chairman
Davis outlined. There is a need to make sure there is more
competition in contracting, that there are fewer contracting
vehicles to help reduce the costs. We are paying to maintain
unneeded Federal property. We are paying through improper
payments for services that either are not rendered or are not
well documented, that we have confidence that they are being
saved or appropriately paid.
And in the revenue area, there is a yawning gap at the tax
level between taxes owed and collected. The last estimate is
$290 billion. And there are areas that we believe through
prudent use of increasing the electronic filing, using third-
party data to identify potential non-filers, and other
activities that need to be looked at.
Now, one of the things that we are going to continue to do,
since this report is the first report that meets our statutory
requirement to annually produce these types of reports, we will
be looking at other opportunities going forward. Tax
expenditures, for example, and how they might duplicate other
things. For example, in this report, we mention the tax credit
in the ethanol area duplicates the renewable fuel standards
that are in place, and that Congress should take a look at the
need to continue this ethanol tax credit, which is billions of
dollars a year in foregone revenue.
There is potential overlap between tax credits, loan
programs and other Federal spending. So we will be looking at
these areas in the future. We already have work underway for
our next year's report, and we look forward to working with the
Congress to help streamline the Federal Government's
activities, to make sure it is operating more effectively, more
efficiently and in the taxpayers' best interests.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my opening statement. I will
be happy to answer questions at the appropriate time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dodaro follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. Thank you. The gentleman yields back 14
seconds. [Laughter.]
Ms. Alexander, please.

STATEMENT OF RYAN ALEXANDER

Ms. Alexander. Good morning, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member
Cummings, and members of the committee. Thank you for inviting
me here to testify today.
Our mission at Taxpayers for Common Sense is to achieve a
government that spends taxpayer dollars responsibly and
operates within its means. All of our work reflects our core
belief that no one, no matter where they fall in the political
spectrum, wants to see their money wasted.
To that end, TCS has worked with the left and the right to
achieve victories on stopping the bridge to nowhere, getting
the earmark moratorium enacted, cutting funding for an
alternate engine for the joint strike fighter and creating an
inspector general for the Iraq war.
We have testified before this committee several times with
proven results for American taxpayers. We testified on the cost
overruns and problems with the F-22 Raptor and that program was
stopped. When Mr. Davis was on the dais, we testified on crop
insurance waste, prompting the Agriculture Committee to take
action. And working with you, Chairman Issa, we have testified
on Army Corps of Engineers issues, and worked with the
committee regarding lost royalty revenues from offshore oil and
gas leases, both of which are in the GAO report we are
discussing today.
In addition to my written testimony, I would like to enter
for the record our two recent reports detailing recommended
budget cuts.
In our more than 15-year history, TCS has worked on many of
the programs and issues highlighted in the GAO report. We hope
the increased scrutiny generated by this report, the current
political will to tame the deficit and the good work of this
committee will lead to meaningful and overdue reform or
elimination of many of these programs.
Obviously there is much too much to tackle in this
voluminous report in 5 minutes or even 50, so I will just
highlight a few issues.
Across the Government, GAO found examples of duplication.
Reforms to the acquisition process, governmentwide, could yield
significant savings. This is particularly true in the Pentagon,
where the risks of duplication across services are high.
Efforts to acquire weapons like tactical wheeled vehicles
should be coordinated across services. Encouraging competition
and inter-agency contracting can help drive down costs by as
much as $500 billion by GAO's estimate. And as Mr. Dodaro
mentioned, coordinating between DOD and Veterans Affairs
electronic health records systems and working together to
control costs in the area of drug purchasing.
Real property management by GSA also has enormous possible
savings, both from disposing of billions of dollars worth of
unnecessary Federal property, better fleet vehicle management,
and better cost analysis of purchasing and leasing decisions.
In addition to opportunities to reduce spending, the GAO report
highlighted important ways to enhance revenue, another critical
element of reducing our deficit. Giveaways to the oil and gas
industry through royalty management and collection systems have
been highlighted by the GAO numerous times and added to the
high risk list this year.
Chairman Issa, you know all too well from your work on
these problems resulting from the royalty relief provided in
the mid-1990's to oil and gas companies operating in the Gulf
of Mexico the problems stemming from the Deep Water Royalty
Relief Act, including a portfolio of leaseholders that pay no
royalties at all for oil and gas exacted from Federal waters
will cost taxpayers up to $53 billion in the next 25 years.
The GAO report notes that almost $1 trillion in Federal
revenue was foregone in fiscal year 2009 due to tax
expenditures, what the Simpson-Bowles Commission called tax
earmarks. The 173 tax expenditures are similar to spending
programs and can be the same magnitude or larger than related
Federal spending in some mission areas, except without the
oversight. We believe this is an area for this committee to
play a critical role in increasing accountability, examining
effectiveness and saving taxpayer dollars.
In its recent report, GAO says reductions in revenue losses
from eliminating ineffective or redundant tax expenditures
could be substantial. Tax expenditure performance is an area
that would benefit from enhanced congressional scrutiny as
Congress considers ways to address the Nation's long-term
fiscal imbalance.
Last year, for example, GAO recommended that Congress
modify the research tax credit to reduce windfalls to taxpayers
for research spending they would have done anyway. This report
suggests changes to the new markets tax credit as well as
reviewing the tax-exempt status of Government bonds. Evaluating
these tax expenditures for effectiveness and value and
eliminating the largest corporate tax loopholes would pave the
way for simplifying the corporate tax structure, lowering
overall rates and establishing an important level of certainty
for the business community. Other tax expenditures, such as the
mortgage interest deduction or deduction for State sales tax
should also be considered.
Reforming Federal activities related to corn ethanol would
be a double whammy, eliminating redundant programs and
enhancing revenue in one fell swoop. The use of ethanol is
mandated, it is protected from foreign competition and it is
subsidized. Any one of these redundant and market-distorting
policy options might be proposed to help an emerging industry.
It is indefensible that the mature corn ethanol industry
continues to benefit from the decades-old refundable tax credit
to blend ethanol, at a cost to taxpayers of more than $5
billion per year.
Clearly, the GAO has given Congress much to think about.
Eliminating duplication and waste in government and responsibly
enhancing revenue are the critical first steps to addressing
our $1.65 trillion budget deficit.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Alexander follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. I thank the gentlelady. You beat Mr. Dodaro,
you yielded back 18 seconds. This is probably a record for any
committee.
I now yield myself 5 minutes.
Mr. Davis, the work you did while you were here continues
on. But as you can see, there is more to do. When we start
looking at duplicative programs, from your experience on this
side of the dais, do you recommend that if the committee
authors legislation that we use carrot or stick or both? For
example, we could look at these programs and we could simply
say, through appropriations, we are only going to fund X
amount, now you have to figure out how to combine these, rather
than perhaps only eliminating them when you run out of money,
period.
Or do we create legislative authority for pools of savings
being combined, and thus create an opportunity in which there
is a carrot for agencies that come together, such as the
electronic medical records, if in fact DOD and our previously
serving members, often known as veterans, can simply come
together and realize they are dealing with the same people and
yet dealing stovepipe with two different systems? How do you
view those two options?
Mr. Davis. I like the carrot better, simply because when
you try to starve a budget, they look within their budget. They
don't look at how they can share savings with another agency.
It is just not in the nature of the beast. If you can
incentivize groups to work together in those kinds of shared
savings environments, you can do much better.
Look, organizations are, you have to look at how they are
incentivized. They are hesitant to give up the control or to
partner, because they don't know what authority they may lose
over the long haul. So when it comes to shared savings, we are
not getting the sustainability we need.
I would do something like mandating agencies to look at two
or three lines of businesses within each one where they could
share some of these instead of putting them into stovepipes.
But just starving them doesn't incentivize them to work with
other agencies, unfortunately. That is just not the nature of
the beast.
Chairman Issa. I appreciate that.
Mr. Dodaro.
Mr. Dodaro. I agree with Mr. Davis. I think the incentive--
--
Chairman Issa. He is not chairman any more, you know, you
don't actually have to agree with him. [Laughter.]
Mr. Dodaro. In this case, I mean it. [Laughter.]
I think there are disincentives in the budget process, for
example, in the way the money is there. It is difficult to
collaborate across agencies. And I think there could be more
flexibilities that way.
Also, the ideas that you posit there I think are also true
at the State and local level, in dealing with Federal on
grants. For example, we have recommended that the Federal
agencies look at incentives for States to combine in the
employment and training area. Now, a lot of these programs are
delivered through State and local administrative structures. A
lot of times they have to set up separate structures in order
to deliver multiple Federal programs.
So I think there is a lot of opportunities for incentives
and some flexibility.
Chairman Issa. Quick followup on that. Since so much of
what is delivered in programs like that is in fact Presidential
earmarks, often called grants and competitive grants and so on,
should we require that the executive branch do that
consolidation? Recognize that if you are going to give five
pots of money that do substantially the same thing all from the
executive branch and all on, many of them, non-formula, that in
fact that they be combined? Do you think that is a wise piece
of legislative, or should we try to work, if you will, to
combine with the administration in their own best interest?
Or last, should we give the States authority to essentially
combine grants, so that no matter where they come from, they
can merge them, which is something that Governor Barbour has
talked about, where he gets different puddles of money, and
each one is with different strings. How do you view those
various options to try to get the efficiencies?
Mr. Dodaro. I think all the options are very valid ideas.
At the Federal level, I think there are opportunities to
consolidate these various programs. For example, we understand
in the administration's proposal for reauthorization in the
education area actually 38 programs that we have identified are
proposed to be consolidated into 5. There are some thoughts on
surface transportation. Clearly, that.
I do think the States should have some flexibility to show,
and they can do it on a way to help reduce some of their own
costs. As you know, they are struggling with their own fiscal
stress. And give them some flexibility to combine, as long as
there is proper accountability in place.
One of the things we have said is that there is not enough
tracking of unobligated balances in a lot of the grant
programs. So I think all those could work.
Chairman Issa. I appreciate that.
Ms. Alexander, just a quick one. In your opening statement,
when you took on one of the hardest pillars to take on around
here, the ethanol subsidy, and I appreciate that, how do you
propose that we begin the process of doing away with one of the
obvious non-fossil fuel wastes in government? Do you suggest
that we in fact take that $5 billion and simply force it to be
put into renewable fuels more broadly, so there can be
competition from what most would call the more promising fossil
fuels? Or do you have an alternate suggestion?
Ms. Alexander. Our preference would be to have that be
savings, and that be savings that go to deficit reduction. That
has been our preference in terms of the elimination of VEETC
for several years. I think in many ways, the answer on VEETC
for us is this just can expire. It is done at the end of this
year. It could have been done last year. So we don't see a need
for replacing it.
There are lots of efforts to look at new and more promising
fuels. But I don't think that they need to be tied to VEETC.
That is just a failed policy that is redundant.
Chairman Issa. Thank you very much.
I recognize the ranking member for his questions.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro, one of the things that I found interesting
about your report is, in the report it said DOD made major
revisions to its acquisition policies. And you went on to say,
more emphasis was placed on knowledge about the requirements,
technology and designs. I found that when, as chairman of the
Coast Guard Subcommittee, what we discovered, when we were
dealing with the Deep Water project, when they were buying $25
billion worth of hardware over 25 years, and had boats that
didn't float, part of the problem, literally, literally, part
of the problem was, the acquisitions process. In other words,
they didn't have people who knew what they were doing with
regard to specifications, with regard to putting together
contracts, with determining when something, performance was
done. They even had the contractors determining when bonuses
would be given.
And so I am just trying to dig deep in here with this DOD,
because we see a lot of money going out the door there. How far
have they gotten with that whole acquisitions process? You said
they have made some movements. What do you see that, how much
progress have they made, and do you see other things that could
be done in that regard?
Mr. Dodaro. I think basically, for example, in the weapons
systems acquisition, they put in place, as a result of
congressional laws the Weapons Systems Acquisition Reform Act
of 2009, they put good policies and good practices in their
regulations and manuals. But they need to implement them more
consistently across the department.
Mr. Cummings. How can we get them to do that? I guess that
is the question.
Mr. Dodaro. I think there is no substitute for regular
congressional oversight.
Mr. Cummings. And Chairman Davis, you talked earlier to me
privately about, it has to be a sustained effort. How do we
sustain, I know with the Coast Guard, we just kept bringing
them back, over and over and over again. And we got things
done. We saved, I am sure, a few billion dollars in a very few
years. But I am trying to figure out, how do we keep that
sustained effort, Chairman Davis?
Mr. Davis. Two things. One of the difficulties in
sustaining this in government is that you have people who are
replaced over a period of time.
Mr. Cummings. Right.
Mr. Davis. They have a lot of other priorities. I liken it
to mergers and acquisitions. In the private sector, when you
merge, it is costs, you have to take those out, you need to
stay competitive. You have strict time lines, you have
management oversight from above. So many times in government,
you have costs that look good at the front end, on paper, but
by the time they are translated 2 or 3 years, it sometimes ends
up costing you, because you have this wait it out atmosphere.
One other thing on the procurement, we still don't have
enough procurement officers. There is a paucity of procurement
officers at the Pentagon. They need to hire and train more
people in these areas. It saves money in the long term to have
good people behind there.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Dodaro, I only have a few minutes left, 2
minutes left. Your report also says the United States is
essentially giving oil companies up to $53 billion because back
in 1995, Congress exempted them from paying royalties on
certain leases in the Gulf of Mexico. There are some oil
companies today that are paying no royalties to the American
taxpayers on certain leases. As part of this so-called royalty
relief program, these companies are removing the oil and gas,
which belongs to the American people, selling it and making
record profits.
So I am just trying to figure, this is our money, isn't it?
Mr. Dodaro. Basically, we have recommended that, there has
not been a comprehensive look in 25 years of what the Federal
Government is charging for these leases. And when they are
ranked, the U.S. Government is ranked against other countries
and even some States, we rank very low as to what we are asking
for on a regular basis for return on the leases for these
lands.
Interior has finally agreed to do that comprehensive
assessment. It is supposed to be completed this year. I would
encourage the Congress to review that study and to make sure
that there are proper incentives.
We have also said, Mr. Cummings, that there is not enough
verification of the production that is occurring on those
lands, in order to make sure the government is getting its fair
return.
Mr. Cummings. And you put this on your high risk list, is
that right?
Mr. Dodaro. That is correct.
Mr. Cummings. And why was that?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, we believe that there wasn't reasonable
assurance that the Federal Government was getting the revenues
that they were due as a result of those leases, for two of the
reasons that I mentioned before.
Mr. Cummings. In other words, we are being cheated?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I think it is not clear that we have
reasonable assurance we are getting everything we should.
Mr. Cummings. You say that in a very nice way, but the fact
is, it is money that is due the American people, on our land,
and we are not getting it. Let me tell you something. If that
happened anywhere, if people were being cheated, folks would be
going to jail in my district. Matter of fact, if somebody
steals a $300 bike, they go to jail.
So here we have billions drifting away, and at the same
time, we are trying to find money to make sure that kids can go
to school and have teachers and all that kind of thing. But
this has to be a priority. I know the chairman has made it a
big issue, this is a big issue for the chairman. I am really
looking forward to working with you, Mr. Chairman, as we tackle
this problem.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Mack.
Mr. Mack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A quick note on the ethanol. Count me in on finding those
savings. On a personal issue, the ethanol has been screwing up
my boat motor. So count me in. [Laughter.]
A minute ago, the ranking member said that the OMB wasn't
here partly because they are planning and they are doing. But
wouldn't it have been a great way to plan to actually come to
the hearing and get some input and share their thoughts? And
the ranking member also said that one of the ways that they
were able to get some savings and be effective in another
committee dealing with the Coast Guard was, keep bringing them
back. Well, I would like for the OMB to show up for the first
time, so we can keep bringing them back and figuring out ways
to save some money.
Let me start with this, Mr. Dodaro. Has the administration
had any reaction to your report so far?
Mr. Dodaro. I have not talked to them about the report.
There are some areas in here in our high risk list that we have
made a number of attempts to have discussions with OMB and the
agencies on the high risk list and the GAO. So we are engaged
in regular discussions on that.
I do believe the announcement also yesterday that they were
proposing a commission to deal with the Federal real property
issue was in response to this report as well. I do plan to
followup with them and try to create dialog to make sure that
all these issues are addressed.
Mr. Mack. But they haven't had a reaction? It would be nice
if the Director of OMB was here so we could ask him that
question.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. My understanding is yesterday that the
deputy for management over at OMB, Jeff Zients, said that they
are on the same page as we are.
Mr. Mack. Mr. Davis, good to see you again. Isn't this
really, I remember my first term here when we were in the
majority, weren't the reports, and didn't President Bush at the
time, didn't they come out with programs that were duplicative
in nature, that could be done away with? So this is a real
problem, this isn't the first report or the first time that we
have learned that the Federal Government is wasting money by
having duplicative programs.
Mr. Davis. No, Mr. Mack, unfortunately, it is a soap opera.
I think Mr. Dodaro would agree with that. There are things that
have been on that high risk list for generations. It takes a
sustained effort on the part of Republicans and Democrats up
here working with the administration to get these done. The
problem is just keeping your eye on the ball with everything
else that goes on. And when you cut budgets, when you go
through CRs, these are the kinds of things that fall through
the cracks.
You still have the Pentagon. Books aren't auditable. So how
do you know where you are on these kinds of things? So yes, it
is a soap opera.
Mr. Mack. And Mr. Dodaro, can you give us any
recommendations on what might be some of the low-hanging fruit?
Mr. Chairman, if we could move on any of these, I think it
would be a sign of moving in the right direction. So is there
any kind of low-hanging fruit, things that are so either
ridiculous in nature that by not acting, is kind of a shame?
Mr. Dodaro. I think, my recommendation would be to first
build off where there is pretty good consensus about the need
to streamline. Like for example, in the areas I mentioned about
multiple programs, there are some recommendations to the
administration. For example, in the employment and training
area, to reduce and consolidate some of the programs. In
surface transportation, there is agreement. Teacher quality,
improving those programs, consolidating in the education field.
There is some common agreement there.
So my suggestion would be to build off where there is
consensus as a starting point. A number of these areas are
also, as Mr. Davis mentioned, on our high risk list. There we
have seen progress.
I would say the real point, though, we took two areas off
the list this last update. And both those areas had more than a
dozen congressional hearings, and a lot of dialog with the
administration to produce the results that were there. It
requires top level attention, metrics on progress. But there
are a lot of opportunities to do this.
There are also opportunities in the real property area,
Federal real property, that is not needed but needs to be
disposed of. We are spending, by latest estimates, almost over
$1.6 billion a year to maintain property that is under-
utilized. That doesn't make sense. There should be more
competition in contracting. About a third of the contracts that
were put in place either had no competition or only one bidder
on the competition.
There is also $640 million that is sitting in a Customs
collection account for a number of years that there haven't
been decisions on how to use. That could be clearly an easy and
quick win there.
And there is also a lot of money going out the door in
improper payments that I think could be stopped. That is going
to take some time and effort. We have talked about the use of
technology there, but I think that is another area where the
latest estimate, and not all programs have been estimated yet.
The latest estimate is about $125 billion.
So I think there are plenty of targets of opportunity, and
we would be happy to work with the Congress and the
administration to get results.
Mr. Mack. Thank you very much, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Kucinich, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you very much.
Ms. Alexander, I would like to ask you, as president of
Taxpayers for Common Sense, for your take on the American
people giving the most profitable industry in the world a $53
billion gift. I would like to break this down in laymen's
terms. And if I have any misperceptions about this, maybe you
could help me with it. Due to a flaw in the 1995 Outer
Continental Shelf Deep Water Royalty Relief Act, numerous oil
companies are now drilling in the Gulf of Mexico, in Federal
lands, and paying no royalties to the Federal Government. Is
that correct?
Ms. Alexander. That is right.
Mr. Kucinich. And as we have heard, GAO--could you say that
louder?
Ms. Alexander. My mic was not on. I am sorry. That is
right. They are paying no royalties right now as a result of an
error at Interior and the structure of the Deep Water Royalty
Relief Act and subsequent court case.
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you. Now, as we have heard, GAO reports
that U.S. taxpayers could lose as much as $53 billion as a
result of this. And it has already begun. In fiscal year 2011
alone, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and
Enforcement estimates that we will lose $1.4 billion.
In contrast, the oil industry is making staggering profits.
For example, the top five oil companies reported profits of
$485 billion from 2005 to 2009. ExxonMobil, the largest
American oil company, reported a 53 percent increase in its
fourth quarter profits. Chevron, the No. 2 American oil
company, reported fourth quarter earnings were 72 percent
higher than the preceding years. The third largest,
ConocoPhillips, reported that its quarterly profit climbed 46
percent.
Now, Ms. Alexander, is this an industry that needs billion
dollar giveaways?
Ms. Alexander. Taxpayers for Common Sense has worked on
this issue for a long time, and I think our position is
perfectly clear that we do not think the oil companies need
these subsidies or really any others. So we think this is an
issue that is ripe for Congress to address. And because in some
ways it is so outrageous, the problems with the Deep Water
Royalty Relief, that there should be bipartisan agreement on
it. These are taxpayer assets that people are taking. If any
one of us owned those oil and gas reserves and said, yes, just
take it, people would think we were a little crazy.
Mr. Kucinich. Well, back in 2005, when the oil was at about
$55 a barrel, President Bush addressed the American Society of
Newspaper Editors. I want to quote to this committee what he
said. ``I will tell you, with $55 oil, we don't need incentives
to the oil companies and gas companies to explore. There are
plenty of incentives. What we need is to put a strategy in
place that will help this country over time become less
dependent.''
Ms. Alexander, would you agree with that statement by
President Bush?
Ms. Alexander. I would, and with oil at, last I checked,
about $98 a barrel, it seems like it still applies.
Mr. Kucinich. So his point makes more sense now, right?
Ms. Alexander. Right.
Mr. Kucinich. Recently, John Hofmeister, who retired from
Shell in 2008, and now runs Citizens for Affordable Energy,
told a national journal that big oil companies don't need
government help. Would you agree with Mr. Hofmeister?
Ms. Alexander. I would agree that big oil does not need
government help.
Mr. Kucinich. How could we modify this subsidy structure to
encourage a transition of, let's say, clean, renewable energy
sources?
Ms. Alexander. Our position has always been, we know what
we don't need and we can get rid of it. Congress can come
together, develop a solution to the problem with the Royalty
Relief leases and simply just, some of the bigger tax
expenditures have significant benefits for oil and gas
companies. There are subsidies for oil and gas companies
riddled throughout the tax code and throughout different
spending programs. So we think this is a big opportunity for
there to be bipartisan action for reform that will help close
the deficit, just one baby step, and let a mature industry
stand on its own two feet. Many of these subsidies, the Royalty
Relief is not 100 years old, but other oil and gas subsidies
are as much as 100 years old, and it is a mature industry that
doesn't need them any more.
Mr. Kucinich. And these handouts don't do anything to help
the American economy, is that right?
Ms. Alexander. We think that these handouts are enriching
very profitable companies.
Mr. Kucinich. OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentleman yield his remaining time
for just a followup question?
Mr. Kucinich. Sure.
Chairman Issa. Ms. Alexander, you are nuancing, and I think
it is important for everyone that wasn't here when Chairman
Davis headed up our investigation, it is the leases that are
flawed, not necessarily the law, isn't that correct? In fact,
the leases did not properly have the language to trigger when
fuel prices, when oil prices and natural gas prices reached a
threshold to actually trigger the royalties. That is the reason
that most of this money is not being paid.
Ms. Alexander. My understanding is that there is a set of
leases that were issued between 1996 and 2000 that are flawed.
There was an error in the drafting. Then because they didn't
have a price threshold in them, subsequently a court ruled that
all the price threshold language in any leases in that period
that contained them was flawed. So all of those leases are
exempt from royalties right now. So it is a complex problem.
Chairman Issa. And I do think there is bipartisan support,
still, to try to fix that. I thank you.
Mr. Lankford of Oklahoma.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. And thanks to you all for coming.
We had talked earlier today about incentives for agencies
to try to look for duplicative waste. Obviously everyone wants
to have more staff, wants to do more things, wants to engage
it, and everyone sees the problems, they want to help solve it.
What incentives specifically do you see that you think, OK,
this is an incentive to help? Because honestly, I have talked
with several people that are Federal workers. They see it as
well, they see the waste around them. They say, I can't believe
we fill out this form, I can't believe we do this, someone else
does this. They see it. How do we create incentives within that
agency to that specific employee to say, when you see it, here
is a way to be able to help us get out of it?
Mr. Davis. I will give you a couple of examples. When I was
head of the county government in Fairfax, I went to my agency
heads at a budget time and asked them to cut their budget. They
came up with nothing. When we said look, of what you can find,
you can spend some of this your own way, within certain
guidelines, they came up with a lot more.
Mr. Lankford. Right.
Mr. Davis. Who is interested in cutting their budget if it
is going to go to somebody that overspent their budget, or if
it is going to ``deficit?'' It is just not in the nature of the
way things work. So that is one thing you could do.
Another thing is, we could bring agencies in and ask them
to take certain line of businesses and look for ways to share
savings and report back. Just if it is two or three lines of
business per agency, where right now they are stovepiped but
they could work together. The best example of that is the
health records between VA and DOD. There is no reason you have
to do different sets of health records.
Now, I will give you one other that affects the State, if I
can just take a second. Right now, for State governments, they
are spending a lot of money on just being able to authenticate
their communications with the Federal Government. Security
standards exist for States to authenticate users to access data
in federally funded systems that are hosted by the State. But
each Federal agency interprets the standards differently, so
States have to meet each Federal agency standard, replicating a
different process to various programs. That costs a lot of
money.
So Social Security uses technology for verification,
Department of Justice will use a certain procedure and
protocols on that. So they are having to do different things.
They ought to have one standard across the board for these
kinds of things.
Mr. Lankford. That is terrific. Mr. Dodaro, do you want to
comment on that as well?
Mr. Dodaro. Mr. Davis talked about, within each agency, and
I do agree with his suggestions in terms of forcing people to
come up with recommendations. But many things that we point out
in our report are multiple agencies involved in the same area.
We believe the only way this is going to get solved is by high
level attention within the administration. OMB needs to play a
very critical role in this whole endeavor, and the Congress
does as well, to provide the right type of incentives there.
For example, one of the areas, it is not mentioned in here,
what we are going to work on, it is on our high risk list, is
modernizing disability programs. There are about 200 different
disability programs. And because of our insistence in working
with OMB on the high risk set of meetings I talked about
before, we brought together all the agencies involved in that
process. It was one of the first times they have ever met to be
able to discuss that.
So I think there are ways to build in incentives and deal
with disincentives.
Another area that we have recommended before is leasing
versus buying. There is sort of a bias in the rules toward
scoring that differently. We have recommended that be changed
as well.
Mr. Lankford. Let me ask you a specific question as well,
Mr. Dodaro. You had mentioned about the contracting vehicles,
and you are recommending fewer contracting. Have you compiled a
list of contracting vehicles you say, these should be seriously
looked at?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. These are contracts that are inter-agency
contracts. What we have said is there is really not a list, the
list ought to be compiled by the executive branch, it ought to
be made visible, and people should make sure they----
Mr. Lankford. So right now, we have a multitude of
different contracts and systems of contracts for procurement.
You don't have, at this point, a list to say, here are the
different contracting vehicles we think are inherently
inefficient?
Mr. Dodaro. We have the types of vehicles that are
inefficient, or pose more risks to the Federal Government. I
would be happy to provide you that.
Mr. Lankford. That would be terrific. I would like to be
able to have that list as well.
Is there a need as well, you were able to reach into all
these different agencies and be able to research them in a way
that most people cannot. What would you perceive as the need
for individuals to be able to reach in and be able to search
the data, so the agencies can get out their employment, their
strategies, their program philosophies, to be able to go
through data and to be able to actually search it? Not just a
.pdf on some Web site, but actually searchable data, is there a
need for that and is that possible to pull off?
Mr. Dodaro. There is definitely a need for it. There is not
enough of it. And it is possible to pull off.
Mr. Lankford. That is one of the areas I look at and say,
you have the opportunity to be able to do that. But there are
lots of people at home that would like to be able to search
that and research that, whether they be journalists, whether
they be individuals. That is something I would like to see us
continue to push on as a committee. I know it has been talked
about before, to continue to find ways to be able to push and
do that.
And one last thought on it, sunsetting programs. Is there a
particular plan that you have seen to say, this is a great way
to sunset these things out?
Mr. Dodaro. I think there needs to be regular
reauthorization of programs. There are too many programs that
are created that don't have a regular review and process in
place. I do think the Federal Government needs to invest more
in regular program evaluations. One of the things we find and
we talk about in here is a lot of these programs have been
operating for years, and there is really not a lot of empirical
evidence of what the returns are and whether they are being
effective. So I think the Federal Government has, in the past,
shortchanged the program evaluation, and I think it needs to be
more put in place on a regular basis.
Mr. Lankford. Terrific. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me welcome the
panel, in particular, our former chairman and my predecessor in
this seat in Virginia, my good friend, Tom Davis. Welcome back,
Tom.
In fact, perhaps, Congressman Davis, we could begin with
you. You talked about the fact that it would be a wise
investment to expand the number of acquisition and procurement
personnel within the Federal Government, so that we are looking
for efficiencies and cost savings. Could you expand on that
just a little bit? Because one of the things that certainly has
struck a number of people is that Federal contracting increased
enormously in the 1990's, but procurement and acquisition
personnel within the Federal Government did not keep up with
that.
Mr. Davis. In fact, in some areas it declined during that
time. It was a way to cut budgets. In fact, many times you go
to a procurement meeting now, and what you have is a lot of
contractors running the procurement. That is not all bad, but
you need a cadre inside of Government who understands the tool
box that they have, can figure out what gets the best value for
the Government. And that needs constant training, it needs all
of those kinds of things.
And what has happened, many times, is we end up scrimping
on procurement personnel, we lose good personnel to the private
sector. And yet that is where you get your cost overruns, that
is where you get contracts that are not performing well,
because you don't have the appropriate oversight all along.
That has been my experience.
And I think it is money, for the most part, that is pretty
well spent, provided you continue to train people once you hire
them. I don't know if Gene agrees with that or not, but that is
my observation.
Mr. Dodaro. I think that is definitely the case. For
example, at DOD, the amount of contracting of goods and
services more than doubled over the past several years. And the
acquisition work force grew less than 1 percent. There are
efforts now to try to bolster that work force with proper
training and proper oversight. It is a good investment.
Mr. Connolly. I think that is a really good point.
Sometimes we get carried away with things like refuse of
Federal spending binge, titles like that. But sometimes we have
to make strategic investments, in fact, if we are going to
protect taxpayer dollars. Is that not correct, Mr. Dodaro?
Mr. Dodaro. That is true. You need to look at the outcomes
you are getting from the programs. But you have to make sure
you have the proper oversight. Contracting is a particularly
important area.
Mr. Connolly. Congressman Davis, just one other thing. Just
knowing your interest in the technology sector, right now the
administration is looking at Federal data centers and trying to
consolidate. There has been a big proliferation of the Federal
data centers. What is your sense of the prospect of perhaps
both achieving more efficiency, protection of data and cost
savings for the taxpayers?
Mr. Davis. You have over 2,100 data centers right now in
the Government for 24 different agencies. I think you could
save several hundred million dollars a year by consolidating. I
think you ought to put this on a fast track.
You need to look at the security as you do those kinds of
things. But look, in so many areas, we are not sharing savings,
we are stovepiping. And as Mr. Dodaro said, there are so many
ways we could work across agencies to store these kinds of
things. You get not only economies of scale in this, you get a
lot of other savings along the way if we would learn, between
agencies, to share these things. It has just not been the
culture.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. Dodaro, going back to the subject of oil, and Ms.
Alexander, in response to the chairman's question on Mr.
Kucinich's time, he said the problem is really with the royalty
agreements, not so much with the law. I thought I heard you
say, well, actually there was a change, a flaw perhaps, in the
law that was written in 1995 that had the effect, did it not,
of pretty much exempting a lot of offshore oil drilling from
any royalty payment at all.
Ms. Alexander. It is my understanding there was a flaw in
the execution of the leases at Interior in the 1990's. Whether
or not there is a flaw in the law is a little more of an
opinion matter. But I think it is a fact that there were errors
in the drafting and execution of the lease agreements at
Interior in the 1990's. We think there are problems with the
structure in the law just because it then, subsequently in a
court decision, moved all price thresholds in that context, the
legal. But it is, the execution of the leases was a problem.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, but with respect to this change in the
law, that is something, obviously, within the purview of
Congress.
Ms. Alexander. Well, Congress can solve this.
Mr. Connolly. That is right.
Ms. Alexander. This is something that Congress can come
together and figure out a solution for, and we hope that you
do.
Mr. Connolly. And finally, because my time is about to run
out, Mr. Dodaro, any estimate on the lost revenue to the U.S.
taxpayers in terms of the fact that we are 93rd out of 104
countries in royalties exacted from the oil industry?
Mr. Dodaro. I don't believe we have a current estimate in
that regard. But I do think, as I mentioned earlier, that we
don't have reasonable assurance that we are collecting as much
as we should.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Kelly of Pennsylvania for 5 minutes. And would the
gentleman yield for just a moment?
Mr. Kelly. I will, sir.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
I think the gentleman, Mr. Connolly, made a very good
point, and his chairman, Mr. Lankford, that in fact this is
probably one of the areas in which the subcommittee needs to
take on, under procurement reform, and work together. Because I
do believe that this is an example where these kinds of
questions and answers here, we can provide your subcommittee
some of the history, so that you could work on procurement
reform to make it clear that we never write a law again that
could be misinterpreted by Interior, written incorrectly and
then ultimately not survive at the court. So I appreciate that,
and I yield back.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro, good to see you again. It is nice to have
Western Pennsylvania people in the room.
One of my questions, from where I am, we do a lot of
touring, and I have been to a lot of meat packing plants. My
question has always been, and I don't understand this, and
maybe you can shed some light on this. We start to talk about
duplication and how many people we have in different places
checking different things, a lot of them checking the same
things at the same time and trying to come up with maybe some
type of a lead on how to do it.
But I know in meat packing plants, the USDA has an
inspector there every day, is that not true?
Mr. Dodaro. I believe so.
Mr. Kelly. And again, I say this from being there. My
question then comes, we have these folks there every day. And
then we have a plan called the Hazardous Analysis Critical
Control Point, and it is, let me just read this. Considered
that its pure and scientific application is a state-of-the-art
food safety system, every meat plant designs their own system,
in accordance with USDA requirements, and must operate
successfully under this system. We do not need an inspector at
every plant every day. We operate the same facilities, the same
systems, whether inspectors are present or not.
And I would just say that, for what I have done in my
lifetime, running footage is a lot more important than
snapshots from time to time. So we have these folks in these
plants every day, USDA inspectors. They are watching what these
people do. In addition to that, we send in another group that
comes in to go over what they have already gone over.
Now, when that happens, these folks, and these are not
large meat processors, in some cases, they are small places,
have maybe 40, 50 employees. They have to stop what they are
doing and spend a week going over the plan, which is gone over
every day with the USDA inspector. I am just trying to
understand, as we go through this, and we see the duplication
of this and the cost to taxpayers, and really the cost benefit
analysis, where in the end does it serve the taxpayer or the
people in those businesses? Could you shed any light on that at
all?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. We have pointed out, for a number of
years, that the food safety system is completely fragmented. It
is really not operating effectively. There is a need to go to a
risk-based approach, and I think that is where you are pointing
out the real need to do that. We have recommended that there
be, Congress commission a study with the National Academy of
Sciences or some blue ribbon panel to redesign this. A lot of
our food now is coming from foreign sources, and we are still
focused on domestic production a lot.
So we have said that the system right now can be a lot
better, and there needs to be a real look at it. The risk-based
approach is really the way to go.
Mr. Kelly. And I wonder about this. I come from private
industry, I am not really well-hinged with government. I just
keep wondering why we keep shooting ourselves in the foot and
wonder why we are limping. We have these committees, we ask
these questions, we keep going over and over and over again.
And everybody comes up with the same answer. There are too many
regulations from too many agencies, there is too much
duplication, there is too much overlap. When does it stop? When
do we fix it?
Mr. Dodaro. I think you just have to figure out which
priorities Congress wants to pursue and stick with it. There is
not a lot of substitute for just rolling up our sleeves and
focusing on these areas and making sure we get results. It
requires sustained follow-through. There are cultures and
incentives that will keep things in place until they are
broken. And the only way they will be broken is through
sustained efforts by the Congress and the administration in
order to do it. Otherwise, it won't change materially.
Mr. Kelly. Well, I am looking forward to working with you.
We try to drive to those same conclusions and get things fixed.
Thanks very much. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Tierney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is interesting, Mr. Dodaro, I heard my colleagues say
that they would like to solve the problem having to do with the
leases and the non-collection of royalties on that. Your report
recommends that the Government obtain a fair return on oil and
gas produced by Federal leases. It seems like a very common
sense recommendation. Everyone on the panel says they agree
with it.
But interestingly, these no-royalty leases continue. And
you agree that we are not getting a fair return currently,
correct?
Mr. Dodaro. There is not reasonable assurance we are.
Mr. Tierney. And then we had the report last year from Mr.
Issa and his colleagues tell us on page 4 that the total loss
from offshore drilling may extend beyond the troubled 1998 to
1999 leases. The paragraph goes on to culminate in the end
saying, depending on the market price of oil and natural gas,
the total costs of foregone royalties could total nearly $80
billion.
In fact, your report, Mr. Dodaro, says it is between $21
billion and $53 billion, dumping from these oil companies into
their pockets instead of paying down our debt. We have Shell
and BP and Chevron and ExxonMobil, $485 billion in profits. And
they have lost 10,200 jobs. So this is the situation we do, and
we talk about wanting to understand the history. That is the
history. Everybody knows what the problem is. Everybody knows
what the consequences are.
And I just want to make sure everybody knows there is a
solution out there. My Massachusetts colleague, Ed Markey, has
proposed a way to address this problem. First, he recognizes
that you can't go back and void the leases without risking new
litigation. His resolutions are an alternative to that. It
would not allow any new leases to companies that are currently
benefiting from no-royalty leases. Those companies have a
choice, you either keep your no-royalty leases, or you can
renegotiate them to begin paying a fair price and get new
leases eventually on that. It is up to them.
Now, my colleague has worked very closely with the
Congressional Research Service to make sure there are no
constitutional issues with this problem. So my question to you,
Ms. Alexander, is does Taxpayers for Common Sense support Mr.
Markey's legislation?
Ms. Alexander. We worked with Representative Markey on
that, and we support that, among other options. We just want to
see this fixed.
Mr. Tierney. But that would work?
Ms. Alexander. That would work, yes.
Mr. Tierney. Good. So now we have the history, and now we
have everybody saying that they agree that they want to resolve
the problem. And yet it is not resolved.
Let me tell you that last week, last Friday, Mr. Markey
offered that legislation on the House floor. Not a single one
of our colleagues on the other side voted for it. All of the
people on our side did. It was offered again this week as a
floor amendment. And again, not a single one of our colleagues
on the other side voted for it, and everyone one of the people
on this side of the aisle voted for it.
And last year, and the year before, let me go back. This is
not a new idea for Mr. Markey, this is something he has
repeatedly brought to the floor. So if we think that we all
understand the problem, if we know the history, and if we all
say we want to fix it, it always takes deeds to make things
happen, not words. I hear a lot of words, we have seen no
deeds.
So Ms. Alexander, we can offer this over and over. But
until our friends on the Republican side of the aisle really
want to put deeds behind their words, we are not going to get
much action on that.
So what would you say to convince my Republican colleagues
over here who are blocking the fix to this change, what would
you say they should have in mind next time Mr. Markey brings it
to the floor?
Ms. Alexander. As I say, our position over time has just
been, just get this done, just fix it. The Markey bill does fix
it, so that is one way to do it, is vote for that. Come up with
another solution if you have another solution that you think is
better.
Mr. Tierney. Well, tell them why the Markey Amendment
works. Tell them why you support it.
Ms. Alexander. We support it because we think that it is a
constitutional approach, based on what we have read, to putting
the leaseholders of the no-royalty leases in a position where
they have an incentive to renegotiate. And simply put, we just
want to not continue to give away those resources. So we are
looking at lots of different options.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
So let me say to my Republican colleagues, we understand
the problem, we share what you say. Is your intention you want
to resolve it? We have provided you with a perfectly good way,
a legitimate way and constitutional way to resolve it. Let's
work on it, and next time it comes up, maybe you will vote with
us on it and we will get the matter resolved, $53 billion back
to our people, so we are not running around cutting matter from
teachers and reducing Pell grants so students can't afford
college, whacking job training so people who are unemployed
can't get back to work. Let's get serious. Let's do something
for real.
Mr. Cummings. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Tierney. I will yield.
Mr. Cummings. Ms. Alexander, one of the things that the
report said was that, in some instances, information was being
provided by the oil companies erroneously. And there was self-
reporting. And in some instances, there was no reporting
whatsoever.
Could you comment on that, please?
Ms. Alexander. The issue of self-reporting, this is
basically an honor system, here is our oil, take it, tell us
how much you have taken. We don't think that is the right way
to do business. We don't think that is Congress and the
administration treating taxpayers like they have a fiduciary
responsibility to manage our assets aggressively.
And I just want to give credit where credit is due, we do
support the Markey fix, but we also have worked very closely
with Chairman Issa. I think there is a real potential for a
bipartisan solution on this. And from the taxpayers'
perspective, it is just, move forward.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Meehan, for his comments, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for the
presentations from the entire board.
Mr. Dodaro, I didn't know for sure, but I was listening to
the language. And I thought I picked up the Pittsburgh. Is Jim
Dodaro your brother?
Mr. Dodaro. No.
Mr. Meehan. OK, but it's the Pittsburgh in the voice.
Thank you for your presentation today. I come to this
committee with a background that includes times as a U.S.
attorney. In that capacity, I came in just after September
11th, when we were dealing with the issues of terrorism. We
each share responsibilities in other committees as well, and
one of those committees on which I serve is Homeland Security.
As a result, I think as each of us went through your very
comprehensive assessment of Government spending in various
capacities, but also the duplication, I was really struck for
two reasons. One, with respect to sort of the bureaucratic
overlay of so many agencies, but also what is at stake with the
issue of bioterrorism. So I take a minute to read from your
report at least five departments, eight agencies and more than
two dozen Presidential appointees overseas, $6.4 billion
related to bioterrorism.
Then on the front end of this, we are saying there is no
broad, integrated, national strategy that encompasses all of
the stakeholders with biodefense responsibilities to identify
the risks systematically, access the resources that are needed
to do it, and then to prioritize and allocate the investment
across the spectrum. So that is on the front end, to prevent an
incident.
Then you conclude, there is no national plan to coordinate
Federal, State and local efforts following a bioterror attack.
And the United States lacks the technical and operational
capabilities required for an adequate response.
This could be Katrina all over again. We are really on the
front end of a remarkable challenge. And from my work on the
Homeland Security Council, bioterrorism is a very real threat.
Can you take a minute and comment on this very, very important
aspect of this report?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, I would, thank you.
Following September 11th, there was a lot of focus on
protecting the transportation system, particularly the airline
industries. Then what we were trying to focus on, and I think
the 9/11 Commission, was, what are the other potential risks to
the country, what are other avenues that could be pursued. For
example, smuggling information or threats over the border
physically, other modes of transportation.
But the biodefense area is one that we felt, for a number
of years, wasn't getting enough attention, and understanding
what the threats were, having an appropriate plan in place to
be able to do it, it is like a number of areas that really
requires multiple agencies to be involved. And there really
hadn't been a means to coordinate that.
We tried to elevate this to the Homeland Security Council
and the National Security Council, which are well postured to
be able to do this. We haven't gotten as much response as I
would have liked from them in this area, to provide the proper
leadership. So I do think this is an area where congressional
oversight is warranted, and from my perspective, would be very
welcome, to bring about some of the very important things that
could be done to make sure we are in a position to detect and
prevent something, not only in a position to be reacting after
the fact.
Mr. Meehan. Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Mr. Meehan, let me just say, if you think that
is tough, you ought to look at cybersecurity, where you have
Intel, DHS, DOD, and every agency doing a different approach to
FISMA, the Federal Information Security Management Act. I think
it would be even more alarming.
Mr. Meehan. Well, I only have 50 seconds, but I am going to
ask both of you, in response to this, would you tell me how we
look at creating the kind of mechanism where there is a
national strategy and a focal point where we can get a single
point of response that enables us to both be prepared on the
front end, to coordinate these assets, and as importantly, in
the event that we have an incident, to be able to respond
effectively on the back end? We have asked for attention to be
paid. I understand maybe you can tell me the history here. But
what is the solution? What works best in terms of how we
organize and then seek accountability?
Mr. Davis. I will take a quick stab. One of the problems at
the executive branch level is jurisdiction and turf over who is
going to be in charge. This is going to take engagement from
the Congress, from both parties, with the administration in
figuring out a path and moving ahead. We haven't had FISMA
revisions since 2002, long overdue. But I think it is going to
take a lot of dialog and a lot of bipartisan cooperation to
move this ahead. But it has to be done.
Mr. Dodaro. I agree with that completely. This needs top
level congressional and administrative support to be able to do
it. You can't work with the agencies on a peer level and expect
that they are going to create this type of mechanism. That is
the fundamental problem.
Mr. Davis. And I would just add, I didn't grow up in your
district, but I had two of my kids who went to Swarthmore
College in your district.
Mr. Meehan. Well, they are obviously very bright children.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Issa. Ending on that high note, the gentleman's
time is expired.
We now recognize the gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro, that is a great report. I really want to thank
you for it. I thought what, among other things, was terrific
about it is it was balanced, it looked at the whole problem,
not just the loss from duplication, but also the loss from
inappropriate tax subsidies, improper payments, the error rate
in our payments. So it was quite comprehensive and extremely
helpful.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you, too. I think the focus
of this inquiry is really important. Mr. Ranking Member, I
really appreciate it.
I am asking a little bit about the oil subsidies, because
it is an easy target for us, but astonishing that it isn't
taken care of. Your report indicated $53 billion would be saved
by taxpayers if we eliminated that oil subsidy for royalty-free
drilling at a time of $100 a barrel oil. So you fully support
eliminating that subsidy for the oil companies, so we can save
money for the taxpayers?
Mr. Dodaro. We were asked to calculate what it would be if
that had been in place properly during that period of time.
Mr. Welch. Right. I would ask you what you support, if it
would be $53 billion.
Mr. Dodaro. I believe that is the high end of our estimate.
But what we are trying to focus on----
Mr. Welch. Let me just go on, I will come back to you in a
minute.
Ms. Alexander, you indicated that was, again, I applaud you
because you are taking a comprehensive approach, you are
looking at all the elements of how the taxpayer is getting
hammered unnecessarily. But that oil subsidy was something you
spoke about as well, that we should get rid of. The oil
companies disagree, and they spent about $340 million in the
past 2 years lobbying to retain this taxpayer help.
Ms. Alexander. It is the oil companies' job to make money
drilling oil and selling it. It is Congress' job to have a
fiduciary role and take care of taxpayer dollars. We are
looking out for the taxpayers, and we think there is room for a
fix.
Mr. Welch. Is it your view that if there are going to be
taxpayer subsidies, and that is an expense to every taxpayer in
the country, but the intention is to create jobs, that subsidy
should go to emerging technologies and industries, not mature
and profitable industries?
Ms. Alexander. We take a skeptical look at all subsidies,
and certainly, as a starting point, we want to know what we are
getting for our tax dollars. If we are putting a dollar into an
industry, we want to know why we are doing it and what our
goals are. Are we trying to get jobs out of it and we are not
getting jobs? Then it is an ineffective subsidy. If it is a
very profitable industry that is mature and should be able to
take care of itself, then it shouldn't need subsidies.
We are going to be skeptical about subsidies to new and
emerging technologies, and set very high performance standards.
There is a reason and a timeframe.
Mr. Welch. And basically, that skepticism is appropriate.
It should be applied to a tax expenditure, which costs the
taxpayer money, just as it should be applied to any line item
expenditure in the budget, correct?
Ms. Alexander. We see it that way, yes.
Mr. Welch. Mr. Davis, some people say you are a real smart
politician. I am going to ask you really for some advice.
Mr. Davis. I am a reformed politician. [Laughter.]
Mr. Welch. In this room, we have the Democrats who tend to
hammer away on what we see as tax giveaways. And a lot of times
the other side of the aisle is focusing on duplication. My
view, we are both right. Where there is duplication, we ought
to eliminate it. Where there is a freebie tax subsidy, we ought
to eliminate that. But we are sort of arrayed on opposite sides
of the line here, and I know that the chairman and the ranking
member want to save taxpayers' money. That is the ultimate
goal.
I wonder what you would think of us trying to pair off
areas where we agree. In other words, Mr. Lankford is doing
good work in his subcommittee. You mentioned, for instance,
duplication that makes no sense, VA and DOD records. Why don't
we have one set of medical records. What if we paired that
with, say, getting rid of the ethanol subsidy, where there does
seem to be some bipartisan support, and you are doing them
together? Or another pairing might be these oil subsidies that
just serve no purpose and cost the taxpayers $53 billion, and
we pair that with following your advice, where we have
different Federal agencies requiring the States to accommodate
each one of their different standards for verification? It
makes absolutely no sense.
So how do we, my frustration here at times is that it seems
like it is a political impediment that inhibits us from taking
appropriate action that can make real progress. And in your
testimony, you suggested to us that we look in the mirror.
Frankly, I think that is pretty good advice.
And my goal here would be to save taxpayers' money. Where
there is duplication, we can agree on, it ought to be
eliminated, let's do it. Where there is a tax expenditure that
is just a ripoff from the perspective of the taxpayer, let's
eliminate it. From a moving ahead, making progress on what the
chairman and ranking member want to accomplish here, do you
think that makes some sense?
Mr. Davis. It not only makes sense, it is essential if we
are going to move ahead. You have a Democratic administration,
you need an administration buy-in. You have a Congress that is
divided. And when it comes to waste, you say one man's pork is
another man's steak, but on a lot of these efficiency issues, I
think we ought to be able to come together on this committee,
sit down, we are not going to agree on everything.
But there are enough things we agree on, put together that
report and then you have to drive it. Then you have to go to
the administration, you have to go to the floor. And look,
let's face it, there are interest groups outside of this
committee room that want to weigh in on some of these subsidies
and the like. It is easy to talk in a vacuum where you have
your bean counters here, these are the numbers. But when you
get outside, it becomes a little more difficult.
So this committee, I think, could play a very vital role in
coming together with a strong bipartisan report and pushing
that, holding hearings on that. I think you could get everybody
back again, once you get some agreement on this and trying to
drive it.
The frustration I felt up here in 14 years in the House is
just, there is no sustainability to this. You get a report, you
have a hearing, you get a little momentum, and you forget about
it and you move on to the next new thing. But this is something
this committee was empowered to do when it was formed back in
the 1950's. I think it is something that, we are not going to
agree on everything. But there are enough things we agree on,
we could put together a pretty juicy report, and I think save
the taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars. So I think it is
a good suggestion.
Chairman Issa. I would give you more time if I possibly
could, because you were on all the right message. I thank the
gentleman.
We now recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania--we are
very Pennsylvania-oriented committee, as you know--Mr. Platts,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I certainly thank all
three of our witnesses. It is great to have all of you here,
and your insights.
Mr. Davis, I actually, with all respect to the current
chairman, I always want to say, Mr. Chairman, great to have you
back as well.
Chairman Issa. Let it out, just keep letting it out.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Platts. Your insights are certainly very helpful to us.
I want to commend Senator Coburn for having sponsored the
legislation and the result in this report, and the important
work of GAO and now following through on the assignment. Really
what I see is the beginning of the process, the first of what
will be hopefully a lot of dialog between GAO, this committee
and its important work. Tom, you touched on it perfectly,
sustainability, that we don't just talk about these things, but
we follow through.
As when you were chairman and now with Chairman Issa, I
have the privilege of chairing the Subcommittee on Government
Organization, Efficiency and Financial Management. I assure
you, we will do our best as a subcommittee to sustain this
effort from the legislative side and working with all the
parties.
On a specific issue, when you think about what is in the
report, what is highlighted, and the inefficiencies, the
duplication, the waste of resources, teacher quality, education
of our kids, employment training, especially with unemployment
over 9 percent for almost 2 years, DOD, Homeland Security,
these are all top priorities for our country and for our
citizens. Yet, we know we can do a lot better with the
resources we are putting into them.
Two first questions, Mr. Dodaro, to you, and this probably
will be maybe in a followup hearing with you or staff on the
subcommittee level, as you looked at some of the duplication
such as the $4 billion on teacher quality, is there any ability
to give even a guesstimate of savings, administrative savings,
if we took those 82 different programs into even half that
number? Any ability to give a guesstimate of that $4 billion,
how much could we likely save from eliminating the duplication?
Mr. Dodaro. I will go back and take a look and work with
the team. I don't think we were able to do it, because there
are a lot of limitations on the amount of information that is
available on what it costs to administer some of these
programs, particularly those in this case that are administered
through the State and local level. But we do believe there is
plenty of opportunity here to consolidate programs. And as I
mentioned earlier, in the administration's proposal for
education reform, they are already proposing to consolidate 38
of these programs into 11. So I think there are a lot of
opportunities. I don't have a cost estimate. I wish I did.
Mr. Platts. And I think that is a positive sign here, your
reference to Secretary Duncan and DOE, looking at trying to be
proactive in that consolidation effort to be more efficient.
A follow-on, and I think it is a similar answer, that you
don't have the ability to have the details at this point, and
that is, I am going to stay with teacher quality, teacher
preparation, those 82 programs, I don't think you probably have
the data available to you right now to do a cost benefit
analysis to say, all right, we have these 82 programs, these 5
over here we can show have really done a great job. These other
77 are struggling. Is that accurate, that at this point you
don't have the data or info to be able to get to that detail,
that cost benefit analysis?
Mr. Dodaro. That is correct, especially for the smaller
programs. We do mention in the report that a number of the
smaller programs are so small, it is hard to evaluate them.
Mr. Platts. That under $50 million number, what the
administrative costs, what the savings would be?
Mr. Dodaro. Right. That is correct.
Mr. Platts. In looking ahead to the hearing process, I have
to tell you, the temptation is to try to make the point about
the duplication, to invite one representative from all 82
programs on just teacher education to come. We would fill the
room, there wouldn't be any seats left, to make the point that
your report does, that we need to do a lot better here.
An additional question I am going to try to squeeze in
here, improper payments, huge issue, you reference $125 billion
as probably the low end. That is what we know or think we know
about it, who knows how much is really out there. Any specific
recommendations? Because when we think of how to balance the
budget and deficit reduction, it is entitled reform. And two of
the biggest areas of improper payments are Medicaid and
Medicare. Any specific areas you want to put us toward
regarding improper payments and those two programs?
Mr. Dodaro. The first thing I would say, in the Medicare
area, there needs to be an estimate for the prescription drug
component. Right now there is not, so the estimate is
incomplete.
There are opportunities to use more information technology
up front to help detect, and we are looking at and evaluating
opportunities right now. We talked about it at the high risk
hearing with Chairman Issa. So we are looking at that issue.
I think the Improper Payments Elimination and Reporting Act
that was passed by Congress last year is a very important
vehicle. It lowers the thresholds, it requires accountability,
it requires regular reporting, setting of targets and followup
and transparency in reporting. So I do think this is a really
important area that, with sustained attention, that we can make
a lot of progress on going forward.
Mr. Platts. Hopefully we can sustain that effort with you.
Chairman Davis, did you have something to add?
Mr. Davis. I would just add, improper payments I think has
been constantly a problem for government. And this legislation
helps. There are so many great software items out there on
fraud detection, anomaly detection and the like that aren't
being utilized. I think you need to continue to push that from
here.
And I would just add, share and savings contracts are
something the Government needs to look at in some of these
areas. That is basically that you don't pay anything unless you
get a return, and then you can do a percent from that, and it
is negotiated down. They are legal under the FAR, but they are
rarely used. But it is a great way to get something out there
quickly. It doesn't have to come out of budgets at this time.
It is a net-net to the Government. I throw that out for
discussion.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. The gentlelady from the District of
Columbia, Ms. Norton, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much for this hearing, Mr.
Chairman, it is a very important and helpful hearing.
I have a question for Mr. Dodaro, and my good friend, Mr.
Davis, my regional neighbor and good personal friend. But I am
going to give you a pass on the topic du jour. I am not going
to ask about oil subsidies. In fact, I am going to ask you
about a subsidy that lies way beneath the surface.
I am ranking member of a committee that has to do with
property and property disposal, also with building and leasing.
I note, Mr. Dodaro, that among your lists of areas identified
was, and I would like you to elaborate upon it, because it is
stated so tersely, ``improve cost analyses used for making
Federal facility ownership and leasing decisions could save
tens of millions of dollars.''
Let me give you an example. We just built a beautiful
Department of Transportation building just a few years ago. It
is huge, it was state-of-the-art. Guess what? We built the
Department of Transportation, it will always be there, it is a
headquarters building, we built it, built by a developer, we
have a 15-year lease on it. When that lease is out, we probably
shall have bought the building. Then we will start buying the
building again.
I believe this has a lot to do with scoring. What changes
do you think should be made and who should make it? We run up
against these humongous losses, it is not tens of millions, it
is billions of dollars, because we don't do real estate the way
the private sector does it. How should we change scoring? Who
should do it? Is it administrative? Does it take an act of
Congress?
Mr. Dodaro. We have recommended that OMB come up with a
proposal to be able to deal with this issue. That has not been
done yet. But it is a combination of action by OMB, working
with CBO and the budget committees that really would have to
make a change in the scoring rules. I think it is appropriate.
There needs to be flexibility. It is not always one way or the
other, but there needs to be a good cost benefit study, and the
government and the taxpayers would benefit.
Ms. Norton. Yes, all I am asking for is that the Federal
Government not have one way of doing real estate transactions,
while the rest of the country does it another way. The first
thing you have to look at is, why does everybody else do it
that way? Why do you buy a home with the mortgage, and if you
are the Federal Government, you have to put the money straight
down? Why is that better for the taxpayers?
Mr. Davis, I was interested, in light of your, this is so
Davis-like, win-win approach to things, this notion of trying
to find ways to work together on these things, I noted that in
property disposal, I have just signed a letter with the
chairman of the subcommittee, in which we are asking GSA for
access to their database on excess property. Now, the President
has a whole study on excess property going on, and now you see
our committee interested as well.
So you see the administration, you see this committee and
you see the appropriate subcommittee all going at the same
issue, all seeing that there are dollars there. What role, Mr.
Davis, having been chairman of this committee, do you think the
committee should play now that there are so many actors
interested in this low-hanging fruit?
Mr. Davis. Well, and there is an initial actor. Martha
Johnson, the Administrator at GSA, has put a team together, her
own advisory committee on this subject, too, of doing away with
surplus properties. You have a lot of cooks in the kitchen
right now. This committee needs to drive an outcome. I think
you need to hold their feet to the fire. We need to put some
time limits on this. This has been around a long time, before I
came to Congress, trying to dispose of property or utilize
dilapidated properties in a way that we can rehabilitate them,
use them, sometimes share it with the private sector.
What we need to do here at the subcommittee level is
continue to hold hearings and drive it and keep their feet to
the fire. You have to put time limits on this, or the clock
runs out. I think Mr. Dodaro's report shows a lot of savings in
this, if we can get it right.
I would just add one other thing on the scoring. I hate to
mention this, but you get frustrated, Congress can always
direct scoring, too, if you don't get any action out of the----
Ms. Norton. What do you mean, direct scoring?
Mr. Davis. You can direct scoring. You can write the rules
for scoring. We have done it, I don't say we do it all the
time, but we have done it with some frequency.
Ms. Norton. Save a lot of money. I yield back, thank you.
Mr. Platts [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back, and
another former chairman of the committee, Mr. Burton,
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Burton. Tom, it is good seeing you again. I understand
you are out there in the private sector making lots of money.
So it is good to see you. See, he is blushing.
Mr. Davis. Not this morning. [Laughter.]
Mr. Burton. Well, anyway, welcome back. It is good seeing
you. This picture simply doesn't do you justice.
But anyhow, I would like to make a brief comment about Mr.
Tierney's remarks a few minutes ago when he was here. I wish he
was still here. We checked on the issue that he raised on that
recommital motion. The reason that recommital motion failed was
because they were, in effect, I don't like to use the term
blackmailing, but blackjacking the oil companies into
renegotiating leases that had already been agreed to in order
to get a new lease. And that is something that I think most
people would agree is a violation of law. The leases, some of
them are for 20, 25, 30 years.
And there was a case, and I am stating all this for the
record, there was a case, the Kerr McGee case in 2007 that went
to court, where they tried to force a renegotiation of the
contract, and Kerr McGee won because the contract was valid and
the government had no right to go back and insist on a change
in that, simply because they wanted to get more back from the
company.
Now, I think there is a way that we can do this in the
future. We have talked about this up here. That is, we can
encourage them, when we negotiate new leases, not threatening
the old leases, but when we renegotiate, when we negotiate new
leases, to create a better way to get those funds back that
would help bring more money into the Treasury and reduce the
debt.
I would like to go into this a little bit further, this is
a little off the subject at hand but I think it is extremely
important. We have been talking about this, and I noticed on
the news in the last few days, there are more and more
commentators and ``experts'' that are talking about it, and
that is, our dependence on foreign energy. It plays into what
we are talking about in an unusual way.
We import about 63 percent of our energy. Back in 1972,
when we had the oil embargo, it was about 25 or 26 percent. So
we have more than doubled our dependence on Middle Eastern oil,
oil coming from Mexico, Canada and Venezuela, the communist
dictator down there, Chavez. So we are in a position right now
where if these oil supplies were in jeopardy, we could see the
cost of oil per barrel go through the roof and the cost of
gasoline and other things that we use oil for, as far as energy
is concerned, go through the roof.
I got some gasoline last night, which may not be of
interest to anybody, but it was regular gasoline, and it cost
me $3.57 a gallon. And that was the lowest that I could find on
the entire George Washington Parkway. So the cost is higher
than that here in D.C., and it is going up. Some people say
that there is a disruption of the oil supplies coming in from
the Middle East alone, if we had a blockage of the Suez Canal
or the Straits of Hormuz, or the Persian Gulf, that we would
see oil and gas costs go through the roof. You could see $5, $6
a gallon gas.
Now, we deliver, in this country, a great deal of our
resources by truck. T. Boone Pickens was in to see me about a
week or two ago, and he told us if we converted or got all of
the 18 wheelers to use natural gas, we could cut our dependence
on foreign oil by 50 percent within the next decade. That one
thing. And yet we are not drilling or doing anything to explore
for energy in this country. We can't get new oil leases, we are
getting all kinds of environmental issues raised that way, we
can't drill here, we can't drill there. We have trillions of
gallons of coal shale that could be converted to gas to oil, we
have oil all over this country, in the ANWR and off the
continental shelf and in the Gulf of Mexico. We have trillions
of cubic feet of natural gas, and we are not doing anything.
So we are in effect creating a greater dependency on
foreign energy than we ever have in the history of this
country. We have gone from 25 percent to 60 some percent
dependence on foreign energy, since we had the oil embargo,
where people were walking four blocks to get a can of gas to
get to work.
If you would just give me another 30 seconds, Mr. Chairman.
I think it is extremely important, and I know this is off the
subject and I really appreciate your being tolerant of my
comments here. But I think it is really important, when we are
talking about renegotiating or negotiating oil leases or gas
leases or whatever we are talking about that we realize, we
have a huge dependency on foreign energy. And this country,
from an economic standpoint, and a defense standpoint, could be
in a terrible situation if we don't move toward energy
independence.
I think all of us, all of us on this dais and all of us,
regardless of whether we are Democrat or Republican, ought to
be talking about ways that we can move in this direction as
quickly as possible. Because if we don't, and things go south
in the Middle East or in Venezuela or elsewhere, we could
really see problems, lights off, gasoline going through the
roof, the cost of all the goods and services that are trucked
going through the roof, an inflationary spiral that could kill
this country.
With that, I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Platts. Thank you.
Mr. Davis. Mr. Burton, can I react to that for just a
second? I think you are on, but can I just make one comment?
Mr. Platts. Sure.
Mr. Davis. You have to remember, the stone age didn't end
because they ran out of stones. Our dependency on oil, it is
not because we run out of oil. There are going to be
alternative fuels developed. That, I think, continues to be the
long-term strategy.
What is the most frustrating is about Congress' inability,
and I was part of this, to come to grips with some kind of
defined energy policy that has more domestic production, as you
have noted, more research and incentives into alternative
fuels, which we have started to do, and then more conservation.
It is a three-pronged deal. The parties should be able to come
together on this or exactly what you say is going to happen.
Mr. Burton. Mr. Chairman, let me just make one brief
comment. That is, the things that Chairman Davis just mentioned
is absolutely accurate. We need a comprehensive approach.
But a lot of these things they are talking about are going
to take time, it is going to take 5, 10, 15 years. We don't
have the luxury of time. We need to get moving on energy
independence right now.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Platts. The gentleman yields back. Having had the
privilege to serve under both former chairmen, how could I not
agree with both of you. You make great points when we talk
about energy independence. It is economic security, it is
national security. They are all intertwined.
With that, I yield 5 minutes to the gentleman from
Missouri, Mr. Clay.
Mr. Clay. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Let me first
welcome Mr. Davis back. Your portrait and Mr. Burton's
certainly look good in this freshly painted hearing room, don't
you think?
Let me start my questioning with Mr. Dodaro. Thank you for
your testimony, and recommendations on ways we can make the
Federal Government more efficient and save taxpayer dollars. I
would like to focus on the Department of Defense.
I am concerned about DOD's pattern of negative appearances
in GAO reports. As we continue to increase DOD's budget, the
agency continues to be plagued by inefficiencies, duplicative
programs, waste and in some cases fraud. In your report, you
identified the DOD's military health system as an area of
concern for duplication and redundancy. The report states that
the DOD military health system has no central command authority
or single entity accountable for minimizing costs and achieving
efficiency. That is very troubling, given its mission.
Can you share with the committee the annual costs of DOD's
military health system, and what are the projected cost
increases through 2015?
Mr. Dodaro. It is about $50 billion.
Mr. Clay. Fifty billion for the health care. Wow.
Mr. Dodaro. Right. We point out in the report, too, that
health care costs at DOD, just like they are in other parts of
our economy, are growing. The area that we mention in terms of
military health care commands is something that has been
studied by the Defense Science Board and others, or
recommendations within DOD to do it. And they pursued a
strategy that had minimal changes involved. We think if they
pursue a broader strategy, it would be very important.
Also in the health care area, Congressman, is the cost of
prescription drugs, which is a fast growing component of health
care. We think that DOD and VA working together, which they
were doing a few years ago, could yield some benefits by
leveraging their purchasing power as well. They have agreed to
start revisiting that issue.
Mr. Clay. Thank you for that response.
What impact do you think the system's redundancy and
command structure issues have on those costs?
Mr. Dodaro. The estimates that were made at the time,
savings could be achieved between $250 million and I think over
$400 million a year, depending on the nature of the
consolidation.
Mr. Clay. OK, so that would kind of help save taxpayers, if
they took the recommendations and implemented them?
Mr. Dodaro. That is correct.
Mr. Clay. And right now, they are pretty much ignoring
them?
Mr. Dodaro. They have made some minimal changes in that
regard. But we think they could do more.
Mr. Clay. OK, and you have recommended alternative concepts
that have been on the table for a while, in addition to your
report, the Center for Naval Analysis did one in 2006. And you
also report that DOD officials generally agree with the facts
and findings of your analysis on their health system. With
rising costs in the billions, with DOD's health system and
clear inefficiencies, do you think DOD is doing enough right
now to make improvements?
Mr. Dodaro. I think they can do more, as we pointed out in
our report. We have encouraged them to do so. We will continue
to do studies, basically outlining what some of the options
would be. For example, a single military command is an option.
There are other options that could be pursued. But this is a
case where there is cultural stovepiping by the services, and
there needs to be some broader leadership brought to bear. I
think it is warranted, giving the fast-rising health care
costs.
Mr. Clay. Thank you for that response.
Mr. Davis, going back to an efficient energy policy, one
argument we hear is that eliminating these subsidies would cost
jobs. I note that from 2005 to 2009 the top five oil companies
have reduced their U.S. work force by more than 10,000. What
would happen if we shifted these subsidies from oil to wind or
other domestic producing energy initiatives? Wouldn't that spur
job creation in this country?
Mr. Davis. I am just not an expert on those areas. I am one
who would let the marketplace set that, rather than some of
these incentives. But we are starting to incentivize wind, we
are starting to incentivize some of these other areas. It is
having an effect, not just on job creation, but pre-positioning
us for the future, and a global economy.
Chairman Issa [presiding]. I thank the gentleman.
Before I recognize Dr. Gosar, we have a request from two
Members who have had to leave the dais that there be unanimous
consent for the General to revise and extend your report. I
understand there is some additional detail that has been
requested your people say they could give us in supplemental
for this report. Is that amenable to you? We will leave the
record open for you to supplement with any additional details,
for example, the 80 programs and four agencies, naming them,
those sorts of things.
We realize that is not easily put together in 1 day.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, we will do that.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
Dr. Gosar is recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Davis, I am currently co-sponsoring
resolution 606, which establishes a bipartisan Presidentially
appointed sunset commission that identifies failed programs and
those that are not achieving their goals, to review them and
subject them for termination. I suspect the commission would
review this committee's work.
With your experience, what are your thoughts on this, if
this legislation were enacted into law?
Mr. Davis. If I were in Congress, I would co-sponsor it. I
think that is a good place to start.
One of the things you have to remember is when you start
talking about programs that don't work or that have expired and
the like, that there are a lot of interest groups out there
that really don't care about efficiency. And they push Members,
and they have their say in this by the time it is over.
So it is great to have a GAO or a commission like this that
can call the balls and strikes. And then it gets harder for
some of these groups to defend some of these subsidies and some
of these programs that may not be doing well. So I think it is
a wonderful idea. It is another starting point on this.
The only point I would make is that in all of this, it is
sustainability, keeping the momentum going. It is a lot easier
to make government work more efficiently and to take costs out
of government in terms of delivering services than it is to cut
programs. That is where our focus needs to be.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you.
Ms. Alexander, would you see this as a real benefit that
taxpayers could get behind?
Ms. Alexander. We supported different forms of sunset
commissions in the past. It is something that, we would look at
the details of your resolution, but certainly we are open to
the idea.
Dr. Gosar. Good. Mr. Dodaro, to Mr. Mack's earlier
questions, you mentioned real property owned and maintained by
the Government that are unnecessary and not being used. In your
view, what is the best method to get the agencies to part with
this property and sold to the private sector? What are our next
steps to make this happen?
Mr. Dodaro. We have recommended in the past, OMB chaired,
and they do have a real property council at this point in time.
I think Congress should require regular reports on a quarterly
basis from OMB about what the plans ought to be to dispose of
property. Right now, there are over 45,000 buildings that are
under-utilized. That has grown over the past year by 1,800
buildings. The cost to maintain under-utilized properties, over
$1.6 billion a year. So I think there needs to be plan.
Now, the administration has set goals to try to dispose of
property by the end of 2012. But I think it is part of
Congress' responsibility to hold them accountable for what
progress they are making toward achieving those goals.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you very much. I yield the balance of my
time.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentleman yield?
Dr. Gosar. I would yield.
Chairman Issa. Thank you. Mr. Dodaro, have you looked at
some of the excess property in sufficient detail to look at
things, for example, I was out at Moffett Field on a committee
fact-finding. We discovered that NASA was utilizing a
relatively small portion of it, leasing out a small portion of
it profitably, and then leasing out for de minimis amounts
large amounts of it for non-core business that was important to
the community.
Have you looked at those sorts of things, of whether or not
agencies holding land that is not technically under-utilized,
but being utilized for non-core functions, did you look at any
of those sorts of items?
Mr. Dodaro. I would have to go back and check with my team
and I will provide you an answer for the record, Mr. Chairman,
on that.
Chairman Issa. I appreciate that.
One additional one is, you talked in terms of, the other
side was asking questions, and I think it was very insightful,
you were almost saying we need a second Goldwater-Nichols, that
we need to go further in merging the command structures of the
military from the standpoint of spending. Is that pretty much a
succinct part of your report?
Mr. Dodaro. I think there needs to be some outside
intervention, in order to break some of the stovepipes down at
DOD.
Chairman Issa. Chairman Davis, you have certainly seen this
and you were here for the BRAC process. Would you say that in
fact, that is one of the things that committee should look at,
is lessons learned and failures, if you will, post-BRAC, when
they no longer belong to the military, yet they are still
costing the taxpayers?
Mr. Davis. Well, one of the problems, the McKinney Act was
passed, I think, with the greatest of intentions. But at the
end of the day, I think the priorities have shifted from how do
we use this land in the community in some cases to how do we
put this back on the tax rolls. Which also helped those
communities, and how do we get money back to the Federal
Government. We are borrowing 40 cents on the dollar. It is just
not sustainable. We have to start looking at costs. I agree.
Chairman Issa. Thank you. And one last question, as a
followup, Ms. Alexander, you have been very supportive of many
fixes. I remember that your organization and several others
were supportive of us stripping the courts of the ability to
make the decision that they unfortunately made that puts us
with these billions being lost through oil leases that were
flawed. And I know that we agree to disagree on whether or not
Mr. Markey's fix would be held constitutional, or whether it
would fall into that punitive.
But more broadly, have you looked at what could be gained
by Congress taking all of the various subsidies, oil being one
of them, but there are other energy subsidies, and requiring
them to be brought together, something that follows the theme
that we have been talking about here today?
Ms. Alexander. We haven't specifically looked at how to
package all the energy subsidies together. We tend to, our work
has been to look at individual subsidies. But certainly, we
recognize the need for a comprehensive energy policy, and to
look at whether or not each dollar is going toward a common
goal. So that is something we would be happy to work with the
committee on. We have looked at lots of different energy
subsidies across different fuels. We try to look at them
together, but we understand the difficulty of looking at them
all side by side. We certainly don't think that we have apples
to apples comparisons coming out of the administration or
Congress as often as we would like.
Chairman Issa. We look forward to working together on that.
With that, we recognize the gentlelady from New York for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. First, I would like to welcome my former
colleague, Tom Davis, who did an extraordinary job as chairman
of this committee, on which I was honored to serve. He was
always a good fighter for the partisan cause, but also
reasonable and listened to the minority and we worked together
on a lot of good bills. It is good to see you, we miss you,
Tom, welcome back.
Mr. Davis. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney. I want to thank Mr. Dodaro for your excellent
report. It is really very helpful, and the chairman, for
focusing on it. This is a time that we need to look at ways to
protect taxpayers' dollars and start reducing that deficit and
debt.
Your report says that some oil and gas companies are not
paying what they owe under existing leases. I think that is a
little bit of an understatement. Your investigation examined
royalty reports for 2006 and 2007, and found that many were
simply missing. They also found many sales reports were
erroneous.
Specifically, your report states that you found numerous
instances in which oil and gas production data were missing or
sales data appeared to be erroneous. Is that correct?
Mr. Dodaro. That is correct.
Mrs. Maloney. For just these 2 years alone, 2006 and 2007,
your investigators found that oil and gas companies may have
withheld $117 million in uncollected royalties. That is a
staggering amount. Your report indicates that one reason this
may be happening is because we rely on oil companies to self-
report.
Mr. Dodaro. There needs to be more verification by the
Interior Department of the data to make sure that the Federal
Government is getting, there is reasonable assurance that they
are getting the revenues that are there. So there is a set
schedule for verifications that are supposed to occur. But the
Department was way behind in maintaining that schedule.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, why in the world are we relying on them
to self-report, when we have documentation that they are not
capable of self-reporting accurately? Why in the world don't we
have the royalties reported, what is due, by the agency, or at
least a third party? Why in the world are we relying on the oil
and gas industry that is not reporting accurately, according to
your own study after study after study?
Mr. Dodaro. Our recommendation is that there is more
verification that needs to be done by them.
Mrs. Maloney. But you are still letting the companies
verify, correct?
Mr. Dodaro. No. Interior needs to verify.
Mrs. Maloney. Interior needs to verify.
Mr. Dodaro. Having self-reported information can work if
there is verification by the departments of the checks and
balances, rather than go out and have people independently
measuring it. So it can work, but the Department has to do
their part to protect the taxpayers. That is what you are
saying and that is what we have said in our recommendations.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, also in your recommendation your report
proposes that the Federal Government use independent third
party data to provide greater assurance that royalties are
accurately paid. But my question is, do you think it is better
to have a third party or just have Interior do a better job
verifying?
Mr. Dodaro. Well, Interior needs to do a better job
verifying it. They can use their own verification, they can use
other third parties to corroborate as well. That is what we do
in doing our audits and verifications. You should use
everything that is available to you to corroborate data, to
make sure that the reporting is as complete as possible and
that taxpayers are protected and we are getting the revenue
that we deserve.
How much do you estimate we would be able to bring in if
they verified it in an appropriate way?
Mr. Dodaro. We don't have an estimate right now.
Mrs. Maloney. And why is it taking so long? Are they
verifying now in a better way? Have they taken the steps to
respond to your recommendations?
Mr. Dodaro. They are starting to, from the team. We are
going to be following up and staying on this, and we will
provide regular reports to this committee.
Mrs. Maloney. Do you think it is important that maybe we
need to legislate that they verify, to make sure it happens?
What do we do to make sure this happens?
Mr. Dodaro. I think you ought to have Interior up here and
explain what they are doing and the importance of doing it. I
think a regular oversight is important. We have done work. The
Inspector General has done work over there. We are continuing
to do our part. So I think that it is good to have sustained
followup with the department that is responsible for handling
these matters.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, I regret that there was an amendment
that I authored in another committee, and the debate went on
just until now. So I missed a great deal of your testimony. In
the 21 seconds left, I would like to ask you, in your report,
what other area in government can we manage better and save
funds? Obviously the oil and gas has historically been an area
of tremendous abuse, particularly on oil extracted from
federally owned lands. But what other category in government do
you think, if we managed it better, we would be able to save
taxpayers dollars and make a dent in this terrible deficit we
have?
Mr. Dodaro. Our report discusses opportunities virtually
across government. The Department of Defense is an opportunity
there, I think, for significant savings. I also mentioned the
need to focus on revenue collection, where we are not cutting,
we are actually getting more than we are owed in from a revenue
standpoint, beyond the Interior issue. I think the IRS can and
should implement a number of our recommendations to take that
area on.
I think we have also recommended that tax expenditures be
brought under regular review. That is almost as much as
discretionary spending in a year, in revenue foregone.
So I think all those are really good opportunities, to be
able to save moneys and to be more efficient. But in tackling
our deficit, efforts there have to go beyond just these
programs and to entitlement spending as well.
Mrs. Maloney. My time is expired. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Davis, I think you wanted to respond to that also.
Mr. Davis. I just wanted to, Mr. Issa had asked a question
earlier where he talked about, he asked something similar.
There is a lot of savings between agencies, where they can
chart sharing services. I know they allude to that in the
report. It wasn't just the focus of this report. But agencies
can share services. Right now it is just very stovepiped in
terms of the way they look at it, the way they are budgeted.
And they are reluctant to do that.
But you could save literally billions of dollars, probably
tens of billions, if they could share services between
agencies. As we talked about, the best illustration being
medical records between VA and DOD. There is no reason you need
two separate lists.
But that is the kind of thing, the collaboration between
agencies, that is not really existing now that could save a
lot.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
In closing, actually for the gentlelady's edification, too,
because I think Mr. Dodaro did it very well when he was
explaining something to us, this third party data that we want
to explore further with the GAO, the idea of when an oil
company takes oil, they put it onto a tanker that is weighed
and measured. They offload it and it is metered. This is all
third party data, that if we gathered it all, it would be
almost impossible not to see any discrepancies between what is
reported and so on.
This is also, earlier, what they said about the IRS. The
fact is that if somebody says, I don't have any money, and yet
you see credit card receipts saying they are spending money, if
that data is compared within the Internal Revenue Service, that
third party collaboration, because remember, IRS is voluntarily
reported, too. But some people don't quite report accurately,
as they discovered when people were saying what they lost in
Louisiana, and it didn't match anything that they had ever
declared.
So I look forward to working with the gentlelady on that.
In closing, particularly for Mr. Dodaro, our intention in
the committee is to have you back on a roughly quarterly basis.
I hope that either you or a designated representative would be
able to do that, so we can continue this dialog in a way to
stay on top of what you are doing and of course, on top of what
the administration is agreeing to do.
Additionally, I want to again repeat for the record that
the commitment to go after a number of areas you have covered
here today, including natural gas and oil, and find
constitutional ways to keep from losing the money that we are
losing, and particularly, we are going to have the new agency,
the Ocean Energy Management, the old MMS, we intend to have
them back. Out of deference to the reorganization that was
announced by Interior, we are trying to give them a reasonable
amount of time. But Carolyn, we are going to have them in,
specifically, as we did when Chairman Davis had them in
repeatedly.
So I want to thank the witnesses today. I would like to
have you all back. I suspect, because of your expertise, we
will have you all back. And this committee stands adjourned.
Mrs. Maloney. And my statement in the record. I ask
unanimous consent.
Chairman Issa. Oh, sorry, and unanimous consent that your
statement and all statements may be placed into the record, for
up to 7 legislative days.
And all of you, by unanimous consent, may revise and extend
for that same period of time.
We stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:45 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]


