- THE FORECLOSURE CRISIS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FORECLOSURE CRISIS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 8, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-44

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-519 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 8, 2011....................................     1
Statement of:
Kaufman, Mark A., commissioner of financial regulation,
Maryland Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation;
Kevin Jerron Matthews, homeowner; and Jane Wilson, Chair of
the Board, St. Ambrose Housing Aid Center..................    44
Kaufman, Mark A..........................................    44
Matthews, Kevin Jerron...................................    58
Wilson, Jane.............................................    67
O'Malley, Martin, Governor of Maryland; and Stephanie
Rawlings-Blake, mayor of Baltimore.........................    17
O'Malley, Martin.........................................    17
Rawlings-Blake, Stephanie................................    27
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Cummings, Hon. Elijah E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Maryland:
Article entitled, ``The Impact of Foreclosure Waves on
the City of Baltimore''................................     3
Prepared statement of Mr. Bernard C. ``Jack'' Young,
president, Baltimore City Council......................    86
Prepared statement of the National Community Reinvestment
Coalition..............................................    91
Kaufman, Mark A., commissioner of financial regulation,
Maryland Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation,
prepared statement of......................................    47
Matthews, Kevin Jerron, homeowner, prepared statement of.....    61
O'Malley, Martin, Governor of Maryland, prepared statement of    20
Rawlings-Blake, Stephanie, mayor of Baltimore, prepared
statement of...............................................    29
Wilson, Jane, Chair of the Board, St. Ambrose Housing Aid
Center, prepared statement of..............................    69

THE FORECLOSURE CRISIS

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 8, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Baltimore, MD.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9 a.m. at the
Nathan Patz Law Center at the University of Maryland, 500 West
Baltimore Street, Baltimore, MD, Hon. Darrell E. Issa (chairman
of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, Walberg, Amash, Cummings,
Tierney and Welch.
Staff present: Ali Ahmad, deputy press secretary; Molly
Boyl, parliamentarian; Katelyn E. Christ, research analyst;
John Cuaderes, deputy staff director; Linda Good, chief clerk;
Christopher Hixon, deputy chief counsel, oversight; Hudson T.
Hollister, counsel; Justin LoFranco, press assistant; Lisa
Cody, minority investigator; Carla Hultberg, minority chief
clerk; Lucinda Lessley, minority policy director; and Davida
Walsh, minority counsel.
Chairman Issa. This hearing for the Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform will come to order.
Today's hearing concerns the ongoing foreclosure crisis
that has left tens of millions of American homeowners without
an important piece of the American dream.
Today's hearing is but another hearing in a continuation
that this committee has looked into since 2007. Long before the
economic meltdown, Americans were finding the American dream
escaping them. Back in 2007, this committee went to Cleveland,
Ohio where for a number of years home prices had stopped going
up and were beginning to go down at a frightening rate. As a
result, homeowners who had purchases with little or no money
down and/or been laid off found themselves losing their home.
As a result, communities were beginning to be boarded up. As
communities were boarded up, the cycle began to escalate with
home values going down.
All of this began without an economic world meltdown, but
it foretold many things that we now see here today. The fact is
the American home mortgage was designed based on an assumption
that homes would never go down in value. All of us know better
today that you can't have a national deflation among homes that
ultimately if you lose your job, you will not be able to keep a
home that was highly leveraged.
So as we hear from witnesses, beginning with the State's
Governor, we want this committee to realize that the Government
plays a part in it but there are other factors that always will
supersede even Government's best intentions.
This committee has begun and continues to look at HAMP's
success or failure and the various Government agencies,
including Freddie and Fannie, that failed to secure the dollars
that they were supposed to in order to be prepared for down
times.
This committee came to Baltimore today at the request of
the ranking member. He has worked diligently on the issue of
home foreclosures and continues to be a voice on the committee
for further investigation.
With that, I recognize the ranking member for his opening
statement.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
very much.
Chairman Issa, I want to thank you for convening today's
hearing, and I welcome you and the other members of the
committee to my hometown of Baltimore. And I want to welcome
Governor O'Malley and Mayor Rawlings-Blake when she arrives.
And I want to thank you, Mr. Governor, for your leadership
and you, Mr. Issa, for yours.
Thanks also to the University of Maryland School of Law, my
alma mater, for hosting us all here today and to Associate Dean
LaMaster and Ed Fischel and certainly to Dean Phoebe Haddon.
Mr. Chairman, we are in the grips of a nationwide
foreclosure crises. In 2009, there were about 2.8 million
foreclosures across the country. Last year there were 2.9
million. And this year there may be more than 3 million.
This week researchers at Johns Hopkins University here in
Baltimore prepared a report for the committee called ``The
Impact of Foreclosure Waves On the city of Baltimore.'' I ask
that this report be made a part of the official hearing report.
Chairman Issa. Without objection, so ordered.
[The article entitled, ``The Impact of Foreclosure Waves on
the City of Baltimore,'' follows:]

Mr. Cummings. The report finds that between 2008 and 2010
there were more than 11,000 foreclosures in the city of
Baltimore alone, and cost families more than $1.5 billion.
The foreclosure crisis is a wrecking ball smashing through
communities across the Nation, and Baltimore is one example of
that destruction.
This crisis not only threatens our Nation's economic
recovery, making it harder to reduce unemployment and spur
economic growth, it also drains State and local budgets that
rely on property tax revenues for schools, police and emergency
services. It destroys neighborhoods and devastates families.
And it harms individuals. It is a national crisis with very
local consequences.
What is so frustrating is that this crisis is being
aggravated by actions of the mortgage servicing companies that
conduct foreclosures. There are no national standards for these
companies and they have engaged in systematic abuses across the
country.
In our committee's first hearing this year the Inspector
General for TARP testified that the performance of mortgage
servicing companies has been, ``abysmal.'' He also said this,
``From the repeated loss of borrower paperwork, to blatant
failure to follow program standards, to unnecessary delays that
severely harmed borrowers while benefiting servers themselves,
stories of servicer negligence and misconduct are legend.''
These companies have signed false affidavits by the tens of
thousands, inflated fees, performed illegal actions against
military service members and veterans and aggressively pursued
foreclosures when modifications made more sense and were
already underway. This system does not work for homeowners, and
it does not work for State and local governments. It does not
even work for mortgage investors who want to salvage their
investments through loan modifications rather than
foreclosures.
The Association of Mortgage Investors, which represents
private investors, pension funds, universities and endowments
reports that investors have suffered material losses as a
result of faulty and inefficient and at times improper
servicing of mortgage loans. It seems that the only ones who
support this flawed system are the ones with their hands on the
lever of the wrecking ball--the mortgage servicing companies.
They are swinging it more recklessly each year, and we cannot
stem this damage unless we hold them accountable.
Mr. Chairman, our committee is taking a great first step
today by hearing about the State and local impact of
foreclosure crisis. When we return to Washington, I hope we
will be able to hear directly from the mortgage servicing
companies themselves.
I want to thank you and, again, I want to welcome the
mayor, and it is good to have you here, Madam Mayor.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
All members will have 5 legislative days in which to
include opening statements and any other remarks.
Do either of you want to make an abbreviated opening
statement?
Mr. Amash. No. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Okay. Thank you.
With that, as is the policy of the committee, we will begin
reading the mission statement. I know every city and State have
their mission statements, here's ours:
``The Oversight Committee, we exist to secure two
fundamental principles:
First, Americans have the right to know that the money
Washington takes from them is well spent. And, second,
Americans deserve an efficient, effective government that works
for them. Our duty on the Oversight And Government Reform
Committee is to protect these rights. Our solemn responsibility
is to hold government accountable to taxpayers because
taxpayers have a right to know what they get from their
government.
We will work tirelessly in partnership with citizen
watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American people and bring
genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy.''
This is the mission of the Oversight and Government Reform
Committee.
And with that, we go to our first two witnesses.
Governor O'Malley. I am sure that we could all do a lot of
introductions, but quite frankly I think you are better known
than we are here.
And Mayor Rawlings-Blake.
It is the rule of the committee that all witness be sworn
in. Would you please rise to take the oath?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Issa. Let the record reflect both answered in the
affirmative.
It is also tradition on Capitol Hill that witnesses speak
for 5 minutes and then be endlessly asked questions from the
dais. We will change that considering your input. We would ask
you remember that your official opening statements are in the
record, however, we recognize you for such time as you may
consume, Governor.

STATEMENTS OF MARTIN O'MALLEY, GOVERNOR OF MARYLAND; AND
STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE, MAYOR OF BALTIMORE

STATEMENT OF MARTIN O'MALLEY

Governor O'Malley. Mr. Chairman, Chairman Issa, thank you
very, very much, and Ranking Member Cummings and all of the
members of the committee.
Well, I should leave that to the mayor, right, to say
welcome to Baltimore. I can say welcome to Maryland, the rich
and the land of the free, home of the brave.
It is a honor to be with you and to be able to address on
this important, important issue along with Mayor Stephanie
Rawlings-Blake.
As we make this turn out of the recession and into a new
economy, I firmly believe, as you do, that the building block
for our stronger growing middle class is a family's home. It is
the building block. And there is no more powerful place in our
State than a family's home. And the loss of even one home
impacts not just entire families, but entire neighborhoods,
entire communities, entire cities, entire counties. Home
ownership is critically important to our ability to make it in
America.
And while we are by no means out of this crisis, we still
have a lot of people looking for jobs, we do believe that we
have been able to do some things that have helped to protect
family homes, protect home ownership and allow many of our moms
and dads to be able to get to the other side of this recession.
Our foreclosure rate is now significantly lower than the
national rate. Last month RealtyTrac reported that we have
driven foreclosures down 70 percent compared to a year ago. It
is the sharpest decline that any State in the country has been
able to achieve over the course of this last year. And yet too
many of our fellow citizens continue to lose their homes. And
as mortgage companies and the post-robo signing moratoriums, we
are very cognizant of the fact that those foreclosures once
again will start to go up.
With reforms we passed last year mortgage giants in America
are now required to meet with homeowners at the negotiating
table before they can throw them out on the street. They must
prove that they've made a full review of mitigation options.
This was legislation that we enacted, as I say, just last year.
Prior to that, when this crisis hit, we enacted other
legislation. In fact, at the time, the Washington Post
characterized it as one of the most sweeping legislative
packages in America to slow down the fast track to foreclosure.
It might have been sweeping, but it was not as effective as we
would have liked. So that is why we had to go back again and
give every homeowner the right to a mandatory mediation before
they can be thrown out of their home.
We have now reached agreements with multiple mortgage
services to create a streamlined and transparent loss
mitigation process. We've assembled a pro bono network of a
thousand attorneys called forth by the Chief Judge of our Court
of Appeals, Judge Robert Bell. And we've teamed with nonprofit
housing counselors to assist more than 54,000 Marylanders.
When the robo-signing incident came to light, we partnered
with Congressman Cummings and our Attorney General for our
State to demand that servicers halt foreclosure proceedings
until they reworked their practices. And we partnered with our
court system which adopted emergency rules to protect
homeowners. We are part of that multi-State effort that, I
believe, was joined by all 50 Attorneys General. I hope I put
the right plural in the right place there.
Many servicers still do not have the basic systems in place
to keep track of paperwork to provide timely responses to loan
modification applications. Maryland's housing counselors tell
us that obtaining even a trial loan modification typically
takes 6 months.
We have taken action at the State level to protect
homeowners and hold the national mortgage giants accountable.
But we cannot go it alone and we need your help. And to that
end I ask that you number one, hold mortgage giants
accountable. We favor the creation of clear and specific
national servicing standards. Each one of these modifications
should not be some grand mystery started from scratch every
time a homeowner is looking for a little relief.
Number two, housing counseling empowers our most vulnerable
homeowners with the tools and the know-how to save their homes.
I want to understand how critically important the dollars have
been from, I believe, the Federal Government and also our State
that we put into the nonprofit housing counselors. They have
acted as mitigation originators, if you will. And they are
critically important. Now is not the time to slash those
dollars.
Number three, rather than dismantling the imperfect and yet
critically important Home Affordable Modification Program, the
HAMP Program, we believe that it can and should be retooled for
greater efficiency, greater transparency and higher
performance. The simple truth is that without access to
affordable and sustainable loan modifications, more Americans
will lose their homes, slowing our recovery.
Number four, HUD's Emergency Homeowner Loan Program is
projected to help more than a 1,000 unemployed Marylanders who
are struggling to make mortgage payments while looking for
work. I believe that this is another tool that has to be
preserved and has to be employed.
Number five, community development block grants and the
Neighborhood Stabilization Program can be the difference
between saving or losing a neighborhood in the course of these
difficult times.
So, I urge you to continue your oversight, continue to
drive performance. These are programs that should work more
effectively than they have worked. We do believe that we have
found the right alchemy of several steps, one of them being the
mandatory right to mediation, that has greatly reduced the
number of homes we are losing to foreclosure.
I thank you again for your attention to this important
matter.
[The prepared statement of Governor O'Malley follows:]

Chairman Issa. Thank you, Governor.
Mayor.

STATEMENT OF STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE

Mayor Rawlings-Blake. Thank you very much, and good
morning.
I want to thank Chairman Issa and Ranking Member Cummings,
and the members of the committee for allowing me to speak to
you this morning. The matters being considered by your
committee are of vital importance in addressing the foreclosure
crises facing Baltimore and our Nation.
I applaud Congressman Cummings and the committee members on
holding this hearing to gather testimony on the abuses in the
mortgage service industry that greatly compound this crisis.
Let me very briefly outline the scale of foreclosures in
Baltimore. Since 2007, some 18,000 properties in Baltimore City
have had foreclosures filed against them. All but a handful of
neighborhoods in the city have been impacted by foreclosures.
Many of our neighborhoods have been impacted severely. Well
over one-third of our neighborhoods have had more than 5
percent of their properties foreclosed against. Many of these
neighborhoods that I'm talking about are the bedrocks of our
city.
Our community is comprised of both rowhomes and detached
structures with high occupancy rates and majority homeowners.
The foreclosure crisis has imperiled many of these areas.
It is not only Baltimore homeowners that have been impacted
by foreclosures. Over 40 percent of all properties that have
been foreclosed against in the past 4 years are rentals. This
had led to the extremely unfortunate situation where residents
who have paid their rent are at risk of losing their housing.
The city's foreclosure rate would undoubtedly be
significantly higher had Governor O'Malley's administration not
taken legislative action that slowed the foreclosure process
and improved opportunities for mediation with mortgage holders.
As foreclosures began to dramatically increase in 2007, city
government in concert with State and Federal agencies and the
foundation community began to increase financial and
organizational support to nonprofit entities providing
foreclosure counseling. It was through the network of
counselors that we became increasingly aware of the abysmal
performance of the mortgage service industry in constructively
addressing this crisis. Among the many troubling aspects of
this performance is the almost systematic loss of supporting
documentation for loan modifications that particularly stands
out as an error that needs to be corrected.
The dedication and professionalism of so many of the
housing counselors in the city is to be commended. This is
difficult, exhausting work carried out under daunting
circumstances. Their perseverance and their unwavering support
of homeowners in crisis have helped many Baltimore homeowners
avoid foreclosure. Unfortunately, the insufficient efforts on
the part of the mortgage service industry has in many cases
lessened the effectiveness of these counselors.
As concerns the abuses being examined by this committee let
me note the following: Baltimore households have suffered from
virtually all of the abuses; predatory loans, robo-signing,
wrongful foreclosure, failure to properly maintain and file
mortgage documents and false affidavits, all being invested by
this committee.
Often services have profited handsomely from these abuses.
Despite this, they have not employed enough staff to locate and
properly process the loan documentation but routinely file lost
note affidavits. Some lenders have steered buyers into loans
they could not afford, and then profiting through initiating
fees and points, bundling the loans into mortgage-backed
securities and sold them off to secondary markets, thus selling
off their risk.
These predatory lending and services practices caused
equity stripping, home loss and blighting vacancies. These
practices not only devastate families, they cost the city
millions of tax dollars lost in property tax and transfer tax
revenue.
As concerns regulatory solutions, the committee may
examine, and I hope consider the following:
The real party and interest should be the named plaintiff
in any foreclosure action. Currently only the trustee or
substitute trustee must be named, usually the attorney hired by
the servicer.
The lack of transparency makes it difficult to understand
and document trends in lending and foreclosure practices in our
city, thus handicapping our ability to protect our residents.
The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act should be amended to
require that borrowers' credit scores be reported as publicly
available data in addition to the race and other data currently
being reported. This will enable Federal, State and local law
enforcement agencies to discover and document predatory
practices without the burdensome need for instituting suit or
obtaining discovery.
Every document that a foreclosure plaintiff files should be
served on the homeowner who is at risk. For example, the Report
of Sale is not served on the homeowner and is not uncommon for
a homeowner to answer their door and just have a stranger tell
them ``I just bought your house and you need to leave.''
Increased transparency will enable distressed homeowners to
better defend their homes and better plan for their future.
Increased Federal oversight and enforcement is also needed.
Much of the subprime predatory lending that helped trigger this
crisis could have been avoided had there not been lax
enforcement of the Fair Housing Act and banking regulations.
Again, I want to thank you for being here in Baltimore, a
city that has been tremendously impacted by abuses in the
mortgage industry. I hope that this committee hearing serves to
be fruitful in your efforts to correct the wrongs.
[The prepared statement of Mayor Rawlings-Blake follows:]

Chairman Issa. Thank you, Mayor.
I want to particularly thank the city of Baltimore for
having us here.
And Governor, I'll start with you. The committee has, and
somewhat to the mayor's statement, been working to try to
create transparency in Government. On a bipartisan basis we
tried to interject open standards into the Dodd-Frank bill that
passed last year, and failed. Congressman Frank and others have
offered to help us to get it through this Congress, and we
intend to get through data standards that would allow for
anyone who wants to give an access either individually or for
statistical purposes to be able to very transparently get all
of that information.
One of the things that our earlier hearings showed us was
that in fact there is no standard for submission so that you
have to go bank-by-bank. And unless somebody wants to pay the
bill to consolidate all these divergent standards and get, if
you will, the credit score lined up between different loan
organizations, you're not going to get there.
But, Governor, you mentioned HAMP in your opening
statement. As you know, the HAMP program is highly flawed. By
its own testimony it's not getting to its goals and the
servicers make it very clear that the only people that are
getting permanent loan modification are people that would get
it without HAMP program, even though it's cost $30 billion.
And, yes, we have that under oath.
So, my question to you is as Congress looks at how to spend
the next $40 billion of a $70 billion program, shouldn't we
consider making the HAMP the loan modification of last resort
and not first? Cause all people to go through and be refused
loan modification and then only if they're unable to get it
through ordinary means at the bank's own expense, the bank's
servicers' benefit, should they be able to come to the
Government? Have you considered that in order to try to narrow
the basis down to those who would not otherwise get a loan
modification?
Governor O'Malley. I know there are probably other people
on the panel who can speak with greater situational awareness
on the ground. It's my understanding that in the absence of any
sort of lender responsibilities or penalties for lender
deviation from the HAMP guidelines, that it's not being
maximized to its greatest degree.
I think one of the recommendations that our staff has is
that there be a one-step modification rather than a two-step
modification. I take it the chairman's talking about maybe a
third step?
Chairman Issa. No, Governor. Currently the servicer gets no
money for doing a trial loan modification. It's all on their
back. So as they go through the process to decide whether or
not somebody could be eligible for loan modification, they get
no funding, nothing comes out of HAMP. Once they do a permanent
loan modification, then that $30 billion that we've obligated
comes into play.
So, in our case what we're finding is is that's what most
criticized is the portion that HAMP doesn't pay for, which is
the trial modification. Initially the trial modifications
modified everybody, everybody got in. Later on they decided
that a lighter loan, coming back to be a lighter loan
application wasn't a good idea. Then you should have to before
you get into the first step, have some substantiation that you
have real tangible income on which you might be able to have a
loan modification. So they've made changes, but it still comes
down to HAMP as the first step; everybody goes and says ``Am I
eligible for it?'' and makes the application. And 6 months, as
you said, or more goes by before they find out yes they are or
no they're not. In the meantime, the system is essentially
stalled.
So, I won't belabor the point, but for both of you as
Congress considers changing or canceling HAMP, one of our
questions is clearly going to be: Should HAMP exist, and if so,
should it only apply to those who otherwise would not get a
modification versus paying the banks who shift through about a
3-to-1 ratio or so, about three don't get it for every one that
does. And then we find that the ones who get it are the ones
who would have gotten it anyway. They didn't need a Government
bailout to get it.
Mayor, you mentioned the 40 percent of homes which were
basically income properties that have been put through
foreclosure. From your knowledge do you have a program or can
the Government have a program that causes those renters' money
to go to the actual mortgage company? Because I assume that the
renters' money is being diverted by the mortgage holder, or
mortgagee.
Mayor Rawlings-Blake. Mr. Chairman, that is something that
we have been looking into. Prior to being mayor, I was the
President of the City Council and this issue we've been working
on since that time. So over a year to try and protect the money
that the renters are paying with no protection.
As you can expect, we met significant opposition from the
banking industry, you know who has control over that money.
Chairman Issa. But I assume the banks would love nothing
more than for the renters' money not to be diverted so they
could at least be getting something for the home, where in most
cases the actual borrower once they know they're going into
foreclosure, simply keeps collecting the rent and not paying
it. This is something we ran into in our Cleveland
investigation 4 years ago.
Mayor Rawlings-Blake. Yes. One of the problems that seemed
to come up was that the banks felt like then they were dealing
with two mortgage holders; one with no real responsibility to
the mortgage. That while they were dealing with one mortgage
holder that was in default, another one was attempting to pay
and the efforts weren't connected. That there was no way for
the--you know if there was money that originally the landlord
didn't submit, that there could have been a gap and then the
bank wouldn't be able to close that gap if there was some
lapse. So I would love to hear more about what happened in
Cleveland to fix that problem because it is a significant issue
in Baltimore City. So if there is a way to make sure that the
banks are on board, it would be helpful.
Chairman Issa. I appreciate that.
And I don't want to monopolize your knowledge, so with that
I recognize the ranking member for his questions.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to go back to some of things that you talked
about.
The chairman talked about the HAMP program. And one of the
things that we on the Democratic side are most concerned about
in Congress is that if that program is eliminated as opposed
to, as you said, I guess to borrow an old expression ``mending-
and-not-ending,'' what recourse do people have? That is our
problem.
In other words, I think that all of us agree that, as you
said, the program needs be retooled. But you would not, I'm
sure that you are not an advocate for having nothing there?
Governor O'Malley. No, not at all. I mean, it would be a
miraculously occurrence if a Government program were operating
at 100 percent proficiency and performance less than a year or
two after its creation. I mean, there are some programs that
have been around for many, many decades and I think we can all
agree that they can be improved.
But there are approximately 22,000 modifications that have
been made, 4,500 I'm told are active trial modifications,
17,000 are permanent modifications. So that's 22,000 households
in our State that have been helped by this in Maryland, and
that's for over the course of this I think just this last year.
I think we're only now starting to get on top of this wave that
had the mortgage companies so utterly underwater themselves in
terms of servicing this problem that I think it would be a real
mistake to back away right now.
I think HAMP probably can be improved. I think monthly
reporting and maybe some sort of standardization so that we
know which servicers are getting on top of this and which are
not. And maybe there's a way that you can put some incentives
in there for those servicers that are actually doing the better
job on their modifications.
Mr. Cummings. You know this robo-signing issue, Mr.
Governor, I think here we are sitting in a law school I think
that the mayor, you and I graduated from this school.
Governor O'Malley. Me, too.
Mr. Cummings. And the Governor.
Chairman Issa. I'm the odd man out I'm afraid.
Mr. Cummings. And the question is, you know last fall the
Nation's largest mortgage servicing companies admitted to robo-
signing; tens of thousands of affidavits in foreclosure cases
falsely swearing to the accuracy of information that they never
actually reviewed.
Governor, you and I took immediate action to protect
Maryland homeowners of this abuse. We wrote to these companies
and asked them to suspend foreclosures here in Maryland.
Even though they halted foreclosures in 23 other States
they refused to stop faulting them in Maryland, is that right?
Governor O'Malley. Pardon. This Mark Kaufman, who is our--
--
Mr. Cummings. Yes, I know Mark Kaufman will be here in a
minute. But what impact do you think that had?
Governor O'Malley. I believe it's had a tremendous impact.
I think the two things--and it's hard to separate out which one
was most responsible, but roughly at the same time our
mandatory mediation requirement kicked in and shortly
thereafter the robo-signing problems arose and many of the
large servicers halted their foreclosure proceedings in
Maryland.
It's resulted in a 60 percent reduction since last year of
foreclosure actions in our State. As I said, it's hard to
separate out the two.
Mr. Cummings. Yes.
Governor O'Malley. But I do think putting families on an
equal footing with the mortgage servicers and forcing them to
come to the table in front of the judge or judicial officer
before they can go forward with the foreclosure is really,
really important. How tragic that this apparatus, this sort of
meat grinder of home ownership destruction continued to go
unchecked and even accelerate in the course of this recession.
If anything, it should have been slowed down, and I think we
have found a way to do that now. But the modifications are
still very much a work in progress and we need the Federal
Government at the table in order to force the mortgage
servicers to stay at the table.
Mr. Cummings. Madam Mayor, in Baltimore we have a fragile
situation where we're trying to make sure that the city
neighborhoods are strong. You talked about the number of
foreclosures. A lot of people don't realize how much
foreclosures bring down property values and affect a city's
ability to function. Can you just talk about that for a moment?
Mayor Rawlings-Blake. It's significant. I mean, there are
things that we can measure, like the amount of property tax
loss in 2010. We lost almost $14 million due to the foreclosure
crisis in Baltimore City, and that's what we can measure.
There's also intangibles. You know, the impact, the
continued impact of blight in the vacant properties when these
homes go vacant, what that means to a community, how that drags
down property values and creates unsafe neighborhoods.
We're struggling in Baltimore with a significant amount of
vacant properties, investors that come in, purchase properties
and are sitting on them. We're tackling that, and added to that
is the issue of the foreclosure crisis and the vacancy that's
creating. So, you know it's layering on intractable problems.
Mr. Cummings. I see my time expired. I yield back.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Walberg
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Governor and Madam Mayor, thank you so much for
your hospitality and having us here. I've always enjoyed my
time spent in Maryland or Baltimore, and it's good to come back
this morning early enough to miss the traffic jams as well.
Coming from Michigan, we understand foreclosure well and
economic hard times.
Mr. Governor, you mentioned in your statement several times
this morning your support for HAMP and realistically a
Government program that isn't perfect. But in looking at some
of the figures that I've had in front of me, nationwide HAMP
has resulted in just over 539 permanent modifications as of
January of this year, but has also resulted in 8,800
cancellations. Homeowners whose HAMP modifications, and I think
this is a significant problem, are canceled often end up worse
than if they had never been part of the program in the first
place.
In your testimony you mentioned the creation through HAMP
of 22,000 permanent modifications in Maryland. How many
temporary modifications have been canceled in Maryland and how
many permanent modifications, if you have those records, have
been canceled in Maryland?
Governor O'Malley. Congressman, the numbers I had in front
of me and as I look over my shoulder here at my able staff who
are looking over their shoulders----
Mr. Walberg. I'm not looking over mine.
Governor O'Malley. The numbers I had in front of me was by
the end of January, I had 4,000--I don't have the
cancellations. I have 4,545 active trial modifications and
17,483 permanent modifications for a total of 22,000. I do not
have numbers in front of me on cancellation.
Mr. Walberg. It's similar to the rest of the country, if
those figures hold. But we do not know the cancellations.
Governor O'Malley. Well, we might be able to find that if
someone would consult the State satellite.
Mr. Walberg. Well, the concern is what happens to those
people whose temporary and permanent modifications are
canceled. Because, indeed, if it's like the rest of the Nation,
it appears that as a result of being given the hope and yet for
one reason or another not following through they end up in a
worse situation than before having spent money in the process,
continued on mortgage payments as opposed to the foreclosure
completing and go on with life. So, it would be interesting to
have those numbers, but if they're not available to you at this
time, let me move on and turn to the mayor. Again, appreciate
you taking the time to be here.
It has been stated several times during the course of
testimony this morning that the recent robo-signing scandal is
a symptom of an industry crises. Simply put, the scandal
illustrates another symptom of an industry that needs
accountability and transparency. The Governor stated that very
clearly as well in his testimony.
Nevertheless, in looking at this situation Treasury's own
reviews suggest that even if servicers' performance was
perfect, which it won't be, HAMP's results would not improve
significantly. Under Treasury's Second Look Program, Treasury's
compliance agent reviews a statistical sample of homeowner loan
files that were not chosen for HAMP modifications. For the
second quarter of 2010, the most recent period for which
results are available, Treasury's agent only disagreed with
servicer actions 2.4 percent of the time.
And so my question is do you believe that HAMP's results
would improve significantly if servicers' compliance was
better, and how so?
Mayor Rawlings-Blake. Yes. I am not an expert on the fix. I
am an expert in the impact of the problem.
I anecdotally have heard so many times in community
meetings that I go to all throughout the city where people feel
that they have been working on a modification, but in essence
it is being dual tracked. So they are thinking that they are
working on a modification but at the same time aggressive
foreclosure is being pursued at the same time.
I mentioned about the lost documentation and people really
being strung along. These are the things that I know about.
As far as the regulatory fix, I am sure that they are
coming to testify much more seasoned people that give you
recommendations on the fix. I can speak about the problems I
hear from my constituents.
And people are being lied to. They are being given false
hope. And they are depending on the word of these financial
institutions to the detriment of themselves and their families,
and as a result to our communities and our city. So that's what
I know the problem is. And my hope is we can get to a solution.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Tierney for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for having
these hearings.
And thanks to Mr. Cummings for having these hearings and
doing the work that he's doing on this subject as well.
Governor and Mayor, thank you for the work that you all do.
I think Maryland and Baltimore has done quite well in
comparison to other parts of the country on this very
perplexing issue.
This is an industry that didn't cover itself in glory when
it led us into the financial crisis that we're in today, and it
is certainly not covering itself with glory as we try to get
out of it.
And I understand the HAMP program is not perfect. I am as
frustrated or more frustrated than anybody with its
imperfections. The question for us pretty soon, this week in
fact, is going to be whether we leave the banks on their own
and we have pretty much seen where that's led to, or whether we
try to get a system in there that works to help the homeowners.
Because, Mayor, like you Mr. Cummings' office staff and through
all my colleagues' staffs, my staff are pulling their hair out
trying to help people who come in desperate. We have a holdover
from a previous administration in the head of the Office of
Comptroller of the Currency that seems to be more concerned
with the banks then he is with homeowners.
We have the Federal Housing Finance Administration that I
think is not doing its job in terms of the conservatorship with
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac. If they were, they would insist on
some of the principal on that basis that would better protect
the taxpayer and investors than letting them go to foreclosure.
So there is a lot of work to be done in this area, and I
thank you for your efforts.
Governor, there are 50 States, and Maryland is one of them
involved in court action. And there is talk in the newspapers
of the amount of money that banks, servicers may be forced to
come to the table with.
Elizabeth Warren, who is the Consumer Protection Advocate,
obviously just recently appointed by the President, thinks that
$20 billion is not enough. Do you have a position on what your
State will be arguing in those settlement proceedings as to
what ought to be an appropriate amount of money for the people
to come to the table on, or do you know?
Governor O'Malley. I do not, Congressman. I have left that
to the Attorney General.
Mr. Tierney. All right. Well, do you have a feeling of what
standards ought to be put in place? What ought to be placed
into that lawsuit that these services and banks have to comply
with to make this system work better?
Governor O'Malley. I think that there needs to be, and not
only the openness and transparency with regard to underwriting
standards, standards for a modification, there needs to be some
strike zone, if you will, that is easily understood in terms of
the ratios so that we're not recreating the wheel every time we
get somebody to answer the phone.
And second, I also believe that there needs to be some
enforceable period of time, some timeframe within which a
person should expect their modification to be reviewed,
approved or disapproved. And I think those two things are the
most important things that we can achieve.
In the suit I suppose you can load up with the penalties
and the like, but at the end of the day I mean I think there
really should be some expectations and some enforceable way to
make these mortgage service companies protect consumers,
respond to consumers, be able to make the modifications or not
make the modifications. And that is what's been lacking in all
of this.
Mr. Tierney. Mayor, do you have an opinion as to how
valuable HUD's program for unemployed homeowners would be, the
opportunity for them as of the Dodd-Frank Act for them to
receive some stipend to carry them through at least 24 months
if necessary until they get reemployed and until they can
handle their mortgage again? Is that a factor here in
Baltimore?
Mayor Rawlings-Blake. Any subsidy that we can get to help
bridge unemployed individuals to employment is helpful in
Baltimore. Anything. So if it is the Act that you were talking
about or unemployment insurance, all of those things are
significant factors in helping people stay in their homes,
helping people get to a point where they can get reemployed. It
takes time.
We have programs that work to retrain individuals. We are
investing in workforce development, also in emerging
technology. But you can't walk out of one job and go into
another that requires specialized training. So these things are
helpful.
Mr. Tierney. I should put you on alert. Thank you for your
answer. Put you on alert that if the budget process that was a
couple of weeks ago put through, you will not have that work
force training program to worry about because $3 billion sliced
out of that is going to shut them down. One stop shots on that.
So, we have----
Mayor Rawlings-Blake. Our employment development----
Mr. Tierney [continuing]. Got some work to do on that part
as well to help out cities and towns on that.
Mayor Rawlings-Blake. Yes.
Mr. Tierney. Let me just say, I think I am still an
advocate and always have been of a clamp down process on this.
Until the banks have some incentive to write down some of the
principal and treat this thing honestly, we are all going to be
in a lot of trouble on this situation. My contention is that if
a bankruptcy judge had the authority to do that, it would never
get to that point. That these banks would finally wake up and
go to the table and negotiate with these people. But they are
not going to do anything voluntarily. I think they have shown
that quite clearly.
Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Thank you. I thank the gentleman.
Recognize the gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch for 5
minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you for having the hearing. Thank our witnesses.
Representative Cummings has been the leader in Congress in
focusing attention on what the impacts are in neighborhoods
when we lose that base of homeowners. And both of you have
spoken quite eloquently about it.
But I also actually think, Mr. Issa, you have a point about
the HAMP program. If it is not working, the question is why.
And I was interested, Governor, when you testified that you
have had success in reducing the foreclosure rate by 70
percent. So you seem to be doing something right that the HAMP
program isn't.
And when I think about how practically to deal with this,
which you all are on the front line of. The bottom line seems
to be somehow, some way there has to be the mortgage servicer
with authority to say yes or no. And this is where I think
Congressman Tierney has a point. One of the reasons I have
supported the bankruptcy provision is that it is the only way
to force a decision. And it seems that one of the biggest
problems in getting to a practical resolution is that these
mortgages have been issued, then they have been bundled, then
they have been sold to investors and they have been sliced and
diced. So some investors who are in the front of the line
before prepayment are going to do Okay, some at the end of the
line won't. The servicer is caught between its obligation to
these various owners of the packages of securities that they
are mentioning. So they literally do not even have the ability
to say yes to a reasonable deal. And unless, in my view, we
deal with that so there is a party in the room who can say yes
to a good deal, however much counseling we provide people it is
not really going to work. So the only way I know that would
work is with bankruptcy, and that is a contentious debate
within Congress because it does raise some policy questions.
But I have always supported it because it is the only practical
way to get from here to there with an answer. And I just wanted
to ask each of you whether that would help you in your efforts
to try to stabilize and revive these neighborhoods where you've
got your citizens doing their best to hang on.
Governor?
Governor O'Malley. That is on the bankruptcy, Congressman?
Mr. Welch. That is right, just as a tool to help you?
Governor O'Malley. Well, I think it would be very helpful.
In fact, had that tool been in place we would not have had to
put into place a mandatory right for mediation with those who
now handle it at the Office of Administrative Hearings in our
State, and the same entity that provides administrative law
judges that preside over traffic matters and other sorts of
regulatory things.
Mr. Welch. Right.
Governor O'Malley. But I think I had been of the belief
that because of the slicing and dicing it was nearly impossible
to get people with authority in a huge percentage of these. And
that has not been our experience, and perhaps our banking
commissioner or other people that follow in the subsequent
panels.
I think the bigger problem is not the lack of authority, it
is the lack of them being present. It is the efficiency with
which the court system kind of grinds through this foreclosure
process versus the thought and the staff work required to send
someone to actually make a decision. I think they actually had
the authority, I think they are choosing not to exercise the
authority.
Mr. Welch. Yes.
Governor O'Malley. And I think so long as they are able to
make money simply by churning and postponing any sort of
reckoning, whether to write down in the principal or some other
modification, I think they are going to do that.
Mr. Welch. So do you have some suggestions of some steps we
could take at the Federal level to help that happen? Because,
again, I think there is some fair criticism of the HAMP
program. If you just can't get to a resolution, then that is a
fair criticism. Because the goal here is not just to have
another Government program. The goal is to help folks stay in
their homes. So do you have some concrete suggestions on what
we could do that might help you be successful?
Governor O'Malley. I think the bankruptcy suggestion that
both of you have talked about and giving the courts the
authority to pull them in, I think that would be a step in the
right direction. I think in the meantime, otherwise you are
going to see a different circumstance in every State and they
are just going to kick the ball down the road hoping that it is
better when they wake up another year from now.
Mr. Welch. Okay. Thank you.
Mayor?
Mayor Rawlings-Blake. I agree. I mean I think in your
opening you made it clear, I mean you made the point. There
needs to be someone in the room that has the authority to make
the decision and they are not doing it on their own. I think it
would be helpful. I agree with the Governor.
Mr. Welch. Would we have to give some help to the mortgage
services if they are caught between competing interests of the
various mortgage holders that if they make a prudent decision
in the interest of the overall resolution, that they would have
some protection against liability by one tranche of the
security? I don't know if they've been clear on that.
Governor O'Malley. No, I----
Mr. Welch. You got a mortgage servicer and there might be
six of us up here who each own one tranche. And Congressman
Tierney's tranche might be more jeopardized than Congressman's
Cummings if the mortgage servicer settles. So the mortgage
servicer is not so much worried about the judge or anyone else,
he's worried about getting sued by one of the security holders.
And my question is: Would it make sense to give some legal
protection to the mortgage servicer so that if they made a
prudent financial decision in the overall interest of that
security, they would not have to fear retaliation or suit?
Mayor Rawlings-Blake. I think if you do not, you are not
really giving the authority.
Mr. Welch. Yes.
Mayor Rawlings-Blake. If they are acting or not acting on a
fear that they are going to be sued, we are not really given
the tool.
Mr. Welch. Right. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mayor, Governor, you have been very generous with your
time. Would you mind one or two follow-up questions.
Governor O'Malley. Sure.
Chairman Issa. One of them is for the record. Our committee
cannot find one criminal prosecution that we can say this
servicer, this mortgage company as a result of this meltdown
after the fact, if you will, has been prosecuted.
You know, in the savings and loan we had bank presidents,
all kinds of people, who went to jail.
If you don't mind, particularly Governor, if you can
enlighten us for the record on any prosecutions for the
misconduct leading to these loans. Because we are not finding
them and it is one of the questions for the committee is: If so
many bad things happened on the way and if so many people were
misled and so on leading to them having a mortgage that now is
ruining their lives, we would like to know about any of those
prosecutions. We figured if there are going to be prosecutions,
it probably would have happened by now.
The second one, Governor, since you are a graduate of this
law school----
Governor O'Malley. Ah-oh.
Chairman Issa [continuing]. Mortgage law is completely
State, right?
Governor O'Malley. Mortgage law is completely State.
Chairman Issa. In other words, bankruptcy law is completely
Federal. We reserve that in the Constitution. But cramdowns
within mortgage law, recourse, nonrecourse; those parts of
contractual law are within the purview of your State. And the
reason I ask that is you would have the ability to effectively
create, for example, a right of a homeowner to match the lowest
price at the time of the sale. You would have that right within
the State.
So we often--inaction is one of the things we do well in
Congress. The other is overreact. So, assuming we are going to
do the former, inaction in on bankruptcy reform, do you not
have the right to create a mortgage law that would allow the
homeowner to effectively get the equivalent of cramdown,
meaning getting the actual value of the property at the time
that it is going to be liquidated, put them first in line so
that they, as long as they can go find a new lender, a new
source they would have that ability. Because the theory of
joint venture that used to be in cramdown was eliminated, and
it is not likely to come back. Meaning that when I was in
private life we often had contractors, people building massive
real estate structures, they had the theory that if it won they
got the profit and if it lost, the bank shared in the loss. And
that was what bankruptcy reform fixed in the early 2000's.
Getting back the idea that you are in a joint venture; that
heads you get the appreciation in your house and tails you lose
is unlikely, even if we did bankruptcy reform. So my real
question, and it is kind of an open-ended question, is don't
you have the authority to do more at the State level someplace
in which you have shown a willingness to do it quicker than the
Congress?
Governor O'Malley. Well, we are certainly open to doing
everything at the State level. I mean if we see these start
ticking up, we will be back to the drawing board right away.
And I believe that in a crisis like this unprecedented
maybe only one other time in our country's history, that if our
Government cannot get off its haunches and put on the gloves
and get into the ring to protect home ownership when it is
under threat like this, then I mean none of us really have any
business being in public service if we cannot get into the ring
to fight for homeowners in this crisis.
Chairman Issa. I agree with you, Governor.
Anyone else have a followup question?
Mr. Cummings. I want to just go back to my colleagues, Mr.
Tierney and Mr. Welch. You know, it is interesting, Mr. Welch
talked about in questioning you, Governor, with regard to
getting people together, in other words getting the banks
together with the borrowers, the servicers together with the
borrowers.
And for the record what we do in our office, we have a
person who spends her entire day 5 days a week, sometimes 6,
just bringing together--I think we all do--bringing together
the servicer together with the borrower. And a lot of the
problems you have already stated, and I know Mr. Kaufman in his
excellent testimony that I have read will talk about it even
more. But we have a situation where people are being, as you
said, Madam Mayor. I know you hear about it. We experience it
in our office. We see it everyday. People being lied to.
Borrowers are placed in a situation where they call the
mortgage company and they get one person one day--well, first
of all, they get nobody. And then eventually finally get
somebody on the phone and they're transferred to somebody else,
somebody else, their paperwork is lost. We have even had
instances, Mr. Chairman, and Debbie Perry who is sitting over
here in my office deals with this everyday.
We have had situations where paperwork has been sent to
servicers four and five times and they claim they never got it.
And then they turn around, Mr. Governor, and we send them from
our office and they claim they never got it.
So, you know there is a phenomenal abuse. And you are
right, Mr. Governor, I thank you for saying what you said. We
can do better. We can do better as a Nation. We have to protect
home buyers. And this is the greatest transfer of wealth that I
have ever seen in my life. And the middle class, we claim we
are fighting for the middle class. If the middle class loses
their homes, which is their number one investment, then we are
in great trouble in this country if we plan to have a middle
class.
And so, I just wanted to add on that to what the Chairman
said.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Tierney.
Mr. Tierney. Well, I am going to ask all the witnesses here
to contact the White House, contact Secretary Geithner,
Secretary Donovan on that and talk to them a little bit about
the situation.
The Federal Housing Finance Agency now has oversight
authority over Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac hold a very high percent of all the paper of loans
that are resold in this country. As oversight authority, the
Federal Housing Finance Agency is charged with taking actions
necessary to put the regulated entity, that would be Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac, in a sound and solvent condition and to
preserve and conserve the assets and property of the regulated
entity. They have refused, FHFA has refused to allow Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac to engage in principal reduction. All they
basically have to do is turn around to these recalcitrant banks
and servicers and say ``We are not going to buy your paper
until you take care of those homeowners that are in trouble.''
And they would in fact then be better servicing Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac who represent the investor in this case, the
taxpayers, because you would get more out of a modified loan in
most cases than you would on a foreclosure.
So, I invite you to add your voice to the White House and
to the administration, particularly to the individual that is
heading up FHFA right now, who I thought the President probably
ought to show the exit to and find somebody to replace them
until they start getting aggressive and start dealing with it.
I just add that to the record. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Amash.
Mr. Amash. No. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Amash. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you for your testimony today.
Mr. Governor, the question I have is HAMP was designed to
assist homeowners whose payments are increased but who still
have an income and are able to make payments. You testified
today that the face of foreclosures has changed due to
joblessness. What solutions to the foreclosure crises, if any,
are possible without a broad-based economic recovery?
Governor O'Malley. None. Everything we hope to do as a
Nation depends on our recovery.
Mr. Amash. And what solutions are you suggesting for a
broad-based recovery?
Governor O'Malley. Broad-based recovery? I believe that we
need to balance and move forward at the same time. We cannot be
the first generation of Americans that responsibly refuses to
invest in our own time in our infrastructure, not only our
highway, our transportation infrastructure including high speed
rail, but also cyber infrastructure and broadband to connect
all of our smaller communities and our small business with this
new economy.
I believe we need to invest in the education of our
children.
And I believe that rather than slashing and cutting
research and development at places like NIH, which truly makes
us a moral leader of this world, we should be increasing those
investments because in a knowledge-based economy those are the
things that education, the innovation, the rebuilding of our
infrastructure which creates a strong and great economy.
How sad, how very, very sad that China invests a larger
percentage of its GDP in its infrastructure than we are able to
in the United States of America. What a national shame that as
fewer of our people are receiving a college education that we
would be slashing Pell grants and putting college further out
of the reach of hardworking middle class families. I think we
are better than this. I think we have better days in front of
us, but not if we continue to try to hack and cut and slash our
way to a better future. It does not work like that.
If you have ever tried to stay up on a bicycle very long
simply by balancing, you are going to fall over. You have to
pedal forward. And that is what we need to as a country. We
need to balance but we also need to pedal forward.
Mr. Amash. And what would you suggest regarding our current
debt crises that we face in this country?
Governor O'Malley. Fifty-five percent of deficit by 2019
will have been caused by Bush-era tax cuts that
disproportionately benefited the wealthy 1 percent of
Americans. That 1 percent now claims a greater amount of our
Nation's wealth than it ever has since, say, 1929, I do
believe. So that is 55 percent of that deficit.
Another 13 percent of the driver is a series of desert wars
which, for whatever reasons, we have chosen to finance on debt
rather than paying as we go.
So an economy that comes back is an important part of
attacking that deficit. The other important part of attacking
that deficit is to bring into light the spending curves. Not
slamming on the brakes of the recovery and causing us to plunge
back through another double dip, but bringing the cost curves
into line.
It is amazing to me with all the debates that go on in
Washington, we act like tax cuts for the wealthiest 1 percent
do not cost money. They do. Let's get a handle on that, shall
we?
Social Security is not out of whack. Everybody rattles
their sword about Social Security and if we all need to go back
to the days of Coolidge and Hoover, let's go back to the days
of rational fiscally responsible budgeting where we do not act
like tax cuts for the wealthiest 1 percent do not cost all of
our Nation a lot in terms of our economic competitiveness, our
infrastructure and our ability to move forward as a people. I
think we need to be a lot more forthright and honest about the
costs of all of these things and wake ourselves up out of this
wonderland world where we pretend that tax cuts for the
wealthiest 1 percent of Americans do not cost the Nation money.
Mr. Amash. So to summarize, your solution would be to raise
taxes?
Governor O'Malley. No, that is not my solution. And that is
not what I said. Although sometimes it does require a
combination of those things.
I mean, in our State we are one of eight States that still
has a AAA bond rating. And you know what Congressman? We also
have the best schools in America 3 years in a row. Everyone in
our State was willing to pay another penny on their sales tax
in order to be the only State over these last 4 years that went
4 years in a row without a penny's increase to college tuition
for people.
You get what you pay for in this world. It is true in the
America of our grandparents, it is true in our America. And we
owe to our kids to not be the last great generation of
Americans.
I think this country is not only worth fighting for, I
think it is worth investing in. And I think a majority of the
people of this country still believe that.
Chairman Issa. Thank you very much.
You know, it is fitting that we should end on you get what
you pay for. Others paid for you to be here today. I want to
thank both the Governor and the mayor for kindly giving us far
more time than we originally scheduled.
And with that, we are going to take a 5-minute recess.
[Recess.]
Chairman Issa. We're joined now by three additional
witnesses. Mr. Mark Kaufman is Maryland's commissioner of
financial regulation. Mr. Kevin Jerron Matthews is an Air Force
veteran and Maryland homeowner who has experienced mortgage
lender abuse.
And we're being joined by Ms. Jane Wilson, she's the Chair
of the Board of St. Ambrose Housing Aid Center here in
Baltimore. St. Ambrose is a housing counseling agency founded
in 1968. And I might note for the record that we have now
received your opening testimony, so that will complete the
record. And I want to personally thank you, Ms. Wilson, for
coming in. You were a last minute inclusion, and I appreciate
your coming here today.
Pursuant to the rules of the committee, if you could please
rise to take the oath?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Issa. The record will reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Now I am going to announce because you were all here
patiently on the previous two dignitaries, that the rules of
the committee are that opening statements will be for 5
minutes. Your entire written statements will be placed in the
record. And as my predecessor Chair said, everywhere in America
the green light means keep talking and the yellow light means
wrap up and the red light means stop. So, if you could observe
that, it would be very much appreciated. I know there will be a
lot of followup questions and, again, your full statement will
be placed in the record.
With that, we will first go to Mr. Kaufman.

STATEMENTS OF MARK A. KAUFMAN, COMMISSIONER OF FINANCIAL
REGULATION, MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, LICENSING AND
REGULATION; KEVIN JERRON MATTHEWS, HOMEOWNER; AND JANE WILSON,
CHAIR OF THE BOARD, ST. AMBROSE HOUSING AID CENTER

STATEMENT OF MARK A. KAUFMAN

Mr. Kaufman. Thank you. Chairman Issa, Ranking Member
Cummings, members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
My name is Mark Kaufman and again, I'm the State's
commissioner of financial regulation.
As the Governor has described, foreclosure issues have been
a focus for those of us at the State level for years. They are
more than numbers or percentages, they are phone calls, letters
and emails from constituents with desperation revolving around
their situation and scams that evolve within the crevices of
the law. With the Governor's leadership the State has taken
significant steps to address the problem reforming the entire
foreclosure process and more recently implementing a mediation
program.
As commissioner my office has also played an active role.
We have used delinquency data that we received to send over
a quarter of a million outreach packages to severely delinquent
borrowers.
We have launched an examination program that has resulted
in hundreds of thousands of dollars of refunds to consumers.
And we have also implemented a reporting requirement, at
the time the first of its kind at the State level, for licensed
mortgager servicers.
When we required servicers to report not only data, we
required them not only the number of modifications that they
were achieving but the impacts of those modifications on the
borrower's monthly payment. Shockingly, the early results
documented that for most of the borrowers who successfully ran
the gauntlet of modification they wound up paying more when
they were finished then when they started. These modifications
seemed doomed from the start.
When the Federal regulators began to collect data we urged
them to also collect data on the impact on payment. It took
more than 8 months and several requests from our congressional
delegation, including from Congressman Cummings, before the OCC
agreed to collect data on payment terms.
Our office is also targeted with other States. Together
with four other banking commissioners we joined 12 State
Attorneys General in 2007 in the State Foreclosure Prevention
Working Group led by Iowa's Attorney General Tom Miller. The
group published five reports between 2008 and 2010 and forms
the foundation for the robo-signing investigation which I will
describe in a moment.
Many of the problems that we face today are a function of
changes in the mortgage market. Today, as you know, most
mortgages are originated, secure tied, sold and serviced by
different parties. This unbundling process may reduce costs and
increase efficiency, but it has also fragmented roles,
distorted incentives and severely complicated the effort to
avoid preventable foreclosures.
In theory, servicing is a scale business. This is certainly
true when things are going well as automation created profits
while driving down costs. When the mortgages began to default,
however, the situation flipped leaving servicers without the
expertise, the resources and the incentives to meet the new
need.
To make matters worse, the same economies of scale drove
consolidation. The percentage of the market in servicing
handled by the top five servicers in this country has doubled
over the last 10 years to over 60 percent. Beyond the increased
management challenge of operating these behemoths in a crises,
they're virtually all owned by the major banks, the same banks
which are too big to fail. I believe this results in a market
that is particularly ill suited to reprice in order to meet
elevated needs. After all, the current provider never goes
bankrupt and the process of restoring reasonable returns for a
well run and operated business is impaired, in large part at
the expense of the homeowner who has no choice in who his
servicer is. The invisible hand is essentially broken.
These issues were thrust into the public eye with the
recent robo-signing scandal. As the Governor's described, the
response in Maryland was swift. Our elected officials,
including the Governor and Congressman Cummings, called on the
servicers to halt foreclosures until their processes cold be
validated. Our courts implemented new rules on an emergency
basis. My office, through the working group that we were part
of, joined the 50 State AG investigation along with 37 bank
regulatory agencies. I am proud to serve on the Executive
Committee of that investigation.
Without going into the details, let me make the following
observations:
First, this is not just a technical issue. As our courts
have noted, due process and the rule of law are not to be
trivialized. More broadly the problems are symptomatic of the
broken process that has been described today. We have seen
incomplete files, shady record keeping and in certain instances
inaccurate loan data. Third party oversight is weak, as
evidence by the improper affidavits that we've see here in
Maryland. And we continue to see borrowers getting mixed
signals believing they are on the road to a modification only
to find themselves deeply down the road to foreclosure.
And these are not only our findings, by the way. The FDIC,
the Fed, the OCC have also publicly acknowledged similar
issues.
The public senses the same problem, that is why the term
``robo-signing'' has caught fire. It embodies everyone's sense
that while servicers and borrowers are struggling along, the
foreclosure is operating in the next room unincumbered.
As we look to the future, let me quickly talk about the
things we see as necessary.
Ultimately we believe that borrowers need a single point of
contact in order to move through this process. We also need to
have servicers, these single points of process, need to be
backed by adequate staffing and training and support
infrastructure.
As I've noted, I question the profitability of the entire
model, so I believe those issues will have to be addressed by
demands rather then by requests.
And I also believe we need to increase accountability from
third party oversight.
None of this will be easy and none of it will be free. But
as I have mentioned, I believe that the invisible hand of the
market will not fix it, at least not in any near term and not
without a lot of continued human cost and economic costs.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify. We will be
pleased to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kaufman follows:]

Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Matthews? Could you pull the mic just a little closer?

STATEMENT OF KEVIN JERRON MATTHEWS

Mr. Matthews. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, my
name is Kevin Jerron Matthews. I am here to talk to you about
the mortgage foreclosure that happened to me.
By the way of brief background, I'm a former high school
JROTC cadet, member of the U.S. Air Force and Maryland Army
National Guard and served with the 243rd Engineering Co. in
Iraq.
In 2008 with the help of the VA Guaranty Loan Program I
purchased my home on 3216 East Northern Parkway. When I
purchased my property I had a good income. I was a contractor
at Fort Meade in the field of wastewater. I also made all my
mortgage payments on time and everything was going Okay. But in
December 2008 I was in a horrific car accident that made my
previous injuries worse than war.
In February 2009 as a result of my injuries and resulting
in continued absences from work, I was laid off from my job
while I was in the hospital. Realizing the difficulty to my
situation, in an effort to be proactive I contacted by mortgage
servicer, USAA, to inform them of my hospitalization,
disability and anticipated financial hardship.
I continued to contact USAA after my release from the
hospital and during my rehabilitation, and I continually
thereafter keep them informed of my situation and to see if I
could secure any help from them while I had no income,
including the possibility of a forbearance or modification.
I made every effort to keep up my mortgage payment
including draining all of my 401(k), using my tax returns and
short-term disability benefits. I also did not pay any other
bills in an effort to keep my mortgage current and depleted all
of my savings.
In July 2009, I ran out of money and in August I officially
went 30 days late. I continued to contact USAA in an effort to
find a resolution to the delinquent payments on my home. I
wanted desperately to save my home or find any other
alternative to foreclosure. After contacting USAA more than 50
times over the course of 12 months or more and retaining one of
the best housing counsels in the State, USAA proceeded to sale
on May 21, 2010 with USAA not even looking at the mitigation
package. On the phone I was told they did not care and it was
not their problem.
After the sale I obtained legal counsel with Civil Justice,
Inc. and the University of Maryland Law School Consumer
Protection Clinic and my lawyers filed a formal exception to
the foreclosure sale with the court.
While the exceptions were pending consideration of the
court and before the lender had the legal right to acquire
possession of the property, I was required to go out of town
for an internship related to my studies. I returned home to
learn that my house had been taken over by the lender without
permission of the court and that a lockbox had been placed on
my front door and that all my personal belongings as well as
that of my son's had been taken from the house by the lender's
agents who secured the house. In addition, as a result of the
illegal lockout, I had to go find an apartment and buy all new
furniture and clothing for not only myself, but my son. To this
date I have never received my property back.
After I obtained legal counsel with Civil Justice and the
University of Maryland Law School Consumer Protection I also
learned that GMAC and not USAA owned my mortgage. Apparently to
what USAA had told the media, it permits GMAC to use its name
for customers like me so we don't know the loan has been
transferred.
I have also learned since the foreclosure my loan was a VA
guarantee loan. The VA requires my lender to undertake loss
mitigation efforts prior to foreclosing on the loan, including
a face-to-face meeting, review of my loan and circumstances for
modification. The possibility of temporarily modifying my loan
to allow my conditions to improve, the exploration of the
possibility of a deed in lieu as an alternative to foreclosure
and as a last resort only. None of these things were done.
In the fall of 2010 when the national and State robo-
signing scandals came to light we learned that an individual by
the name of Jeffry Stephan had admitted under oath in a
deposition that he had signed tons of thousands of bogus
affidavits used to initiate foreclosure proceedings on behalf
of GMAC and other lenders including my own foreclosure.
Apparently Mr. Stephen never reviewed the required
documentation and affidavits were falsely notarized without Mr.
Stephen being present as required by law.
After the hearing we had attempted to secure the key to the
lock GMAC had illegally placed on the door of my home. However,
they never gave my counsel the keys and as a result, I had to
break into my own house. Unfortunately, the neighbors who did
not know me called the police and I had to explain this entire
situation to them. Luckily, I was not arrested.
Upon entering the house I found that the house had not been
properly winterized by the company hired by GMAC to discontinue
with the utilities. As a result, my sewage pipe and hot water
heater cracked from the water expansion in the cold weather
requiring me to fix both in order to move back into the house.
Mr. Chairman, and members of this honorable committee, as a
member of the Armed Service I took an oath where I rose my
right hand and stated that I solemnly swore to support and
defend the Constitution of the United States against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the same, and that I will obey the orders of the
President of the United States and orders of officers appointed
over me according to regulation and the Uniform Code of
Military Justice, so help me God. I did all that was asked of
me proudly and unreservedly. Today I am here not to tell you my
story, but to ask each of you that you will assist not only me,
but the tens of thousands of homeowners throughout this country
to receive the equal protections of the laws and rights to due
process that are guaranteed to each of us by that very same
Constitution that I was asked to defend.
I am an example of everything that can go wrong when
lenders abuse the system and not held accountability. Hopefully
through your actions, other homeowners trying to be proactive
and do the right thing that they will not have to endure what I
suffered and continue to suffer through each day.
Thank you for your time and efforts to work together to
find a common sense solution.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Matthews follows:]

Chairman Issa. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Wilson.

STATEMENT OF JANE A. WILSON

Ms. Wilson. Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Cummings and
members of the committee, thank you for allowing me to appear.
Chairman Issa. You might want to pull the mic just a little
closer.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you for the opportunity to allow me to be
here today to share with you the experiences of the Maryland
homeowners facing foreclosure.
Chairman Issa. I guess a lot closer might be better.
Ms. Wilson. Okay.
Chairman Issa. They try to compensate, but that's what
causes the feedback.
Ms. Wilson. Okay.
And also the steps that St. Ambrose is taking to try to try
to preserve sustainable home ownership and neighborhood
stabilization.
By way of background, St. Ambrose Housing Aid Center is a
non-denominational 501(c)(3) nonprofit located here in
Baltimore. We are a HUD certified counseling agency and a
chartered member of NeighborWorks America. Since our founding
in 1968, we have provided direct housing services to over
100,000 low and moderate income families through our several
interrelated housing programs.
In particular, our Foreclosure Prevention Division provides
default counseling services and direct legal representation and
legal counsel to homeowners and nonprofit housing agencies
across Maryland.
St. Ambrose has been involved with foreclosure prevention
for over 30 years. During that span we have witnessed a
dramatic change in the face of foreclosure. In particular, over
the last few years our attorneys and housing counselors have
found and continue to find that homeowners eligible for certain
types of loss mitigation relief including relief available
under HAMP, faced impending foreclosure sales of their homes
despite having submitted applications for review under the
applicable State, Federal and investor specific loss mitigation
guidelines.
We have never before witnessed such systemic and deliberate
dysfunction at the large mortgage loan services that has
resulted in the sizable loss of wealth to homeowners and
communities across Maryland. We recognize that not every home
can be or must be saved in the process. But the losses are not
limited to the homeowners. We also see the sizable losses to
investors, taxpayers and the Government as a result of the
systemic failings within the servicing industry.
Time does not permit me to recount each example of servicer
failings that I've provided in my prepared testimony, but I
would like to highlight one example. I wish I could say this
one example is an isolated case, it is not. I also wish I could
say that the described events that occurred in 2008 or 2009
would not occur today, but I cannot.
We had a client who came to us in late 2008 with her
mortgage payments 2 months in arrears. Between December 2008
and February 2010 our housing counselor helped her submit the
necessary loss mitigation information to her servicer on 10
separate occasions, only to be told more than 30 days after
each submission that the modification package was incomplete.
Our client finally received a HAMP trial period plan in
February 2010 and made her first payment. Only a few days later
she was notified that the servicing rights had been transferred
to another servicer who claimed that they had no record of the
HAMP trial plan and that if she wanted assistance, she'd have
to start over again.
Most recently, the current servicer offered our client an
unaffordable repayment plan, not a modification but a repayment
plan that required a payment of approximately $800 a month more
than her pre-hardship payment. As you might anticipate, this
was not a viable option for the client. One of our attorneys
continues to advocate for a modification for this client.
I might note that the servicer failures in this case are
particularly frustrating because the loan is owned by Fannie
Mae. Efforts by St. Ambrose staff to discuss the case directly
with Fannie Mae have produced no results.
The servicing industry must be repaired. The problems
within the industry from our perspective are deeply rooted and
systemic. We at St. Ambrose are committed to doing our part to
ensure that every homeowner whom we can assist receives our
assistance. But our efforts are too often frustrated by the
failure or inability of the servicers to respond to legitimate
requests from loss mitigation.
The Board and staff of St. Ambrose are grateful to
Congressman Cummings and to all of you for supporting this area
and we thank you for taking the time to come to Baltimore and
to discuss this critically important topic with us today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wilson follows:]

Chairman Issa. Thank you. And thank you for being exactly 5
minutes. Uncanny. I am glad we got you instead of the earlier
proposed witness.
With that, I'll recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Matthews, having had 35 years with USAA, I was relieved
when you got to the fact that GMAC was behind, if you will, the
servicing company and ultimately GMAC held it. But it still
does not excuse USAA for any portion of their involvement or
any of the other entities involved. And I sincerely feel for, I
guess, what is now a corrected loss but not fully correct and
probably won't be fully corrected for a long time.
Ms. Wilson, I'd particularly note that when we look at
Freddie and Fannie, they do hold $7 trillion worth of these
notes, the largest holders by far. So as we talk about
servicers, obviously we're really talking about services on
behalf of GMAC in some cases, Freddie and Fannie, entities that
were bailed out and continue to be bailed out by the U.S.
Government.
So, Mr. Kaufman, I'll go to you. First of all, there was
some talk about modifying bankruptcy. From your past experience
before you came into your current job if we were to open up the
door of cramdown broadly, the way they were in the 1980s and
1990s, what effect would that have on commercial construction
and all the other entities that used to avail themselves of
cramdown briefly?
Mr. Kaufman. I am not sure I am exactly----
Chairman Issa. Well, another way to put it is what would it
cost if bank consortiums that we are funding, shopping malls
and large home development plans, suddenly had to look and say
``If anything goes wrong, we are not even going to have the
right to take back the property. We are going to be forced into
a cramdown,'' maybe as many as three cramdowns as we found
under the old bankruptcy law.
Mr. Kaufman. Well, I am not sure that it is sort of
statistically possible to make an estimate. I guess I would
make two points, at least one from previous experience working
as an investment banker, which is the leverage to hand back the
keys to that is how workouts get done.
You know, we hear a lot about borrowers who are not holding
up their end of responsibilities, who are acting immorally,
etc., who I would observe act a lot like corporations or
investors that I worked with and nobody questioned their
morals. That was really just how business was done.
I also think it is difficult to estimate. I mean, at some
levels costs would go up, but I am still frankly looking for
the study that even shows you that the cost of an elongated
timeline for foreclosure or for some of the foreclosure reforms
that we put in place raise the cost of credit for consumers.
So, for example, when we talked about changing the foreclosure
process one of the issues was if you do this, this, or this
everyone will pay for it. The person will get a benefit but
every borrower will pay for it in terms of increased rates. We
have a 50 petri dish of experimentation with different
foreclosure timelines, and I am not aware of massively
different interest rates in States which have extremely rapid
foreclosure timelines versus States that don't. It is a natural
market and so if that was a huge impact, I would think we would
see it. But at this point we still do not.
Chairman Issa. Okay. Following up on that, you know home
mortgages are almost non-recourse. So, basically the only asset
you have is the property itself. Maryland is no different. You
are a non-recourse State, is that correct?
Mr. Kaufman. I believe that's correct.
Chairman Issa. Okay. So knowing that you can't go after
other assets, earlier testimony by the mayor of 40 percent of
all the properties in foreclosures that she dealt with were
rental properties. Basically you had somebody who was
collecting the rent, not paying the mortgage.
Mr. Kaufman. Right.
Chairman Issa. And you could not go after their other homes
or property. Realistically the question about being able to go
after other property, recourse versus non-recourse and all the
other mortgage questions that I asked your Governor, aren't
these all things which the petri dish, as you said it so well,
could be dealing with? In other words, before you come to the
Federal Government for bankruptcy change and others, are there
not some others in which States could and should begin making
those changes so that they protect constituents from an
unreasonable foreclosure?
Mr. Kaufman. I guess yes in the general sense, and I think
we have been trying everything that we can throw at this
problem. At a high level, I think the Governor's response was
we are open to any suggestions that people we have. We have
elongated timelines, we have gone after servicers, we have
undertaken examinations; we have tried everything we can.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Matthews' case, for example, he was not
given a mandatory mediation where he could have shown how
absurd the foreclosure process had become and how there had
been no attempt to legitimately look at his willingness to pay,
his willingness to liquidate his 401 and all the other things
that they did. In a sense, your State fix should have, if
available for Mr. Matthews, would have helped him, is that
correct?
Mr. Kaufman. Well, our State fix is an opt-in program so he
would have had to opt-in. My guess, and without getting into
the timing, is the program just went into effect in July, the
law just passed. I am not sure that there would----
Chairman Issa. Well that is what I said, if it had been
available.
Mr. Kaufman. The intent is to address that.
Chairman Issa. Okay. So you have some fixes which in the
future might protect Mr. Matthews and other are possible?
Mr. Kaufman. After a lot of damage is done.
Chairman Issa. A lot.
Mr. Kaufman. But we are trying, yes.
Chairman Issa. I thank you.
Recognize the ranking member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Yes. Just following up on Jim's question, in
reading your testimony which is excellent, by the way,
throughout that testimony you seem to express some frustration
with regard to the limitations of the State. In other words,
you only can go but so far. Can you comment on that and why it
is so important that we act on the Federal level?
Mr. Kaufman. Well I mean on a couple of levels. In very
real terms, you know the vast preponderance of mortgages in our
State and every other State are serviced by institutions which
are primarily federally supervised. And I supervise 50
community banks on the bank side as banking commissioner. We
get virtually no complaints relative to their mortgage
practices of any scope. A vast preponderance are coming from
institutions that I have no jurisdiction over from a
supervisory standpoint.
Mr. Cummings. Because they service their loans, is that
right, basically?
Mr. Kaufman. Because if it is a national bank I do not have
any jurisdiction.
Mr. Cummings. I am talking about the community banks.
Mr. Kaufman. The community banks, right, own and service
their own loans.
Mr. Cummings. Okay.
Mr. Kaufman. So that's a piece of it.
You know, the other piece is even where we have
jurisdiction, quite candidly, these are national operators
operating out of State where we're trying to run an examination
program, trying to oversee institutions which are largely
beyond the physical reach of our employees with very limited
resources. Where you are able to identify clear violations that
you can go after, that is one thing. But when you start trying
to address sort of system-wide practices of an institution,
there is a limit in the sense that ultimately it gets down to
are you willing to pull the license? Are you willing to go in
and tell XYZ servicer they simply cannot operate in your State,
which is going to impact the vast preponderance of their
customers who are actually paying? So there is a limit to what
can be addressed even where you have regulatory authority.
Mr. Cummings. Now with regards to the robo-signing
situation, you commented on that. How many people did that
affect in Maryland, if you know?
Mr. Kaufman. I do not think we know at this point.
Mr. Cummings. Okay.
Mr. Kaufman. And I would point out again, and this is why
again I think that the term has caught such fire. It is less
sort of a technical, and there's a lot of oh, this is a
technical issue, it is a touch valve. It has more, I think,
just sort of captured everybody's sense of exactly the sort of
impersonal and methodical nature of what is going on.
Mr. Cummings. One of your recommendations was that the
servicers staff up, that they have more staff. And I just want
you to comment on that. Because I used to wonder whether or not
they had any staff. I mean, seriously. I mean, it just seems
like these papers were going in, I mean they were being faxed
right into a trash can. So I was just wondering. I mean is
that----
Mr. Kaufman. I think resources have been an issue from the
word ``go.'' I mean I think at the end of the day, you know
they have staffed up, they have added resources, they haven't
added fast enough.
And I go back to, you know I know that there's a lot of
sort of this consistent hand-wringing from regulators and
constant sort of political pressure, etc., and public pressure
from Governors and mayors and so forth. But, you know I believe
at the bottom line is these guys are not profitable. So it is
very difficult to ask a money losing enterprise to expect that
they will sort of on their own continue to invest in issues
that they need. I mean, it is going to have demanded, not
requested. And I think that is why it has been slow to come.
Mr. Cummings. So which entities do you say are not
profitable?
Mr. Kaufman. My point is the whole business model, my sense
from the first time I started talking to servicers 3 years ago,
is that they signed up thinking they were going to take
payments, you know receive payments and mail statements. Not
run call centers. Not do massive mediation. Not run their
business the way a collection agency runs. I used to go see
collection agencies as an investment banker. And the first
question you'd ask is: ``What is your turnover in your call
center?'' It is a 100 percent. If it is under a 100 percent, it
is a well running collections agency.
So these are very difficult businesses to operate. And I do
not think they had any--I mean I know they didn't have any plan
to get into that business.
Mr. Cummings. So they never were equipped to even do this?
So that means that is----
Mr. Kaufman. I think we, they, everyone has been chasing
this problem the whole way.
Mr. Cummings. Now you heard the testimony of Mr. Matthews.
Could he have been helped through this mitigation process do
you think?
Mr. Kaufman. Well, I mean ultimately if we had gotten to
mediation, we would at least be able to get the right people in
the right room. I mean, there is sort of a sense of how do you
know there's a problem that can be fixed. I think all of us
that have escalation contacts, we have them, I know your office
has them, when you escalate they get fixed. And, sure, maybe
some number that get fixed because of the ranking member or the
chairman would not have gotten fixed solely on their economics.
I am not that high up the chain.
When they are getting fixed because of our escalation
contacts, I believe they are economic and they still get fixed
when we escalate them.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And appreciation of each of you as witnesses today and what
you bring to the table.
Ms. Wilson, thank you for the work you do.
Mr. Matthews, thank you for your service to the country.
Hearing your testimony and on face value of what you've said
here, you were submitted to the unjustified perfect storm of a
breakdown that went there. And I just wish the best as it moves
forward here. And I think these hearings and as we consider
further, hopefully, we will come to some conclusions that will
benefit others as a result of what you have gone through.
Mr. Kaufman, in listening to your testimony you mentioned
very clearly that mortgage servicers did not have the
expertise, the financial incentives or resources to engage in
large scale mortgage modifications when foreclosures began to
mount. The question I would ask in context of HAMP then if the
servicers did not have these incentives, resources or
expertise, did HAMP provide them with expertise that they
needed?
Mr. Kaufman. No. I think the intention was to try to
provide this through an incentive, at least solve the incentive
part.
Mr. Walberg. Did HAMP provide the incentives necessary?
Mr. Kaufman. Necessary I don't know, and it certainly tried
to provide additional incentives by definition.
Mr. Walberg. For large scale modifications?
Mr. Kaufman. For modifications that were done, correct.
Mr. Walberg. What about the resources, did HAMP provide the
resources necessary?
Mr. Kaufman. No, I think--I mean I know there is a lot of
concern about HAMP. There is a lot of disappointment HAMP, I
share that disappointment with all of you. It is no secret that
the program has not lived up to anyone's expectations.
You know, the program did not provide expertise.
I will say one of the things it did do was begin to
standardize a completely unstandardized modification process.
That, I think you sort of have to grant. It was the wild west
of modifications. When we started gathering modification data
pre-HAMP, it was all over the board and again, it was shocking
to me as a former business person that most people who got a
modification wound up paying after then before. You know, we
did not put it in our initial data requests----
Mr. Walberg. So in some ways it escalated the problem?
Mr. Kaufman. Yes. You could look at these at scratch your
head and say ``Well, how is this every going to--how does this
work?'' I mean, I couldn't see the underlying case, but the
numbers were big enough that the rational conclusion that if he
is here looking for a modification, what is the likelihood he
is going to be able pay more next month than he could pay last
month was a head scratcher.
Mr. Walberg. Yes. To say the least.
Ms. Wilson, thinking of Mr. Matthews' experience here and
from your experience in working with cases like this, what was
the first step that was missed and what you have had you worked
with Mr. Matthews--I assume you didn't work with Mr. Matthews?
Ms. Wilson. No, our organization did not work with Mr.
Matthews.
Mr. Walberg. What would have been the first step that was
missed and what would you have taken action on immediately to
deal with that, to give us instruction and how we can move from
here?
Ms. Wilson. Well, I believe Mr. Matthews did have and went
to one of the local counseling agencies and did have
counseling. I cannot say for sure that things would have been
any different had he come to us. There are several very good
peers of ours in terms of counseling. And----
Mr. Walberg. Yes, I do not want you to dump on any of your
peers. I am not asking that. But I am just hearing a complete
breakdown. In this case we are not talking about the
stereotypical underwater mortgage from the very get-go. We are
talking about a military service personnel who had set up
plans, had the finances in place, had a job that stable but for
the fact of an accident, as I hear the description here. And
all of a sudden it just escalates. And how would we stop that?
Ms. Wilson. I think the way we stop it is to get the
servicers to do what they are supposed to do. Exactly what
method we have left to use, I do not know the right answer of
how we get there. But this is yet another situation where we
have a breakdown with the servicers not matter what kind of
assistance the homeowner has on his side.
Mr. Walberg. Yes. I appreciate that. Thank you.
I would yield back.
Chairman Issa. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Tierney.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
I think, Ms. Wilson, you are right and what we have here is
insufficient regulatory work resulting in a mess for a lot of
people on it. So how do we work ourselves out of that?
Mr. Kaufman talked about possible incentives. I tell you as
a taxpayer it is a little offensive to think that this free
market enterprise that was not regulated properly has caused a
huge mess and now in order to get them to straighten out we are
going to pay them, or give them some incentive on that? I think
I like the demand side a little bit more; we just make them
step it up and do it right and that is why we talk about
cramdown, which incidentally was not a broad-based cramdown
effect every single mortgage in the world going forward and
backward and all people. And that was very narrowly targeted
the cramdown authority that we had talked about and put forward
on that. But, you know, and I think it is going to take that.
It is going to take somebody demanding or forcing these banks
to step up and do what they should do. After having put this
country in the condition that it is in, I should think they
would find a way to do that. And I mentioned in some of earlier
comments made to the other panel, and I think we will let that
stand on the record.
Let me ask you, Mr. Kaufman, if we were to eliminate HAMP,
what do you envision the situation to become?
Mr. Kaufman. It is not going to help, let me put it that
way. I mean that is my concern at the end of the day. Look, the
program is not perfect, but I think it is somewhat where you
first have to put it in context of where it came from.
You know, when we started at this and prior to HAMP when we
started gathering data, there was hope now which I think
essentially an 800 number and some counseling. And we were not
doing very well, to say the least. So, I think trying to refine
this program and trying to push it forward and continue to push
the process forward is important.
The other thing I would observe based on what we are seeing
from the robo-signing effort is if we are going to declare
ultimately just throw out the program or throw out the baby
with the bath water, we are doing it in the context of very
poor execution on the part of the primary party in execution,
which is the servicer. So we are working to try to remedy that.
Certainly the State AGs contend, we intend through this
settlement to the extent we can do to try to reform practices.
Mr. Tierney. Well, you are doing great work, and I thank
you for it. You are doing essentially the work that our
constituent representatives are doing in our office, and they
are pulling their hair out. So I can only imagine what your
organization is going through on that.
But you indicated that you are at sort of a loss as to how
we resolve this problem. So it is not that I won't ask you, it
is I think you have answered that.
But, Mr. Kaufman, if you are going to keep HAMP, what do
you do to make it work in a way that does not get you so angry
you want to throw it away?
Mr. Kaufman. Well, I mean, I think we have talked about
some of the things that we would intend, we think need to be
fixed more generally and they apply.
We would like to see better third party and third party
review and some sort of ombudsman or something within the
program for appeal.
I think that the lack of technology for input into this
process is pretty poor. The fact that there is not sort of a
single portal which is being talked about on the State AG side
for people to be able to get data and information into this,
better visibility for a consumer.
I mean, I have the sense throughout this that as a current
borrower that you have relatively good visibility into your
mortgage as you pay. And as soon as you stop paying, it is a
completely opaque process that you cannot really exercise on
behalf of yourself. So we would like to see that.
We would like to see the timelines upheld, and that applies
to HAMP and otherwise. I mean, I think a lot of this applies to
everything and not just HAMP.
Mr. Tierney. So the question is now who is going to pay for
this? Who is going to pay for the personnel and who is going to
pay for the technology? What is your recommendation there?
Mr. Kaufman. Well the servicing industry is going to--I
come back to, I sort had this sense, I don't have a scientific
study, if these were freestanding small businesses, they would
go under and the next guy that got hired to do it would say ``I
am not doing that for a dollar. It costs $5.'' And that would
be painful, but we would have a process where the market would
provide $5 of service, I would think. We are not getting there.
We are not going to get there naturally, at least not in the
short run. I mean, the long run this industry will reprice.
There may very well be special servicers, for example, who do
only delinquent loans, which is what happens in commercial
loans. And that may happen. And that may work fabulously well
in 2015. But for the people that are in the process now, that
is not going to get them there.
Mr. Tierney. I guess I am still at a loss. How are you
going to force those services that you are telling us are
tapped right now, don't have the resources, how are you going
to force them to hire on extra people and get technology?
Mr. Kaufman. In most cases the institution----
Mr. Tierney. The people--that started at the bank.
Mr. Kaufman. In most cases the institutions that they sit
within are not, by any means, tapped out. I think there is
someone in many instances go to a quarterly board meeting and
announces how much money his division just lost and says that
he needs to lose even more in the next quarter. And my guess is
that your corporate advancement is not solid if that's your--it
is not a winning strategy.
Mr. Tierney. I want to get that a little clearer on the
record. We are talking about the people with the deep pockets--
--
Mr. Kaufman. Yes.
Mr. Tierney [continuing]. Are the ones that got us into
this mess in the long-term, are the ones that are going to have
to pay to get us out?
Mr. Kaufman. Yes.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Issa. Does the gentleman yield?
Mr. Tierney. Sure.
Chairman Issa. Just to put it, and his testimony is very
clear, what you are talking about is deep pockets at major
banks are not in fact hurting, but the servicers which are
either different divisions or different companies are in fact
uncapitalized to do this and that is part of the reason that
Mr. Matthews and all these others have run into robo-signing
and so on is that the compartmenting, we see the large profits
of B of A, we do not see the servicing entity separately? Is
that correct?
Mr. Kaufman. That is my sense. I mean, I do not have
somebody's balance sheet. It strikes me that it is very
unlikely that a transaction processing business model that has
suddenly become a call center, which is what has happened, can
operate on economics that looked anything like what they were
designed to.
Chairman Issa. Thank you. That is one thing that our
committee can find out for the record from others that we work
with.
Mr. Kaufman. I mean, and it was why I tried to look--the
GSEs are trying to look at incentive, the compensation models
for that very reason.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Welch.
Mr. Welch. This is helpful. I mean, the servicers will
never be able to staff up to do the job if the more they staff
up, the more they lose. It just will not happen. That's more or
less what you are saying.
Mr. Kaufman. It will not happen quickly. It will not happen
without a lot of duress. And I think that is why it has taken
public pressure, events that have happened in districts, the
Governors----
Mr. Welch. But just explain this to me. The big banks, I
mean most of these loans have been sold, right?
Mr. Kaufman. Correct.
Mr. Welch. So----
Mr. Kaufman. Some of them are sold and serviced by the same
institutions.
Mr. Welch. Right. But many of them are owned by like
pension funds. They are owned by, well pension fund investors
who had no clue as to what the future would be anymore than the
servicers did. So it is not just all owned by the big banks, am
I right?
Mr. Kaufman. Correct.
Mr. Welch. So on a practical level it is the owners of the
loans that ultimately have to be brought to the table to make a
decision----
Mr. Kaufman. Correct.
Mr. Welch [continuing]. About whether that asset which has
depreciated by 40 percent, there should be a mark down, right?
Mr. Kaufman. Correct. But it falls to the service provider
to provide the level of service to even get to the
decisionmaking process. And that servicer has to provide the
service.
Mr. Welch. Right. But if you have this loan, you know is it
my mortgage or Mr. Matthews' mortgage, let's say, is divided
into 20 different tranches, so literally there is 20 different
owners out there somewhere that are making a claim on Mr.
Matthews and you have a servicer trying to balance the
competing interest of those 20 different owners, how does that
possibly get done?
Mr. Kaufman. The conundrum of the fragmentation of the
underlying security is sort of a separate issue from the
problem that I am even getting to.
Mr. Welch. So that----
Mr. Kaufman. But that is another layer of questions.
Mr. Welch. See, two things seem to get in our way. I mean,
one, often times we get into the argument about who is
responsible; the big banks, the mortgage originators, the
individual homeowners who brought the MacMansion when they
could have for a house.
Mr. Kaufman. Yes.
Mr. Welch. And there is plenty of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac,
a lot of focus there. And there is plenty of blame to go
around.
Mr. Kaufman. Yes.
Mr. Welch. I think what we're hoping on this committee, it
is, look--we've got a practical problem. We had the Governor in
here, we had the mayor in here, and they are dealing with the
devastating consequences of people getting foreclosed on,
neighborhoods starting to fall apart. It is really bad. So, I
see this as a practical problem that is very difficult to
resolve because there is such fragmentation. So if you had a
suggestion on something concrete where we just sort of put our
rhetorical guns back in our holsters for a while and stop
having the debate about who is at fault because there is plenty
of fault to go around, what would be a practical way where
basically you would be able to sooner rather than later make a
decision on: All right, this loan is hopeless and it will be
foreclosed; this loan could be saved if we made some
modification? I mean, what would be the legislative or legal
things we would have to do in order to allow that to happen?
Mr. Kaufman. You know, that is what the program has tried
to do with the NPV calculation, which is a little opaque for
those of us on the outside. And that is essentially the
calculation that is trying to be run and then get some better
clarity as to what's in it and harmonization in that
calculation.
Mr. Welch. But at the end of the day nobody has authority.
You have a servicer who has a bad business model----
Mr. Kaufman. The servicers, I mean we have talked to--it
has been a little while, but when we did our initial round at
the behest of the Governor, I met with servicers. And we said
``Do you have the authority to do what you need to do?'' They
generally said yes. I mean, it was not a legal question,
although we did have, and I would again give HAMP some credit
for this, we did have people say that we have to defend what we
do as prudent and ordinary course of business practice. And in
that regard, I would note that the modification program has at
least provided some notion of what is routine and ordinary
course, which presumably gives them better defense. But they
did not come in, frankly, as aggressively as we expected at all
with ``Hey, our hands are tied.''
Mr. Welch. Yes.
Mr. Kaufman. That is not it.
Mr. Welch. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Cummings. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Welch. Yes, I yield.
Mr. Cummings. Just one clarification going back to
something that the chairman said.
Mr. Kaufman, when we have a situation where--I mean a lot
of these servicers are owned by the banks, right? I believe it
was asking about deep pockets, is that right?
Mr. Kaufman. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. Well, do you have a percentage or would you
guess?
Mr. Kaufman. Of the top five, all but one is State licensed
but is a subsidiary. But they virtually all are. I mean, our
jurisdiction as a license server, because we do not do much of
that reporting anymore because the number of people who have to
report to us is below 15 percent of the market. So that gives
you some approximate for it.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Could you stay for a few more follow-up
questions?
Mr. Kaufman. Sure.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Kaufman, you actually scared me a little
bit when you said basically like commercial, we should work to
workout units. You know, there are all kinds of workout units
in the commercial market.
Mr. Kaufman. Right.
Chairman Issa. And I remember from my own days in business
that, you know, you would do anything to modify not to go to
that workout unit. But your point, and I think the ranking
member hit it very well, there is basically an artificial wall
between the servicing division and the banks if the bank is
holding the mortgage. If the bank is not holding the mortgage,
if Freddie and Fannie were some other entity, some pension plan
or whatever is holding it, then it really is not artificial
because that entity's line does not go back to the bank's
capital base, it goes back to the Federal Government, is that
correct?
Mr. Kaufman. If I am following you correctly, yes.
Chairman Issa. Yes. So as this committee goes through its
due diligence to try to get through, and the gentleman said,
you know our guns in the blame game. And he is right, that
often is part of what the committee does. But also figuring out
how do we get a reform and where do we get the money for a
reform from?
Currently Freddie and Fannie have received over $150
billion, HAMP has obligated over $30 billion. So it appears as
though Freddie and Fannie are still losing money and their $7
trillion portfolio would be well served if this system worked
better. Would you agree?
Mr. Kaufman. Sure.
Chairman Issa. So in your background how often do you see
any difference in the actions of the servicer based on whether
the GSEs hold the loans or some other entity? Do you see any
discernable difference in how the servicers do their job?
Mr. Kaufman. When the cases come to us, that is not really
an issue that seems to come up, frankly.
Chairman Issa. And this is my real question here that I
sagaciously got to: If we bring Freddie and Fannie in, and
perhaps the third largest holder of this debt, and we asked
them what they are going to do to do a better job of
interfacing with the servicers to get the right outcome to
minimize foreclosure, to maximize benefit for these values, do
you believe we would be well served in pushing that end of it?
Because you mentioned that the servicers only have so much
money, but the real loss is at the GSEs.
Mr. Kaufman. I think the GSEs are, I mean my understanding
and you all are closer to this than I, is that the FHFA and
GSEs are already looking at compensation practices and trying
to see what they can do to reform service for compensation in
order to better align the incentives. So, yes.
Chairman Issa. Although it has been several years since
this problem began.
Mr. Kaufman. I am not here to defend the--but I think they
do recognize the issue. I mean, that the system needs to be
addressed.
Chairman Issa. This is one of the problems we find in
Government, is everybody's about to reorganize about the time
we are willing to close down something. And it seems to be
miraculous how that works.
Anyone else need to followup?
Mr. Cummings. Just real quick.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Just going back, you know we have a situation
where Mr. Matthews, I am just curious. Did you ever--you said
there was quite a bit of damage done to your place. What kind
of money did you have to spend for that?
Mr. Matthews. Basically when you start, they call it
winterizing the house----
Mr. Cummings. Yes.
Mr. Matthews. I know specifically now when you put things
through your pipes, you basically had to winterize the place,
draining pipes to make sure everything is so when it gets cold,
basically the pipes do not freeze.
Mr. Cummings. So what did it cost you to get it?
Mr. Matthews. It cost me approximately $1,500 to replace
the hot water heater and any standing pipes in my house.
Mr. Cummings. And you have not been reimbursed for that?
Mr. Matthews. No, sir. I have not been reimbursed for that
either.
Mr. Cummings. I am sorry you went through all of that. So
you are still in the process, and you are still in the process
of going through this?
Mr. Matthews. Yes, sir. There has been a lot more process,
basically we are still going through the process as we speak.
Mr. Cummings. There is just two documents I want to get
into the record, Mr. Chairman.
Aforementioned Counselor Bernard Jack Young has submitted a
statement for the record, and I ask unanimous consent that it
be included in the record.
Chairman Issa. Without objection, so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Young follows:]

Mr. Cummings. Additionally I ask that a statement from the
National Community Reinvestment Coalition be also included in
the record.
Chairman Issa. Without objection.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of the National Community
Reinvestment Coalition follows:]

Chairman Issa. Mr. Tierney.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kaufman, I agree with you that Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac could get into it. What we really need is the Federal
Housing Finance Agency who is now their overseer to come in.
Mr. Kaufman. Yes.
Mr. Tierney. And I would like very much to have them come
in front of this committee so he could answer of why he is not
acting aggressively enough to have these other, the big banks
and the other people who will make the ultimate decision on
writing down principal, why he is not insisting that they do
that, particularly where it would save the taxpayer investor in
this case and Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae money, where actually
getting a modification would save you more than going through
the foreclosure procedure, he should come in and he should
answer that or he should pack up and leave on this basis, and
the administration get going.
The head of the OCC, same thing. Why are they not using
their regulatory authority to get this thing resolved? He is
making statements on records of different hearings about
worried about the conditions of the banks. The banks have made
more money in this past year then they were making before the
recession. So I am not sure if we should be as worried about
their financial health right now as we should about these
homeowners like Mr. Matthews and the people that Ms. Wilson is
dealing with and get them going. And maybe he should pack his
bags and leave town if he cannot see a way to do the job on
that.
But I hope the chairman has a hearing and brings in the
head of the Federal Housing Financial Agency, the OCC, the
large banks and maybe start with the top five or whatever and
let them tell us why they cannot recognize reality that someday
they are going to have to acknowledge the point to all of those
mortgage loans that those properties aren't worth what they
were. And that in some instances they should and could write
down the principal, but they all refuse to recognize that and
take that step because they think somehow mystically it is
going to come around and their books are going to balance out
in the future.
So, Mr. Kaufman, you have been helpful to us and we thank
you for that.
Mr. Matthews and Ms. Wilson, thank you for your personal
stories and the work that you are doing.
And again, Mr. Matthews, to you I hope that things resolve
quickly and favorably for you and that you are so emblematic of
so many people that call my office, and the story that Ms.
Wilson told us the same. So we need to do something, and we
will. Thank you all.
Mr. Matthews. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding this field hearing.
And I thank each of you for sharing your testimony with us,
your thoughts and ideas.
And I would agree with my good colleague from Vermont that
we have a problem here now, and it is not so much the blame
game, it is how do we deal with it. How we complete the process
and get ourselves back on track. And I think, Mr. Matthews, you
illustrate something that puts a pace in front of the problem,
the key problem.
But I think we would be remiss, too, on this committee and
in Congress if we do not look back even further to 2006 or so
when indicators were very clear that we are going to have a
meltdown and Congress refused to act at that point. The
leadership refused to take the necessary steps to say ``Yes, we
have a problem and it is going to result in human suffering
that we could deal with right now if we would do it.'' That did
not take place and now we have the results.
We can talk about cramdown, we can talk about Government
getting involved, we can talk about whacking different entities
in the process, but let us not forget that when the time was
there, indicators were there that there was a financial crises
looming that was going to take this country to its knees, to a
great extent, it was not dealt with. And we would do well to
remember that for the future.
Thank you.
Chairman Issa. The ranking member.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
Just to you, Mr. Kaufman, I know that negotiations are
going on with regard to this settlement. I mean, when we read
the newspaper articles about it and whatever, it sounds like it
is going to be a robust settlement that is going to, hopefully,
and I know a lot is in dispute and you are trying to figure it
out. Without disclosing anything you should not be, I am just
wondering are you hopefully that settlement because it is going
to resolve a number of these issues? Because just the other day
some of us met with Secretary Donovan and Secretary Geithner
and they seemed to have some confidence. I was just wondering,
do you?
Mr. Kaufman. Yes, I mean we are hopeful. It is a robust
group. The States have a lot of expertise in this area from the
regulatory standpoint and from having managed, tried to deal
with the fallout of what you have seem by banning together we
have an opportunity to have a voice that individually we have
not had. For those of us that have been in the group for going
on 4 years, this is finally an opportunity to really have a
more meaningful discussion with teeth then anyone of us can
have on their own. At the end of the day anyone of us as we
talk about it falls back ``Am I going to put this guy out of
business?'' And that is a tough threat in a State where most
people are still paying and need the services that this
servicer provides on an ongoing basis.
So, you know, we are very hopeful.
Mr. Cummings. And again, I just want to thank all of our
witnesses and everybody here at the University of Maryland for
all that you have done to make this happen.
Mr. Chairman, I do appreciate you coming to Baltimore. As a
matter of fact, within 2 minutes of my house. Cannot do much
better than that. Thank you very much.
And to my colleagues, I thank you all for being here, too.
Chairman Issa. You know, next time though we've got to
figure out how to carpool.
And with that, I too would like to thank all the witnesses
and all those who attended the entire hearing.
And with that, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:34 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]


