- OBAMACARE'S EMPLOYER PENALTY AND ITS IMPACT ON TEMPORARY WORKERS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OBAMACARE'S EMPLOYER PENALTY AND ITS IMPACT ON TEMPORARY WORKERS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH CARE, DISTRICT OF

COLUMBIA, CENSUS AND THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 6, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-119

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
73-613                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Health Care, District of Columbia, Census and the
National Archives

TREY GOWDY, South Carolina, Chairman
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona, Vice         DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois, Ranking
Chairman                             Minority Member
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Columbia
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
JOE WALSH, Illinois

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on October 6, 2011..................................     1
Statement of:
Lenze, Ed, senior vice president, American Staffing
Association; John Uprichard, president/CEO, Find Great
People International; Tav Gauss, president/CEO, the Action
Group-Human Resources Solution; and Christopher Spiro,
managing director, health policy, the Center for American
Progress Action Fund.......................................     5
Gauss, Tav...............................................    28
Lenze, Ed................................................     5
Spiro, Christopher.......................................    32
Uprichard, John..........................................    23
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Gauss, Tav, president/CEO, the Action Group-Human Resources
Solution, prepared statement of............................    30
Gosar, Hon. Paul A., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona, memo dated October 5, 2011...............    44
Lenze, Ed, senior vice president, American Staffing
Association, prepared statement of.........................     6
Spiro, Christopher, managing director, health policy, the
Center for American Progress Action Fund, prepared
statement of...............................................    34
Uprichard, John, president/CEO, Find Great People
International, prepared statement of.......................    25

OBAMACARE'S EMPLOYER PENALTY AND ITS IMPACT ON TEMPORARY WORKERS

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 6, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health Care, District of Columbia,
Census and the National Archives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:33 a.m. in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Trey Gowdy
(chairman of the subcommittee), presiding.
Present: Representatives Gowdy, Gosar, Burton, Davis, Clay,
Murphy and Cummings (ex officio).
Staff present: Brian Blase, professional staff member;
Molly Boyl, parliamentarian; Drew Colliatie, staff assistant;
Sery E. Kim, counsel; Jaron Bourke, minority director of
administration; Yvette Cravins, minority counsel; Devon Hill,
minority staff assistant; and Jennifer Hoffman, minority press
secretary.
Mr. Gowdy. Good morning.
This is a hearing on Obamacare's employer penalty and its
impact on temporary workers. The committee will come to order.
I will recognize myself for an opening statement and the
distinguished gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis.
Two months ago, this committee heard from five business
owners that the new health care law will cause them to reinvest
less in their companies, reduce the number of workers on their
payrolls, automate more services and move workers into part-
time status to minimize compliance costs. The testimony
revealed that job loss from the law might be considerably worse
than the CBO predicted which was 800,000 jobs lost by the end
of the decade.
Today, we will hear from professionals in the staffing and
temporary worker industry that will highlight the negative
impact of Obamacare on their industry and the economy as a
whole. This hearing will provide a better understanding of the
vital role that staffing firms and temporary workers play in
our economy and will also reveal the negative effects of
burdensome statutes in President Obama's healthcare law.
American staffing companies are an extremely important
component of our economy. As a sector, they employ nearly 3
million workers per day and over 10 million workers annually.
For many workers and businesses, staffing firms provide an on-
the-job interview that often leads to permanent employment.
Even workers who do not gain permanent employment from their
position earn a paycheck and improve upon a skill set.
Perhaps most importantly, staffing firms promote
flexibility in the labor market which is an essential feature
of job creation. In fact, between June 2009 and June 2011, the
staffing industry added nearly half a million jobs accounting
for over 90 percent of all total non-farm job growth.
Unfortunately, this industry is threatened. The new
healthcare law was bad for temporary workers and it will harm
America's ability to have a more flexible labor force to better
compete in the global economy.
The President's healthcare law, Obamacare, contains many
reasons for this pessimism. The employer mandate provision
places a tax penalty on businesses that fail to offer their
full-time workers a health insurance package with terms
dictated by the Department of Health and Human Services. This
employer mandate places the burden of carrying out the
President's vision of healthcare reform on the backs of
businesses.
The law defines a full-time worker as an employee who works
at least 30 hours per week with respect to any month. Because
of the high administrative costs of doing calculations for each
worker each month, the Department of Treasury does not think
this provision is workable and is proposing a lookback period
of 3 to 12 months for the purposes of calculating the employer
mandate tax penalty.
The law's non-discrimination rules prohibit an employer
from providing different health insurance to different classes
of workers. The penalty for violating this non-discrimination
rule is $100 per day per affected employee. The administration
is currently writing this regulation and is seemingly oblivious
that it is commonsense to compensate different classes of
workers differently.
However, there is a common sense economic principle that
everyone can understand. As something gets more expensive,
people tend to buy less of it. With the employer mandate tax
penalty, the minimum essential benefit package and the non-
discrimination rules, this healthcare law has made the cost of
labor more expensive. These provisions will result in fewer
jobs and lower wages for many Americans and unfortunately,
those most affected will be younger workers and those with
fewer skills.
Many of these workers are just now starting their career
paths and because of this irrational law, they will have more
difficulty getting their feet in the door which will delay or
prevent them from learning the skills necessary to move up the
economic ladder. In reality, for many Americans, the American
dream will be replaced by government dependency.
The witnesses before us today may testify about the urgent
need to exempt temporary workers from the employer mandate and
non-discrimination rules. They may also call for a longer look-
back period. In essence, there will be more calls for Obamacare
waivers. A government by waiver environment, as Richard Epstein
calls it, creates uncertainty and breeds favoritism.
Uncertainty translates into economic stagnation and only
promulgates the distrust in our Federal Government.
Rather than issuing waivers to particular industries, the
healthcare law should be repealed and common sense reforms at
lower healthcare costs should be pursued. This is the only way
to combat the negative effects of the Affordable Care Act
currently rippling across our economy.
With that, I will recognize the distinguished gentleman
from Illinois, the ranking member of this committee, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to begin by thanking the witnesses for their
appearance today. I appreciate the fact that you traveled quite
a distance to share your concerns about the Affordable Care Act
and for that, we are grateful.
We want to listen to you. Our discussions with the American
people led to the Affordable Care Act. We learned there is
nothing more important and precious than good health. This
should not be a privilege afforded to just a few. The Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act provided a pathway to
accessible health care for the masses.
In an effort to balance the needs of businesses and
workers, we understand that the administration is listening too
and it has opened the process for crafting the implementation
of ACA. Innumerable hours have been spent communicating with
stakeholders, employers and employees. Several government
agencies, including the Internal Revenue Service, have
solicited public comment on a range of employment issues. This
has been and continues to be a fair, transparent and flexible
process.
The ACA was clearly designed with temporary workers in
mind. Because in America, most people have obtained health
insurance through their employer, and temporary workers have
been at a disadvantage. For many temporary work has meant
working for minimum wage or slightly higher, by the hour with
generally no access to health care. These are among the workers
receiving primary care in the emergency room. These are among
the workers that are forced into bankruptcy due to a tragic
accident.
The ACA has provided a solution to that problem for
temporary workers. The ACA is immeasurable progress, but no one
here believes that it is perfection. That is why the public
input is crucial in this process of developing and implementing
regulations for this law. Let us not lose sight of the major
achievement for temporary workers that the ACA represents.
We look forward to your testimony. Again, I thank you for
your appearance.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Illinois.
It is my pleasure now to introduce our witnesses. I would
ask you to come up at this time. On behalf of all of us, we are
delighted to have you. We appreciate your willingness to lend
us your expertise. I will introduce you from my left to right,
your right to left, and after the introductions are complete,
you will be recognized for your 5 minute opening statement.
There may be a series or panel of lights in front of you.
Those lights mean what they traditionally mean in society--a
green is go; yellow is speed up and see if you can get through
the stop light quickly; and red means, see if you can wind up
your thought. By way of reminder, make sure you turn on your
mic so we can hear you loud and clear.
Mr. Ed Lenz is senior vice president, American Staffing
Association. Thank you for joining us, Mr. Lenz. John Uprichard
is president/CEO, Find Great People International and a
resident of the State of South Carolina, I hasten to add. Mr.
Tav Gauss, president/CEO, the Action Group-Human Resources
Solution. Mr. Christopher Spiro, managing director, health
policy, the Center for American Progress Action Fund. Welcome
to each of you.
We will now recognize Mr. Lenz for his opening remarks.

STATEMENTS OF ED LENZE, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, AMERICAN
STAFFING ASSOCIATION; JOHN UPRICHARD, PRESIDENT/CEO, FIND GREAT
PEOPLE INTERNATIONAL; TAV GAUSS, PRESIDENT/CEO, THE ACTION
GROUP-HUMAN RESOURCES SOLUTION; AND CHRISTOPHER SPIRO, MANAGING
DIRECTOR, HEALTH POLICY, THE CENTER FOR AMERICAN PROGRESS
ACTION FUND

STATEMENT OF ED LENZ

Mr. Lenz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We greatly appreciate
the opportunity to testify this morning. I appreciate your
excellent overview of the issue that confronts the staffing
industry and I do appreciate Mr. Davis' comments as well. Thank
you to the other members of the subcommittee as well.
I am senior vice president for Legal and Public Affairs of
the Association which represents staffing firms throughout the
United States. I will try not to repeat all of the points the
chairman made but I will try to touch the highlights.
Staffing firms play a vital role in the economy, as you
mentioned, Mr. Chairman. We provide critical employment
flexibility for employees and businesses. We provide services
in every sector of the economy in a wide range of jobs. Mr.
Davis noted the low income workers but I think it is also
important to point out that staffing firms today provide
services in health care, information technology, engineering
and scientific sectors including professional and managerial
services. The low income worker is certainly a part of our work
force but by no means is necessarily representative of it.
We are also playing a vital role in the current economy by
keeping people working. Without the temporary work option, U.S.
unemployment rates would be much higher. You noted, Mr.
Chairman, that almost 3 million people work on any given day
but over the course of a year, 10 million go through our doors,
showing the high turnover in the temporary work force.
The reason for that primarily is that most people use
temporary work as a short term, stop gap on their way to
permanent employment. We facilitate that. One of the things we
are most concerned about the impact of this law is it would put
a dampening effect on our ability to bridge people into
permanent work.
Of course we are concerned about the impact of the employer
tax penalties. As you mentioned, they are assessed in one of
two ways. If you do offer coverage to your workers, you only
pay a tax on those people getting subsidies. If you don't offer
coverage, you pay the tax on all of your full-time employees.
Staffing firms are uniquely exposed to the penalties for
two reasons. One is the unpredictable nature of temporary work
which means that staffing firms have no way of knowing who will
be a full-time employee and therefore, won't have any way of
knowing what their penalties will be or who to enroll in
coverage.
The second is that they have limited health insurance
options for covering their temporary workers which means they
might not have a practical way to offer coverage to everybody
which means they would pay penalties on all their full-time
employees, not just those getting subsidies, so it is a
conundrum.
The historical reason for why there is limited overage for
temporary employees is simple. It stems from the fact that they
are short term, high turnover workers and when given the option
of health coverage, they generally refuse it. Only a tiny
fraction of temporary employees accept coverage from their
employer even when it is available. It is hard to get insurance
companies to write that kind of coverage.
The result has been that the low cost, so-called mini-med
plans have been the only practical option for most staffing
firms. If they are abolished, staffing firms may not have an
economical way to offer coverage, especially if the new non-
discrimination rules limit their ability to provide flexible
coverage for workers as they need it and to the extent they
need it.
To address these issues, we need two things to happen. I
should say parenthetically and without minimizing the point, we
are strongly in favor of health care insurance for people and
for reform in general. We think many of the aspects of this
bill are sound and to be applauded but as structured, it
creates enormous problems for employers that need to be
addressed and we are hoping that they can be.
First, we need a sensible definition of who is a full-time
employee. You mentioned the look-back rule Treasury is
currently considering. We strongly support that. It ought to be
a look back of at least 12 months we believe.
Second, we need to have viable health insurance options for
temporary employees meaning that the non-discrimination rules
have to be drafted so as to permit that. We are working with
the administration, as I mentioned to do that but our concern
is that the statute may not afford enough leeway for them to do
what they need to do to fix the problem. Our preference would
be for the employer penalties to be repealed entirely or
substantially reduced or modified.
Staffing firms operate on razor thin margins and they
cannot afford to put those costs through to employers. If they
do, as you pointed out, the result will be fewer temporary
jobs. The elimination of the penalties would resolve that
problem and we hope that Congress would consider doing that.
We appreciate the opportunity to testify. We look forward
to working with you in the future. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lenz follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.017

Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Lenz.
Mr. Uprichard.

STATEMENT OF JOHN UPRICHARD

Mr. Uprichard. Mr. Chairman, and members of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity to be here today to discuss the
impact of health care reform on the staffing industry and my
company specifically.
My name is John Uprichard and I am the president and CEO of
Find Great People. We are a temporary staffing and executive
search firm headquartered in Greenville, SC with offices
throughout the Carolinas. We have actually been in business or
30 years and have provided job opportunities and stability to
thousands of people throughout the Carolinas as well as
nationwide. We work very hard to take good care of our
employees and as a result, we have been recognized as Best
Place to Work in South Carolina for 3 years in a row.
In order to help clarify the ramifications of health care
reform on my organization, I would like to give you some
background on my company. We currently have 50 internal
employees with an average salary of $64,000 a year and an
average tenure of 5 years. Our internal payroll for 2010 was
$2.9 million. Our temporary payroll was $7.4 million.
We provide 100 percent of our internal employees health
insurance and long term disability insurance premiums. We also
give them access to our 401(k) retirement savings plan and in
addition, they have generous time off as well. We believe our
internal employees are vital to the success of our organization
and we are very committed to their individual financial success
and stability.
Moving to the folks who work with us on a temporary basis,
we also recognize the need to provide fair, competitive wages
and benefits to them. We currently have 400 people working for
us on a temporary basis at one time. The average wage is
$14.28, well above the national minimum wage.
We provide these temporary employees with access to mini-
med coverage that is not dependent on their temporary work
schedule because we know their hours will fluctuate and we want
them to have consistent access to medical care. In addition,
they have access to our 401(k) program.
The average assignment length for one of our temporary
employees is 5 months. In most cases, the temporary assignments
serve as a bridge to a full-time job opportunity either with
one of our clients or a different employer of their choice.
Those full-time job opportunities are usually dependent upon
their performance with the opportunity given by one of our
customers.
As we began to study the impact of health care reform on
our business, we quickly recognized there were some very
significant and unintended consequences. First is cost. Based
upon historical volumes, our monthly health care costs would
increase by $62,000 to $76,000 per month. That is a
mathematical problem for us.
In addition, the administrative cost to comply with the
regulatory and compliance aspects would be over $40,000
annually. Offering coverage to temporary employees will be
difficult because their hours fluctuate and they are moving in
and out of coverage constantly. Also, it is essential to note
that we do not control the hours. Those are controlled by the
clients to whom we provide the service.
Ultimately, health care reform legislation imposes large
employer costs in infrastructure on staffing firms like FGP
because we cannot qualify as a small business. We technically
have 400 employees but only 50 are regular, full-time staff.
You might ask why can't we pass on this cost to our
customers? This is a question we have studied the feasibility
of. We do not believe it is a viable solution based upon our
recent experience with increased cost from our State
unemployment taxes. In 2011 in the State of South Carolina, we
had a 300 percent increase in our State unemployment taxes. We
had to have this conversation with our customers and we
received significant pushback. Our volume started to drop as a
result of these conversations.
Once we take into account the increased cost from health
care reform and unemployment taxes, we really hit a ceiling on
price where the client actually looks at the cost benefit
analysis and says it doesn't make sense and it is an
affordability issue. As a result, jobs are going to be
impacted. Unfortunately, those jobs will be impacted within our
own organization for the full-time and temporary folks that
work with us. This could result in hundreds of jobs per year.
That is what keeps me up at night, that is difficult.
The people who have helped us build this company,
especially the 50 employees that are with us internally who
have been with us several years, if we are unable to move
forward, we have to make a business decision. We will not close
as a company but we will more than likely get out of the
temporary staffing business which means we will have to down
size those employees who have worked with us for many years.
I appreciate the opportunity to come before the committee
today. I would ask that the committee strongly support the
look-back rule the Treasury Department is now considering.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Uprichard follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.020

Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Uprichard.
Mr. Gauss.

STATEMENT OF TAV GAUSS

Mr. Gauss. Mr. Chairman, distinguished members of the
committee, thank you for having me here today.
I am Tav Gauss. I am from eastern North Carolina. I started
my business 30 years ago after going to the University of North
Carolina, the real Carolina, and then Wake Forest University
and then being a commercial banker.
So as not to repeat what you have already heard, it is in
my testimony but let me get down to some brass tacks. I have 16
permanent people in my company whose payroll is over $1 million
a year. We are in eastern North Carolina. I think two of my
folks have a college degree; the rest are high school degreed
or associates. The average tenure with the company during the
30 years is 18 years.
These people are benefited with health insurance for which
they pay a premium, a significantly large premium. We have a
huge deductible. We have a 401(k) plan that is open to our
permanent staff as well as our field staff. The field staff, to
my knowledge, there have been fewer than 50 people who have
wanted to contribute to that in the 30 years we have been in
business. We match the 5 percent match or whatever and we do
that for field staff as well. We have a lot of vacation time
for our permanent staff and we have paid vacation for our
temporary staff who have been with us over 1,500 hours and it
continues on as long as they live with us at certain levels.
We have 1,700 field staff this year. Mini-med plans have
been offered to them since 1992. I cannot tell you the numbers
that have come across our desk and the ones that would work and
wouldn't work, and so forth. To my knowledge, we have never had
a temporary staffer take their portion of the mini-med plan. I
can say that with 99 percent positivity. They would rather have
the money.
My temporary staff makes an average of $9.25 an hour which
is significantly above the prevailing minimum wage in North
Carolina and the Federal Government. We live in, I wouldn't say
a rural part of the State, but we are not in the metropolitan
part of the State. If you take $9.25 an hour, that annualizes
at a little less than $20,000 a year. They would much rather
have that extra $30 or $40 a week, or whatever, than to pay for
medical care. Some are young and think they are bullet proof
and think they don't need it, and some would rather have the
money.
If the health care plan goes in as it is written now, my
premiums for health insurance will go from $80,000 a year to
$711,000 a year. I would close my doors. All of my people would
be out of work, temporary and permanent staff. If I was able to
pass some of that cost onto my temporary staff, say 20 percent,
I am still out of business because it goes from $80,000 to
$500,000.
In an effort to skip ahead if I may say this, I know this
bill was passed with good intentions by everybody who signed
off on it. There is no doubt in my mind we need reform in
health care. When I look at my personal situation with the
$5,000 and $10,000 deductible, that is pretty high, but when
you take the health care plan and put it on top of the
increases in Federal unemployment taxes, State unemployment
taxes, regulatory more and more rules and laws and fees being
charged and fines being raised and charged, this is a piling
on.
I ask that you please put it off for a while until we get
the loose ends tied up. We cannot figure out how to stay in
business the way this plan is written now. By the way, the
Treasury's idea on look back is not a bad idea, but it needs to
be 12 months. Three months is way too short a period of time
for a lot of obvious reasons that I won't go into here.
Thank you for your time and thank you for listening. I
appreciate it.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gauss follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.022

Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Gauss.
Mr. Spiro.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER SPIRO

Mr. Spiro. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Davis, thank you
for the opportunity to testify today.
Starting in 2014, all Americans will have access to
affordable health insurance. Carl Camden, president and CEO of
Kelly Services, one of the largest employers of temporary
workers, explains why this is so important: ``The United States
remains the only advanced nation in which individuals lack
access to affordable group health coverage outside the
employment setting. As a result, health insurance related job
lock afflicts millions which is bad for entrepreneurship, worse
for economic dynamism and frustrating for an industry that
relies on a free agent work force. Simply put, non-traditional
workers are treated badly by the current model. Any policy
choice that enhances the availability and mobility of talent is
a good thing for the staffing industry and the economy as a
whole.''
As Mr. Camden observes, access to affordable health
insurance will benefit not only workers, but also their
employers. Preventive care will reduce absenteeism and increase
and the productivity of workers. Health care costs for the
uninsured will no longer be shifted onto employers through
higher premiums and for staffing firms, millions of newly
insured Americans will create demand for health care workers of
all types.
In addition to these economic benefits, many temporary
workers who work long, hard hours but may be struggling to pay
the bills and cannot afford health insurance through no fault
of their own, will not lay awake at night out of fear that a
family member will become sick, sending the family over the
edge into bankruptcy.
If you agree with Mr. Camden that access to affordable
health insurance is a good thing, as I do, then employer
responsibility is an essential piece of the puzzle. It provides
an incentive for employers that currently offer coverage to
maintain that coverage. Otherwise, many employers might drop
coverage and allow taxpayers to pick up the tab, which would
increase the Federal deficit by billions of dollars. In fact,
the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office concluded that the
absence of employer responsibility would significantly erode
employer-based coverage.
Simple financial comparisons of potential penalty
liabilities to the cost of coverage may not drive employer
decisions. Many employers offer coverage because their
employees expect them to do so and they want to remain
competitive in the labor market. Since individuals will have a
responsibility to maintain coverage, there will be much more
demand for their employers to offer it.
Finally, the cost of coverage will still be excluded from
income and payroll taxes. In fact, in Massachusetts, enrollment
in employer-based coverage actually increased even during the
recession. Therefore, it is not surprising CBO concluded that
the Affordable Care Act would have very little effect on
employer-based coverage.
Congress carefully targeted employer responsibility under
the Affordable Care Act and the Treasury Department is
carefully examining how to implement the law so that it is
practical and flexible for employers. I want to highlight
several aspects of the statute and its implementation that
demonstrate this careful approach.
First, and most importantly, employer responsibility only
applies to large employers with at least 50 full-time
employees. As a result, the vast majority of employers will be
exempt from employer responsibility altogether. Second, small
employers do not become large employers just because they hire
seasonal workers. Third, since penalties apply with respect to
full-time employees, the definition of full-time employee is
important. Treasury has proposed a safe harbor in which an
employer can generally look back up to 12 months to determine
whether employees averaged at least 30 hours per week.
Employers for Flexibility in Health Care, a coalition of
employers that rely on large numbers of temporary workers,
strongly supports Treasury's proposal, commenting that it ``has
the potential to provide flexibility employers need to preserve
flexible work arrangements, provide a stable source of coverage
and allow for the practical administration of benefits.''
In addition to proposing the safe harbor, Treasury has
requested comments on alternative methods. Of course any method
must not undermine the purpose of employer responsibility that
I discussed earlier to prevent erosion of employer-based
coverage which would be disruptive and increase cost to
taxpayers.
In closing, employers of temporary workers need not fear
employer responsibility. It is an essential part of health
reform which will expand access to affordable health insurance
to millions of Americans. Mr. Camden of Kelly Services writes,
``Someone suggested that higher penalties imposed on staffing
firms will narrow the cost advantage of using temporary
employees and thus, weaken demand for our services. I think
that concern is misplaced.'' Rather, Mr. Camden sees
significant opportunity that the Affordable Care Act will
``accelerate the growth of non-traditional workers and remove
longstanding barriers to employment options.''
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony and I am happy to
answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Spiro follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.028

Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Spiro.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses are to be sworn
before they testify, so I would ask you to please rise and
raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Gowdy. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
All of us are subject to being called for votes at any
minute, so in that case, we will go as quickly as we can to
vote and then come back as quickly as we can so that we can all
be good stewards of your time. We do not control the floor and
the timing of votes.
Mr. Spiro, are you familiar with the phrase pyrrhic
victory?
Mr. Spiro. Yes, I am.
Mr. Gowdy. What is a pyrrhic victory?
Mr. Spiro. It is a victory that at first is small but turns
out to be not a victory.
Mr. Gowdy. Right. It when you win the battle but all your
soldiers die.
Mr. Spiro. Correct.
Mr. Gowdy. The gentlemen to the right of you just testified
that they are going to lay off workers if this is not changed
and yet you, and I would assume you would agree with me, they
have better access to information with respect to their
businesses than you do? Do you agree with that?
Mr. Spiro. I agree he probably has more access to
information about his workers than I do.
Mr. Gowdy. That is not a trick question. They have better
access to the numbers within their own business than you would
have and they both testified that they are going to lay off
workers if this isn't changed. I guess my question, and it may
be a rhetorical question, are you better to have access to full
health care and no job or are you better to have a job and a
mini-med plan?
Mr. Spiro. Mr. Chairman, they are still implementing the
law. Treasury is still carefully implementing the law, so they
do not have full information about how the law will be
implemented.
Mr. Gowdy. Which raises another point. Did you testify
before any committee or subcommittee when they were debating or
considering the Affordable Care Act?
Mr. Spiro. No, I did not.
Mr. Gowdy. Do you know anyone who did?
Mr. Spiro. Yes.
Mr. Gowdy. You do? How many committee hearings did they
have?
Mr. Spiro. There were several committee hearings over a
span of many years leading up to the passage of the Affordable
Care Act.
Mr. Gowdy. And amendments were able to be offered?
Mr. Spiro. I can't speak to that.
Mr. Gowdy. Do you know if any representatives from the
businesses to your right were able to give their perspective on
it?
Mr. Spiro. I am happy to go back and search through the
hearing record.
Mr. Gowdy. What do you think the Speaker meant when she
said ``We will have to pass it to see what is in it?''
Mr. Spiro. I think she meant perhaps that the benefits of
the Affordable Care Act only will be realized in 2014. It will
take some time for the general public to become comfortable
with this law, but I think I agree with the Speaker that once
people have experience under the law, as they have had in
Massachusetts, the public overwhelmingly supports that law.
Mr. Gowdy. Mr. Uprichard, you have such a good reputation
in the State of South Carolina personally and your business
does as well. The thing I was struck by when you and I met and
talked is there wasn't a partisan comment that came out of your
mouth. There wasn't an ideological comment that came out of
your mouth. There wasn't a political comment that came out of
your mouth. To this day, I do not know your politics. Frankly,
it is none of my business.
The entire extent of our conversation was your concern for
whether or not you were going to have to lay off your workers
because of this. I would like you to tell me--take a minute or
minute and a half--tell me this has nothing to do with politics
from your perspective. This is all about saving your business
and allowing you to provide jobs to people that you care deeply
about and you are genuinely fearful that if this is not
changed, you are not going to be able to keep them.
Mr. Uprichard. You are correct, that is really what keeps
me up at night. When we look at our staffing business, the
margins are not significant, they are thin. When we have
significant increased costs we can't pass on to our customers,
it becomes a mathematical problem.
We also take on significant risk with our staffing
business, personal guarantees that I personally guarantee
millions of dollars in working capital for this staffing
business to run. As a business owner, one of the things I have
to do is a cost benefit and risk analysis. As the margins
erode, the risk is too great and it doesn't make sense to move
forward.
The challenge with that is we have built a great company
and I have 50 employees who have been with us for several
years, people that I am friends with. I coach their kids in
soccer, I see them all the time out in the community and they
earn high wages. The challenge will be that we will no longer
be able to move forward with temporary staffing as part of the
services that we offer which means I will reduce my
infrastructure resulting in probably at least half our
employees losing their jobs.
With the impact on our industry, they really aren't able to
go get jobs with other staffing companies because they will
also be impacted as well. That is what keeps me up at night and
that is what is important because that is what I am responsible
for, is making sure we provide a paycheck to those 50 employees
as well as the temporary employees we have out on billing on a
weekly basis.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Uprichard.
I would now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, the
ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Again, I want to thank the witnesses for being here.
Mr. Lenz, let me ask, what would you say are the basic
reasons for temporary employment?
Mr. Lenz. That is a broad question and there are many
answers. Some of them are from the worker standpoint and others
from the business standpoint. Employees use temporary help most
often as a stop gap when they are out of work, looking for new
work or simply looking for a different kind of opportunity.
Students, retired people make up a huge portion of the work
force. In the current environment, lots of people are
unemployed and the only work they can find is temporary work.
The reason why temporary jobs constitute such a huge
portion of the new jobs that have been created since the
recession technically ended in June 2009 is precisely because
of business uncertainty or concern about making a commitment to
permanent hire, but they still need to get the job done, so the
temporary employees are a way for them to get the job done and
a way to keep a substantial portion of the population employed.
That is a unique situation in the current environment.
From the business standpoint, more generally, I think the
key word is flexibility. Most labor economists recognize that
flexible labor markets is one reason why we have had in the
past and hopefully will again soon in the future, such a
dynamic economy because employers can make employment decisions
based on the needs of their businesses and the conditions in
the economy and use labor as needed.
I think it is also important to point out that temporary
jobs represent a relatively small percentage of non-farm jobs
on a daily basis, really less than 2 percent, but we play a
disproportionate role in the economy because we provide that
flexibility to both employees and to employers.
Mr. Davis. Let me ask, would a diminution of temporary work
foster an increase in full-time work?
Mr. Uprichard. I don't think so, perhaps at the margin,
some, but there is such reluctance on the part of businesses to
over hire and to burden themselves with workers they cannot
sustain and cannot support because the business is not there
that I do not think that shortfall would be made up in
permanent jobs by any means.
Mr. Davis. Mr. Gauss, do you think seasonal work becomes a
big factor in this as well?
Mr. Gauss. Yes. Seasonal work, where I come from, usually
has to do with agriculture and you do not find temporary
employees, by definition, in the agricultural seasonal work but
I have friends in Miami and New York and the seasons for the
hotel workers, the restaurant workers, and once the season is
over, then they go someplace else and put them wherever else
they are needed. Could I expand a little on your question?
Mr. Davis. Yes.
Mr. Gauss. When I first started this years and years ago,
basically when someone would call us it was because someone was
going to be out on vacation. As time has gone by, most of my
business is manufacturing. Light industrial is what we call it
in our industry. Industries, especially with the global
economy, have to be more flexible.
To answer your question, if our industries were only doing
business in the United States of America, there may be more
permanent hiring--they are scared to death--but it is not and
we are competing against a lot of low wage countries. For our
manufacturers to stay flexible, it protects the jobs of their
permanent employees. If they have too many permanent employees
onboard, they have to lay off a ton of people. If they layoff
temporary staff here, we can put this temporary staff someplace
else.
Mr. Davis. Finally, quickly, do you think that under the
Affordable Care Act more small businesses will be able to
provide some form of health care for their workers than without
it?
Mr. Gauss. Small business is defined as what?
Mr. Davis. Individual companies with 25 or less employees?
Mr. Gauss. It doesn't apply to me. Actually, I am two
businesses. I am considered a large business by statute, yet we
have less than 50 permanent employees.
As I said, my portion right now is $80,000 a year; my staff
pays about $40,000 a year. We have 16 people and there is a
$5,000 deductible and a $10,000 family deductible. To answer
your question, I have no earthly idea. I would love to think
mine would come down.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lenz. Mr. Chairman, may I respond to Mr. Davis briefly
on the small business aspect of this? I think it is an
important question and a good question.
The problem is the definition of small business rarely does
a staffing firm very much good and the reason for that is most
staffing firms have very small permanent staffs and large
numbers of temporary employees that come and go. If you were to
measure the size of the company by revenue, they might be small
under Small Business administration standards, but by head
count standards, they almost always exceed 25 and even 50 and
with respect to the State health insurance exchanges, they have
more than 100, and you have to be awfully small to meet those
head count thresholds. The vast majority of staffing firms
cannot meet them.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Illinois.
The Chair would now recognize the distinguished gentleman
from Arizona, Dr. Gosar.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the
record, testimony from a ski area in Flagstaff, AZ which I
would like to highlight that talks about temporary workers.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73613.029

Dr. Gosar. This letter basically highlights what we do in
the west when we have temporary solutions as far as utilizing a
ski area that may operate as little as 6 weeks out of a year,
and as many as 4 months out of a year. That gives us a great
idea.
Mr. Spiro, have you ever run a business?
Mr. Spiro. No.
Dr. Gosar. So you have never signed the back end of a
paycheck?
Mr. Spiro. That is correct.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Gauss, you have been in business for 30
years; I was in business for about 27 years in health care, by
the way. How much has your overhead gone up in the
administrative aspect in regard to rules and regulations?
Mr. Gauss. I would say a good 75 percent over the last
eight or 9 years.
Dr. Gosar. Interesting.
Mr. Spiro, do you think the government has a right to turn
out the lights on a business?
Mr. Spiro. No, but I do not think they are turning out the
light on business.
Dr. Gosar. How would you answer these two gentlemen if
these rules go into effect, and they are fairly nebulous rules,
how would they stay in business?
Mr. Spiro. Congressman, I have not seen all the numbers and
assumptions they have used. All I can tell you is that the CBO
studied this issue comprehensively. They looked at all the
studies out there and concluded that the effects of the
Affordable Care Act on the labor markets would be purely
marginal.
Dr. Gosar. It actually shows--lets us go back and
recalibrate that. It actually shows that we lose a significant
amount of jobs and costs incredibly more than what was
originally orchestrated. Is that true?
Mr. Spiro. I disagree with your conclusion.
Dr. Gosar. That isn't what the CBO said?
Mr. Spiro. They said there would be marginal effects.
Dr. Gosar. Let me ask you a question. You are familiar with
the Massachusetts model?
Mr. Spiro. I am somewhat familiar but I am not from
Massachusetts.
Dr. Gosar. But you cited it, did you not?
Mr. Spiro. That is correct, I did cite it in my testimony.
Dr. Gosar. Have premiums gone up?
Mr. Spiro. They have gone up as they have gone up
everywhere around the country.
Dr. Gosar. So it is not a solution?
Mr. Spiro. It was never intended to lower cost. They are
now engaging in a second round of payment reforms intended to
lower costs.
Dr. Gosar. What you are saying to me--you actually
highlighted it for me--it was a solution process but it is not
a solution process because we have seen these premiums going up
all over the place.
Mr. Spiro. It was a solution to the problem of the
uninsured and on that score, Massachusetts has been found to be
wildly successful and popular, reducing the uninsured rate to a
couple of percent.
Dr. Gosar. Let me ask you the question, where was that
money dumped? Was it on the backs of the businesses or on the
taxpayer? Let me answer it for you--on the taxpayer.
Mr. Spiro. It was from taking the cost of uncompensated
care and redistributing it so that it was not being shifted
onto higher premiums for employers.
Dr. Gosar. So let me ask the next question. Premiums went
up then or went down? From what you just said, it should have
gone down. They went up, sir. When you run a business you
understand how those dynamics work and obviously you need to
spend some time in the private sector before you start pulling
out rules.
How do you feel about that, Mr. Gauss? Does the government
have the right to turn your lights off by these rules and
regulations?
Mr. Gauss. No, sir, they do not.
Dr. Gosar. It seems to me there was a lot of nebulism in
this. We talked about mini-med plans. We asked the Secretary to
define the number to use in mini-med plans and holy cow we went
off on tens of millions of dollars and gave waivers to 1,500
industries, picking and choosing. Do you think that was fair?
Mr. Gauss. No, I do not.
Dr. Gosar. How do you feel about that, Mr. Uprichard?
Mr. Uprichard. I would agree with Mr. Gauss, I do not think
it is fair. We are trying to run a for profit business, we are
trying to make a difference in peoples' lives. As we have seen
over the last few years, even with our current economy, it is
not easy. More regulations, more increased costs that we cannot
pass on to our customers will force us out of business.
Dr. Gosar. A business is run on a somewhat fairly certain
environment. You have to have some variance in making sure you
are able to, God forbid, make a profit because that is the only
way you can open your doors, keep your doors open to do that.
Do you see the environment that was created by this law making
it more certain or less certain?
Mr. Uprichard. I see it becoming less certain because the
forecasting will be much more difficult. We look at hours right
now but we will have to look at hours in a very different way
because of the fluctuation in hours of the temporary workers,
it will be incredibly difficult to forecast and people moving
in and out of coverage will also be very difficult to forecast.
The administrative and compliance piece will really be
problematic for our business.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Arizona.
The Chair would now recognize the distinguished gentleman
from Maryland, the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have been listening to all of this and I was just
wondering, Mr. Uprichard, you are from South Carolina?
Mr. Uprichard. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. You realize in 2009, 16 percent of the people
in South Carolina had no insurance? Did you know that?
Mr. Uprichard. No, sir, I did not know that.
Mr. Cummings. It is a fact. I ran a small law firm for
years and we had to do some sacrificing to provide our people
with insurance but we also wanted healthy people. I know you
are a responsible business person and I respect what you are
doing. I know business is hard. If you were to testify before
folks in a hearing like this, I know you would want people to
be insured, would you not? You would want people generally to
be insured?
Mr. Uprichard. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Because if they are not insured, in many
instances, as in my district, they die. I want you to
understand that, dead, gone. I am just wondering what solution
would you have, if any, you don't have to answer this, to help
people get insurance? I am not saying this is the answer. Do
you have an answer on that or does it matter? Do we just let
them die?
Mr. Uprichard. No, sir, we do not let them die, but we
create a model that is practical and provides flexibility and
has, for example, a 12-month look-back rule.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Spiro, they asked you about the
Massachusetts model. I find it so interesting that obviously
when Governor Romney was the Governor, he must have felt there
was a need for some kind of care act and opponents of the
Affordable Care Act ignored the reality that the health reform
law could have positive impacts on the economy in addition to
reducing the deficit over the next two decades, the ACA could
result in significantly improving health outcomes in this
country.
The number of people without health insurance rose in 2010
and is estimated to be 49.9 million Americans, an increase of
900,000 from 2009. Expanding health coverage definitely
improves health outcomes by helping people obtain preventive
care. A large part of the Affordable Care Act of course is
trying to help people stay well so they can have employees, am
I right, because if you are sick, you can't work?
Mr. Spiro. That is correct, Congressman. Of course it
benefits employees and improves their health but we can't
forget how that also benefits employers. As I said in my
testimony, it reduces absenteeism and increases productivity.
That will ripple through the economy. It also deals with the
problem of job block where people feel like they can't move to
another job where they might be more productive. All those
benefits are for workers but also their employers.
Mr. Cummings. The ACA also includes a provision in which
certain employers, those with at least 50 full-time employees,
would pay a penalty for not offering health care coverage or if
the insurance they offer does not meet certain criteria and at
least one of their workers receives a subsidy from individuals.
My colleagues on the other side have argued that this
penalty would dramatically lead to sharp reductions in
employment. In contrast, the CBO has concluded that such
penalties on firms with 50 or more employees that do not offer
health insurance would have little effect on hiring.
Mr. Spiro, do you believe that such penalties will force
employers to dramatically change their hiring practices? I have
heard the testimony of these gentlemen. This is the other part.
Mr. Spiro, the State of Massachusetts also had an employer
responsibility provision in their health plan which served as
the model. I think we need to make sure it is clear. Mr.
Romney, who is now running for President, who now acts like he
doesn't like his own plan, some have called it Romneycare but
my understanding is that the employer responsibility provisions
of Romneycare are much stricter than those in the ACA with
penalties applying to employers with 10 or more full-time
employees. Has Massachusetts seen a decline or increase in
enrollment in employer-based coverage?
Mr. Spiro. You are right to point out that the
Massachusetts employer penalty is much broader in scope. Even
so, the vast majority of employers are exempt. That is the key
to remember that the employer responsibility under the
Affordable Care Act will exempt the vast majority of employers.
As you said, the CBO has studied this issue. It will have
very marginal effect on the labor market and employment.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you. I see my time is up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Maryland.
The Chair would now recognize the distinguished gentleman
from Indiana, Mr. Burton.
Mr. Burton. Who was the chairman of this committee for 6
years. That is my ugly face up there on the wall. I have been
around here for a long, long time, 29 years. How old are you,
young man?
Mr. Spiro. How old am I?
Mr. Burton. Yes.
Mr. Spiro. Thirty-six.
Mr. Burton. You were 7 years old when I came to Congress.
Let me start off by saying to my colleague, my good buddy
down there, that in Indiana we don't let people die. If people
don't have insurance, they still get to go to the emergency
room and they do get coverage. I think it is probably that way
in every part of the country.
There is no question about it, Mr. Spiro, we need to make
some changes in health care. You are absolutely right. We have
come up with a bill that we think solves that problem in a
little more effective way than the Affordable Care, we like to
call it the Obamacare Act.
We believe that small businesses ought to be able to band
together to buy insurance like major corporations do so they
can get the better rate. We believe you ought to be able to buy
insurance across State lines so that companies out West or in
the Midwest can compete with companies in the East.
We believe there ought to be medical savings accounts with
tax deductible options in there so that people and the
employers put money into an account; if the people don't use
that money, say $3,000 a year, it is carried over to the next
year and the next year. Then there is a major medical policy
above that which takes it to $100,000 or more. There are a
whole host of things in our bill that does not cause the
Federal Government to start sticking its nose into the private
sector, but you are absolutely right, we do need to make
changes.
I am now the chairman of Europe and Eurasia on the Foreign
Affairs Committee. I just got back from Greece. Greece has had
a government that has from cradle to grave taken care of
people. They stuck their nose into everything. Do you know what
they are doing to salaries today? They are cutting them by 40
percent. Do you know what they are doing to retirement
benefits? They are cutting them by 40 percent. They are raising
taxes on property and doing it through the utilities over
there. I talked to a policeman who was very supportive of the
government until they started doing this and realized that
government control over the private sector only leads to chaos.
The same thing is happening in Italy, in Spain, and in
Portugal. In Ireland, they had a little different situation but
they are in bad trouble as well. All those things do have an
impact on the United States of America.
I guess the thing I would like to get across is the private
sector is the engine that drives this country, that makes this
country great, not government, not government regulation or the
government sticking its nose into the private sector. We need
to get government out of the way so the private sector can
flourish and create jobs.
The only way our government can create jobs is to take
taxpayers' money. You mentioned the term redistribution of
wealth. The only way the government can do that is to take
money away from the guy that is an entrepreneur that's creating
jobs and give it to somebody else from the government. It just
creates a big mess.
Right now I do not know how many regulations we have added
to the mix in the last couple of years but I think it is about
500 to 600 or more. That is another albatross around the neck
of the private sector. It is just really sad.
When I hear a businessman like Mr. Gauss and Mr. Uprichard,
I did not hear you, Mr. Lenz, I apologize because I was late
getting here, when I hear them telling us that they are going
to lay off people because of government intrusion into their
business, whether healthcare or anything else, it really
bothers me. I had my own business, and I started it by myself,
and I know what it means to have government sticking their nose
into your business.
You are absolutely right. We need to do everything we can
to make it more affordable for people. The way to do that is,
as I said, to get government out of the way, to create
incentives for business and industry to provide insurance, to
give tax incentives for people to do that, not to have the
government come in and say you have to do this, because it only
leads to a really big problem.
I hope that you and other young people like you who are
interested in doing good for the country will take a little
look at history and look at what is going on in other countries
around the world where the government has been very intrusive
because it does not work. It didn't work in Russia, it does not
work in Greece, it will not work in Spain, it has not worked in
Italy and it is not going to work here.
What will happen is government will cause the free
enterprise system to collapse. We need to be a help to the
private sector by creating incentives for them to do the things
that need to be done. That is why the approach we think needs
to be taken is to create incentives for the private sector to
do the right thing without government intrusion.
I will not ask any questions. I just thought I would get
that off my chest, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Spiro. Mr. Chairman, may I respond?
Mr. Gowdy. Let me do this because they have a call for
votes and only because the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Clay,
is such an efficient questioner and is a pithy with both his
questions and knows you will be with your answers, we will try
to get the gentleman from Missouri in so we do not have to go
vote and waste a hour of your time. With that, the
distinguished gentleman from Missouri.
Mr. Clay. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I will be
efficient and keep it brief.
Some have argued that employers face considerable confusion
and uncertainty about the ACA including what it will cost
employers in 2014, thus making planning for the future
difficult. However, the Federal Government Web site
www.healthcare.gov was launched after the ACA was enacted.
Managed by the Department of Health and Human Services, this
Web site provides comprehensive information about the
provisions of the ACA, including a small business site with up-
to-date guidance on small business tax credits, coverage
options and reinsurance for retirees, among other things.
Mr. Spiro, do you believe there is a lack of information
available for small businesses explaining the provisions of the
ACA?
Mr. Spiro. Congressman, there is a wealth of resources, as
you mentioned, www.healthcare.gov, there are calculators so
that small businesses can figure out if they are eligible for a
tax credit. In addition, on this very issue with respect to
temporary workers, you can see the Treasury Department is being
very responsive and they sent out a Notice for Request for
Comment before even issuing a proposed rule. They are gathering
those comments and they are going to then issue a proposed
rule, then get more comments before issuing a final rule. It
has been a very transparent process and they have gone out of
their way to solicit feedback from stakeholders such as the
other witnesses at the table.
Mr. Clay. Could the Federal Government do a better job of
making sure the necessary information is available for
employers as they seek to comply with the ACA's requirements?
Mr. Spiro. I think there is lots of information out there
and I think hearings like this are an important piece of that
to make the public aware of issues surrounding implementation.
Obviously, always more can be done but I am very pleased with
the way the administration has been transparent and seeking
comments and being responsive.
Mr. Clay. On that point, for the entire panel, the IRS, HHS
and Treasury have all conducted outreach to stakeholders to
provide comment and guidance on a broad range of employment
definitions. Did any of you provide comment to the agencies or
departments promulgating these guidelines to express your
concerns? Mr. Lenz.
Mr. Lenz. Yes, sir, we have. We have been working very
closely with the administration and we do appreciate the
efforts that are being made, but it is a complex subject and we
are concerned they may not get it right or may not have the
legal authority to do what they need to do to fix the concerns
that we have.
Mr. Clay. Thank you. Mr. Uprichard.
Mr. Uprichard. Yes, sir, Mr. Clay, we have. As a matter of
fact, I have been working closely with the Deputy of Health and
Human Services for the Southeast, Anton Gunn. He is actually
coming to Greenville to speak to some of our customer base on
November 15th. When I was coming to D.C., he did try to make
some introductions for me to the folks at the Treasury
Department and Internal Revenue Service but they were
unresponsive with the request for a meeting.
Mr. Clay. Thank you. Mr. Gauss.
Mr. Gauss. Yes, sir, I did, mostly through Mr. Lenz because
I have been fighting on the State level because of unemployment
taxes going through the ceiling.
If I could answer about the Web site information, it is
thorough enough for me. That is where I got the $711,000 that
is going to put me out of business. That is how I understood it
and I am in the trenches. I am on the ground, boots on the
ground.
Mr. Clay. Thank you for that response. Mr. Spiro, would you
care to respond to Mr. Burton's comment?
Mr. Spiro. Do we have time, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Gowdy. You have to solve all the world's problems in 37
seconds.
Mr. Spiro. I would just respond that the Affordable Care
Act is fundamentally a market-based solution. It is not single
pair healthcare as you would find in Europe. I think that is
why Mitt Romney supported it in Massachusetts. I would say when
you raise the issue of Greece and debt problems in Europe, that
is exactly why the Affordable Care Act was necessary. The CBO
found that it reduced the deficit $143 billion over the first
10 years and continues to reduce the deficit in subsequent
decades. I think repealing the Affordable Care Act would have
the opposite effect and would worsen our debt problems.
Mr. Gowdy. On behalf of all of us, we want to thank our
witnesses for your expertise, for your collegiality toward one
another, and for your helpfulness to this committee on what is
a very important issue. Thank all four of you.
I am not singling out anyone, but Mr. Uprichard, safe
passage back to Heavens Gateway in the up State of South
Carolina.
With that, the committee is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 10:39 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


