- ASSESSING MEDICARE AND MEDICAID PROGRAM INTEGRITY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ASSESSING MEDICARE AND MEDICAID PROGRAM INTEGRITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION,
EFFICIENCY AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 7, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-176

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

75-794 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Government Organization, Efficiency and Financial
Management

TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania, Chairman
CONNIE MACK, Florida, Vice Chairman  EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York, Ranking
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma                 Minority Member
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas                  Columbia

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on June 7, 2012.....................................     1

WITNESSES

Dr. Peter Budetti, Director of Center for Program Integrity,
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Oral Statement...............................................     5
Written Statement............................................     7
Ms. Ann Maxwell, Regional Inspector General for Evaluation and
Human Services
Oral Statement...............................................    22
Written Statement............................................    23
Ms. Carolyn Yocum, Director of Health Care, Medicaid, U.S.
Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    35
Written Statement............................................    37

APPENDIX

The Honorable Todd Russell Platts, a Member of Congress from the
State of Pennsylvania, Opening Statement.......................    89
The Honorable Michele Bachmann, a Member of Congress from the
State of Minnesota, Opening Statement..........................    92
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Member of Congress from the
State of Virginia, Opening Statement...........................    93
Statement for the Record submitted on behalf of the Council for
Quality Respiratory............................................    94
Statement of the American Medical Association....................    98
Rethinking Medicaid Program Integrity: Eliminating Duplication
and Investing in Effective, High-value Tools...................   101
Questions for Dr. Peter Budetti from Rep. Todd Platts............   116
Questions for Dr. Peter Budetti from Rep. James Lankford.........   120

ASSESSING MEDICARE AND MEDICAID PROGRAM INTEGRITY

----------

Thursday, June 7, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Government Organization,
Efficiency, and Financial Management,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:40 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Todd Platts
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Platts, Lankford, Farenthold,
Towns, and Norton.
Also Present: Representative Bachmann.
Staff Present: Ali Ahmad, Communications Advisor; Alexia
Ardolina, Assistant Clerk; Kurt Bardella, Senior Policy
Advisor; Molly Boyl, Parliamentarian; Sharon Casey, Senior
Assistant Clerk; Katelyn E. Christ, Professional Staff Member;
John Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director; Gwen D'Luzansky, Research
Analyst; Adam P. Fromm, Director of Member Services and
Committee Operations; Linda Good, Chief Clerk; Ryan M.
Hambleton, Professional Staff Member; Mark D. Marin, Director
of Oversight; Christine Martin, Counsel; Mary Pritchau,
Professional Staff Member; Noelle Turbitt, Staff Assistant;
Peter Warren, Legislative Policy Director; Jaron Bourke,
Minority Director of Administration; Beverly Britton Fraser,
Minority Counsel; Ashley Etienne, Minority Director of
Communications; Devon Hill, Minority Staff Assistant; and
Safiya Simmons, Minority Press Secretary.
Mr. Platts. Good morning. This hearing of the Subcommittee
on Government Organization, Efficiency, and Financial
Management will come to order. I first apologize to all of our
guests and our witnesses and my colleagues for the short delay
in getting started. Given that the delay is my responsibility,
I am going to abbreviate my opening statement to get us back on
track, but we are appreciative of everyone's participation here
today, and especially our witnesses.
This hearing is focused on the fiscal integrity of Medicare
and Medicaid and it is our subcommittee's third hearing on this
issue of helping to ensure that we do right by the American
people in how we handle their hard-earned dollars that they
send to Washington. And an important focus of this subcommittee
for many years, going back to when I first joined it, my first
term in Congress in 2001 under the chairmanship of Steve Horn,
is how to prevent the making of improper payments by the
Federal Government.
And when we look at Medicaid and Medicare, more than half
of the most recent years' identified improper payments were
within these two programs, approximately $65 billion of the
American people's money that was not properly handled on their
behalf by the Federal Government.
Today's hearing is looking at how these programs can do
better, and we certainly appreciate our witnesses'
participation and your insights and knowledge that you will
share with us. As in the past and working with the former
chairman of the full committee and the chairman of this
subcommittee, and now-ranking member Mr. Towns, our approach
has always been a partnership with Federal departments and
agencies and programs. We are not out to play ``gotcha'' but we
are simply here to see how can we do better and how can we help
those involved specifically in the operation of Medicare and
Medicaid and those who work with us at GAO and the Inspector
General's Office; how we can improve the effectiveness,
efficiency of these programs, and ultimately serve the American
people through these very important programs where the hundred
million Americans receive health-care benefits but do so in a
responsible manner where we are certainly getting a good return
on the investment and properly handling their money.
So we will look forward to your testimony.
And with that, I am going to yield to the ranking member
from New York, Mr. Towns, for the purposes of an opening
statement.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for holding this hearing.
This subcommittee has held several hearings about fraud and
waste in these critical health-care programs that we must
continue to do so because we need to answer the question: Can
we administer these programs more efficiently by reducing
improper payments and fraud?
Last year, Medicare covered about 50 million beneficiaries
and spent approximately $560 billion, which is about 15 percent
of the total Federal spending. Medicaid likewise provides
coverage for about 70 million people nationwide and cost the
government approximately $260 billion last year, about 8
percent of the Federal spending. These numbers are expected to
grow as our population gets older.
This country increases reliance over time on Medicaid and
Medicare is unfortunately translating into a significant level
of waste and fraud. Improper payments for Medicare was recently
estimated to be $42 billion; and for Medicaid, $21.9 billion.
That is a lot of money. That is the reason why both of these
programs continue to be on the GAO's high-risk list.
The Affordable Care Act includes a number of provisions
that will enhance our efforts to fight waste and fraud in
Medicare and Medicaid. Eliminating avoidable mistakes and
cracking down on criminals will be important elements in
achieving this goal.
Today we will look at some of the innovative steps that the
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services is taking to reduce
improper payments and fight fraud. We will also examine some of
the shortcomings that prevent existing programs from reaching
their full cost savings potential.
There is no single approach that will result in the
reduction of waste and fraud in the health-care system. The
solution requires a multi-tiered approach involving
stakeholders in Congress, CMS, the private sector, and law
enforcement all working together in order to achieve this goal.
I thank our witnesses for their testimony, and I look
forward to hearing your recommendations and suggestions that we
might make.
So on that note, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Towns. I appreciate your
testimony.
I would now ask unanimous consent that our distinguished
colleague from Minnesota, the gentlelady, Representative
Bachman, be allowed to participate in today's hearing for both
the purpose of questions and an opening statement, and, without
objection, so ordered.
I now yield to the gentlelady for her opening statement.
Mrs. Bachmann. Chairman Platts and Ranking Member Towns, I
thank you so much for your consideration and graciousness
allowing me to be able to testify briefly before this committee
today on this critical program, and I thank you also for the
bipartisan way in which this committee is moving forward on
this subject. As we are on the cusp of a major expansion in
Medicaid in the United States, it is more important than ever,
and I commend this committee for taking up this important issue
about saving the expenditure of the people's money. And I thank
you for that.
In April, I testified in a joint hearing of two oversight
committees' subcommittees on the complete lack of reporting,
collection, and verification of meaningful data in Medicaid. I
underscore what I just said. That is a breathtaking statement.
There is a complete lack of reporting, collection, and
verification of meaningful data in Medicaid. The same is not
true for Medicare. That is why this is a bipartisan issue and
one that we hope will focus on helping the needs of the poorest
among us in the United States who must have these program
moneys in order to survive.
The staff report from that hearing stated, ``Minnesota
provides a stunning example of how States are failing to
properly ensure the appropriate use of taxpayer dollars spent
on Medicaid managed care. This is something we are not proud
of. In order for States to ensure the appropriate use of
taxpayer dollars, they must be able and willing to collect the
data that shows how much is paid in a claim, for what, and to
whom. That is only basic common decency.
Since the investigation into Minnesota's Medicaid fraud has
unfolded, several implicated parties have begun to offer up
excuses.
According to the trade organization for managed care
organizations, the Department of Human Services actually has
the data but not the ability to analyze it. They say the
State's computer system is too antiquated. But in contradiction
to this, a DHS assistant commissioner said the data is
``literally analyzed by DHS on a daily basis and has been for
years.'' So now, either the trade association representing the
health plan is fudging or DHS is. We need to find out who. It
is our job to immediately get to the bottom of this. And I
thank the committee for what you are doing.
CMS is already tasked with identifying patterns or
instances of fraud and abuse in Medicare and Medicaid. That
much we know, and that much is good. But despite that, they
require no documented data. Now, the two don't go together. You
can't do your job if you don't have documented data.
That is why this month I am introducing a bill that will
hold CMS accountable to ensure stated audits are conducted
properly. That is why this is totally bipartisan, a bipartisan
bill. We just want to know where the people's money is going
and is it going to help the poor people in this country who
need these services.
But because this situation needs immediate attention, I am
proud to announce that I am sending a letter today to CMS
calling for an immediate third-party independent audit of
Minnesota's books. We can't allow taxpayer dollars to flow
without proper record keeping ever again.
Thank you again to the committee for your fine work,
Ranking Member Towns, and also for your fine work, Chairman
Platts. I am thrilled to be a partner with you in this
important work that you are doing.
And I yield back.
Mr. Platts. I thank the gentlelady for her opening
statement and her involvement and interest in the issue, as
well as your focus on the efforts of Minnesota specifically in
seeking to make sure we do right by all of our taxpayers in
Minnesota and across this great Nation.
All members will have 7 days to submit opening statements
and extraneous material for the record.
I will now proceed to our panel of witnesses. And we are
delighted to have a group of distinguished public servants with
us who bring a welcome knowledge to our hearing today.
First, we have Dr. Peter Budetti, who is director of the
Center for Program Integrity at the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services; Ms. Ann Maxwell, regional inspector general
for evaluation and inspections in the Office of the Inspector
General for the Department of Health and Human Services; as
well as Ms. Carolyn Yocum, who is director of health care for
Medicaid at the United States Government Accountability Office;
and Ms. Kathleen King, director of health care for Medicare at
the United States Government Accountability Office.
We thank all of our witnesses for being here with us today.
Pursuant to committee rules, if I could ask all four of you to
stand and raise your right hand and allow us to swear you in
before your testimony.
Raise your right hand. Do you solemnly swear or affirm that
the testimony you are about to give this committee will be the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? Let the
record reflect that all four witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
We appreciate the extensive written testimony you provided
us, what I call my homework in preparation for our committee
hearings, and your doing so certainly allows both members and
staff to be better prepared to have a good engagement here
today.
With your oral testimony here today, if you can seek to
limit yourself to roughly 5 minutes. You will see the light
system in front of you. If you do need to go over a little bit,
that is fine. But for the purpose of allowing members to get
into exchange and Q&A with you, we will try to limit to 5
minutes.
Dr. Budetti, we will begin with you.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF PETER BUDETTI, M.D.

Dr. Budetti. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
Chairman Platts, Ranking Member Towns, and members of the
subcommittee for this invitation to discuss the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services program integrity efforts for
the Medicare and Medicaid programs.
As I describe in detail in my written statement, the
administration made important strides in reducing fraud, waste,
and improper payments. And I draw your attention to this chart,
which I hope is in a font that at least some of us in the room
can read, which illustrates the framework within which we have
taken action over the last 2 years.
The first point is moving beyond a pay-and-chase approach
by focusing new attention on preventing fraud. We are adopting
what we call a twin pillar approach, building upon the
traditional program integrity efforts that focus on detecting
and prosecuting fraud.
We have implemented an approach that involves two pillars.
One is what we are calling the fraud prevention system, which
applies predictive analytic technology on claims prior to
payment to identify aberrant and suspicious billing patterns.
And the second pillar is the automated provider screening
system which focuses on identifying ineligible providers or
suppliers prior to their enrollment or revalidation.
These innovative new systems are designed to work together.
They're growing in their capacity to protect patients and
taxpayers from those intent on defrauding our programs. They
represent an integrated approach to program integrity,
preventing fraud before payments are made, keeping bad
providers and suppliers out of Medicare in the first place, and
quickly removing wrongdoers once they are detected. These
complement the traditional program integrity activities which
continue.
Second, we would like to emphasize that our work is on a
risk-based approach. We are not approaching this on a one-size-
fits-all model. For example, in addition to the detailed
assessment of credentials and other requirements that all
providers and suppliers undergo through the automated provider
screening system, we've identified those in a moderate level of
risk who are now required to also undergo site visits and those
in the high level of risk who will be subject to fingerprint-
based criminal background checks.
The fraud prevention system itself, the way it operates,
represents another example of our risk-based approach. It
targets our investigative resources to suspicious claims and
providers, generates alerts in priority order, allowing our
program integrity analysts to investigate the most egregious or
suspect aberrant activity.
Third, innovation. For the first time in the history of the
program, CMS is using a system to apply advanced analytics
against Medicare fee-for-service claims on a streaming national
basis. This has enabled us to identify schemes operating across
Medicare Parts A and B claims and across the country.
The fraud prevention system aggregates A and B data claims
in near realtime, and this has revolutionized our approach. For
example, our investigators formerly had to check multiple
systems to determine whether a beneficiary had ever visited a
doctor who billed Medicare for services and supplies. We've now
consolidated disbursed pieces of claims data, beneficiary
visits with the doctor, or orders for durable medical equipment
and hospital, and other providers and other services provided
under Part A, enabling our investigators to automatically see
the full picture.
Similarly, in the second pillar of our approach, the
automated provider screening system, this is another
significant advancement and innovation. We're using advanced
technology in a way that we are committed to both rooting out
and screening out the bad guys while making it easier for the
legitimate providers to enter the Medicare program.
We expect that our enhancements to the Medicare enrollment
system will speed up the time for legitimate providers to get
in and our screening processes will keep out the bad ones.
The fourth point, transparency and accountability, which
are high priorities for this administration. We've held a
number of regional fraud prevention summits around the country
with a wide range of stakeholders and the general public, and
we have engaged in a number of efforts to make sure that the
public is aware of what we are doing to combat fraud and how
they can join with us in doing that.
We are engaging the public and private sector more
extensively. For example, we conducted a month-long fraud
prevention awareness month in concert with the California
Medical Association and the State of California, and we've
involved the private sector, especially the medical community,
very closely in our remodeling of the enrollment system to
address needs that they themselves have identified.
And finally, I'm coordinating and integrating the program
integrity programs. When Secretary Sebelius created the Center
for Program Integrity, she brought together the Medicare and
the Medicaid program integrity activities for the first time.
This has provided a strong basis now for communication between
the programs and for aligning as much as possible the fraud
policy--anti-fraud policies and procedures across Medicare and
Medicaid, as required in many cases by the Affordable Care Act.
Mr. Chairman, Medicare and Medicaid fraud, we agree with
you, they affect every American by draining critical resources
and contributing to the rising cost of health care. We've made
a firm commitment in this administration to rein in fraud,
waste, and improper payments. We have more tools than ever to
move beyond ``pay and chase'' and implement
strategic changes in pursuing and detecting fraud, waste,
and abuse.
I look forward to continuing to work with you as we make
improvements in protecting the integrity of the Federal Health
Care programs, and I very much appreciate your interest in our
doing so.
Thank you for this opportunity to speak with you.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Dr. Budetti.
[Prepared statement of Dr. Budetti follows:]

Mr. Platts. Ms. Maxwell.

STATEMENT OF ANN MAXWELL

Ms. Maxwell. Good morning, Chairman Platts, Ranking Member
Towns, and other distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify about the Office
of Inspector General's evaluations of two national program
integrity efforts. The national Medicaid audit program and the
Medicare-Medicaid data match program, typically referred to as
Medi-Medi.
Our evaluations reveal that these national integrity
efforts in many ways resemble a funnel. Significant Federal and
State resources are being poured in, but only limited results
are trickling out.
Both national efforts are required to identify improper
Medicaid payments for recovery. The National Medicaid Audit
program strives to do this within States and across States.
Medi-Medi attempts to detect overpayments in Medicaid and
Medicare by matching the data across programs to identify
suspicious patterns. However, both programs had limited success
in achieving the goal of identifying Medicaid overpayments. As
a result, both programs had a negative return on investment.
In 2010, the national Medicaid auto program paid
contractors approximately $32 million to identify Medicaid
overpayments of just half that amount. In fact, we discovered
that 81 percent of the audits assigned in the first half of
that year did not or are unlikely to find overpayments.
Medi-Medi also had a negative return on investment. Medi-
Medi was appropriated $60 million over a 2-year period during
which time it saved $58 million. Of that amount, only one-
quarter, $11 million, was recovered on behalf of the 10 States
that are participating at the time. The benefits of the
Medicaid program were so minimal for two States that they opted
to withdraw from the program. One of the States that withdrew
from the program stated that it saved $2,000 after investing
$250,000 of State funds.
There are a variety of challenges that limit the potential
of these programs to attack Medicaid overpayments, including
issues of Medicaid data, poor program administration and the
lack of contractor accountability. The most fundamental
challenge is the data.
National Medicaid data are not current, they are not
complete, and they are not accurate. In fact, the data is not
going to capture all of the elements necessary for the
detection of fraud, waste, and abuse. Due to these data
problems, the National Medicaid Audit Program wasted resources,
auditing potential overpayments that were not real. They were
merely mirages created by the data.
Due to these data problems, Medi-Medi does not have
Medicaid data suitable for automated matching with Medicare
data. CMS has said this matching will not be possible for a
number of years.
In addition to these data challenges, CMS' administration
of these programs was flawed. The National Medicaid Audit
Program States suffered from inefficient communication between
contractors and States that resulted in duplication of effort.
Medi-Medi suffered from a lack of focus on Medicaid program
integrity at the Federal level. CMS also did not always hold
contractors accountable from performing each of their tasks
outlined in their statement of work.
Our evaluations raise questions about the overall
effectiveness of the National Medicaid Audit Program and Medi-
Medi. We recognize that CMS has taken steps to improve these
programs based on recommendations from the OIG, from GAO, and
CMS' own internal assessment. We recommend that CMS continue to
evaluate the goals, the structure, and the operation of these
programs to determine what aspects should be part of a national
strategy to protect the Medicaid program.
Further, we believe that more must be done to overcome the
significant shortcomings in the Medicaid data. Without timely,
complete, accurate, and standardized Medicaid data, it is
impossible to effectively detect systemic vulnerabilities that
span across States and into the Medicare program.
Thank you again for the opportunity to present this work
and to be a part of this discussion. The OIG shares your
ongoing interest in program integrity, and I'd be happy to
answer any questions that you might have on this topic.
Thank you.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Ms. Maxwell.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Maxwell follows:]

Mr. Platts. Ms. Yocum.

STATEMENT OF CAROLYN YOCUM

Ms. Yocum. Chairman Platts, Ranking Member Towns, and
members of the subcommittee, we are pleased to be here today.
I'm pleased to be here today with my colleague, Kathleen King,
as you discuss program integrity in Medicaid and Medicare.
Our prior work has shown that CMS continues to face
challenges with fiscal management of these programs which have
some of the highest--largest estimated improper payments in the
Federal Government. Both are on GAO's high-risk list in part
because of concerns over improper payments.
Our remarks today are focused on CMS' progress and
important steps that remain to be taken from the perspective of
four key strategies and recommendations that have been
identified in GAO's work:
First, strengthening provider enrollment standards and
procedures to help reduce the risk of enrolling entities intent
on defrauding the programs.
Second, improving prepayment controls to ensure that claims
are paid correctly the first time.
Thirdly, improving postpayment review and recovery of
improper payments.
And fourth, developing a robust process for tackling
identified program vulnerabilities.
With regard to Medicaid, since 2007 CMS has monitored
States' provider enrollment standards and procedures through
comprehensive reviews of States. Within CMS' most recent
comprehensive reviews, we found 230 instances of noncompliance
with Federal laws or regulations related to States' provider
enrollment standards and procedures.
CMS continues to develop better controls to detect improper
claims before they are paid. In this area, the agency has
identified--has initiated discussions with and provided
guidance to States in anticipation of new analytic tools that
can identify potential vulnerabilities before rather than after
Medicaid claims are paid.
Regarding postpayment claims review, the importance of
coordination with States has grown because of the increased
number of entities conducting audits, including implementation
of recovery audit contractors, or RACs. CMS' shift to
collaborative audits with States should help avoid duplication
of Federal and State audit efforts.
That said, CMS has not established a robust process for
incorporating RAC identified vulnerabilities in State
corrective action plans. CMS requires State Medicaid agencies
to have a corrective action process as part of their activities
to reduce their Medicaid error rates. And information from the
Medicaid RAC program could be incorporated into these
processes.
For Medicare, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act authorized CMS to implement several actions to strengthen
provider enrollment. Some of these actions, such as developing
a final rule on screening providers and suppliers, have been
completed. But other actions, such as implementing relevant
statutory provisions and some of our prior recommendations,
remain incomplete.
Our prior work found certain gaps in Medicare's prepayment
controls, and we made recommendations for improvements, such as
adding controls to identify unusually rapid increases in
medical equipment billing. We are currently evaluating CMS'
efforts in this area.
CMS has also taken steps to improve its postpayment reviews
and recovery efforts. In March 2009, the agency began the
National RAC Program for Medicare fee for service. As of May
2012, the agency reported that just under $2 billion was
recouped due to these contractors' efforts. While CMS has
implemented a RAC for its prescription drug program, it has not
done so for its Medicare managed care plan.
Lastly, our March 2010 report on CMS' RAC demonstration
program found that CMS had not established an adequate process
to ensure prompt resolution of identified vulnerabilities.
We've recommended that CMS do so, and we are currently
evaluating the steps the agency has taken to develop such a
process.
While CMS has made efforts to improve program integrity,
further action is needed. We believe that many of the lessons
learned from our work on Medicare could be applied to
strengthen the Medicaid program as CMS and the States begin to
use the additional tools provided through recent legislation.
Effectively implementing provisions of recent laws and our
recommendations will be critical to reducing improper payments
and ensuring that Federal funds are used for their intended
purpose.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes our prepared remarks. We would
be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the
subcommittee may have.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Ms. Yocum.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Yocum follows:]

Mr. Platts. And Ms. King, I understand that Ms. Yocum was
speaking for both of you.
Ms. King. She is.
Mr. Platts. Okay. Thank you.
I will now yield myself 5 minutes for the purpose of
questions.
Again, thank each of you for your testimony and your
insights and look forward to not just today with this hearing,
but in going forward to continue working with each of you and
your respective offices as we collectively try to do right by
the American people and how their dollars are used.
Dr. Budetti, I would like to start with you. In your
written testimony here today, you talk about kind of the
traditional approach and then as you highlighted, a new
approach, and your written testimony certainly focused
extensively on new efforts, the fraud prevention services, the
automated provider screening process.
And the way I looked at your written testimony's kind of
view, you have mentioned the more traditional and National
Medicaid Audit Program, the Medi-Medi program, but you really
didn't go into a lot of detail on that.
Should I take from that that there is some maybe
acknowledgment or understanding that the findings of the
Inspector General of GAO of the previous programs or the older
programs focused on program integrity have not been as
effective as we would like and that you are devoting more focus
and resources on a new approach to the FPS and the APS?
Dr. Budetti. The short answer is yes, at least to the
acknowledgment of the problems. You may not be surprised to
know that I find very little to disagree with in much of what--
what you've heard by way of testimony by the GAO and the Office
of Inspector General.
The current leadership, I'll just focus on the Medicaid
integrity programs, National Audit Program for a second,
because I think that is where some of the most difficult
problems have been identified.
The current leadership of that program took over in late
2009 and the program came into the Center for Program Integrity
in early 2010. It was during that year that we identified
internally that we were getting the wrong kinds of results--
very limited, very limited results from the way that we were
going about doing the national audits, and we both embarked on
a way--a program to develop a new approach and also to cut off
the old approach.
So the life history of the audits that were initiated
under--being based on the inadequate data that you've heard
described, they started in September of 2008 before we took
over the program; and the last one, my information is, went out
in February of 2011. During that time--so we have not sent one
out since then, that's my understanding. And since then, we
have been building a new approach which involves working more
directly and more collaboratively with the States because the
States do have--although they have it in very different systems
in some cases and it's not completely easy to get access to--
the States do have, of course, much more complete information
than we've been getting at the Federal level.
So we've engaged with them in thus far, I understand, 137
collaborative audits. Those are taking place in States that
represent about 53 percent of all Medicaid expenditures, and we
are looking to expand that substantially over the coming year.
So we do acknowledge that there have been problems with the
National Audit Program, and we initiated corrective action
early on, and we are very much dedicated to improving that
program.
Mr. Platts. Specifically on the approach, on the
traditional approach and acknowledgment of the problems there,
one that came out in the Inspector General's testimony and the
written testimony, was the example between the-- disparity
between the review integrity contractors and the audit
integrity contractors. And one example highlighted in that
testimony was that the review contractors identified 113,000
providers with potential overpayments of $282 million, and then
when the audit contractors went in and got into that
information, there was only 25 of these 113,000 were determined
to have been given overpayments, and only $285,000 actually
found to have been inappropriate versus the $282 million. That
is quite a disparity and shows a significant problem with that
approach.
Dr. Budetti. That's exactly right. Those are the kinds of
numbers that caused us to stop that approach and that has
caused us to look to a new way of doing business.
One of the things that kept that going was that when the
review contractors looked at the inadequate data, they made
projections that looked very promising, and it wasn't until we
found out that they in fact did not return any results when we
went out and conducted the actual audits, that we decided that
this was so problematic that we would stop that and we would
have a new approach.
In the meantime, the Federal Government, as you've heard,
does not have yet all of the data that are necessary for us to
do the audits ourselves, and so we believe that for now the
best way to go about this is to build up the collaborative
audits, working closely with the States who do have the proper
data.
Mr. Platts. A quick follow-up before I yield to the ranking
member.
On that, so today are we still paying any review audit
contractors going forward, or the audit integrity contractors
under the old system?
Dr. Budetti. So we have existing contracts. We have some
audits that are out there that have yet to be completed, and we
are at this very moment, we are looking at the restructuring of
our entire audit program so that we can use those resources in
a much more effective way, and that also will tie in, if I have
time later, I can talk about how that--we're exploring how that
will tie into the use of our Medi-Medi resources as well.
Mr. Platts. That is a concern of those existing contracts
and what we are paying out still, when clearly the results
versus a collaborative approach and the new systems is night
and day.
Dr. Budetti. We're directing them to new tasks that are
still within the scope of their existing contracts, and we're
exploring the way of--and we're exploring how to completely
restructure our approach.
Mr. Platts. Okay. Thank you.
I now yield to gentleman from New York for the purpose of
questions.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me just begin by saying I am impressed that there is
collaboration with CMS with the Inspector General's Office and
the Department of Justice in law enforcement in recent years,
which I understand has resulted in more than 600 criminals
being successfully prosecuted for fraud against Medicaid and
Medicare, and more than 500 of whom were serving prison
sentences of over 42 months.
How many would that--I am trying to get the conviction
rate. Would anybody know in terms of that number how many
actual indictments?
Ms. King. Sir, that is work that we are currently
conducting, and we'll have the answer to that later this year.
Mr. Towns. Okay. Well, we would like to get the
information.
Ms. King. Both on the civil and the criminal front.
Mr. Towns. The reason I raise that is because the Inspector
General indicated that there was a situation where you spent
$250,000 to collect $2,000. You know, I just think we need to
look at every area to make certain that there is not waste,
fraud, and abuse.
Let me ask, do you think the fact that these systems do not
talk to each other? I mean, what is the problem? And as the
chairman had mentioned earlier on, this is not one of those
committees where we ``got you.'' We want to help. We recognize
how important it is today more than ever that we save money and
make certain that it is being used and used properly. So we
want to be helpful.
But is it the fact that you do not have the money to put
the system in place to be able to get the information that is
necessary to be able to adjust? And let me say why I raise this
question.
I was in bed one night, and at 1:30 in the morning I get a
call from American Express; said to me that somebody was making
a big purchase in the bar on my credit card, you know, and they
said they hated to bother me so, but the point was that this
was so unusual, I guess because my bar bill is like $5 I guess,
I don't know. But I am not sure as to why it was so unusual.
But anyway, the point was that they reached out to me to make
certain that there was no fraud. I mean, they wanted to make
certain that they took care of it right away. I mean, why can't
we look and find a technique, a method to be able to do the
same thing?
Dr. Budetti?
Dr. Budetti. Mr. Towns, I'm happy to report that under our
new fraud prevention system, since as of the end of April, our
investigators have conducted 1,541 interviews with
beneficiaries that really are parallel to the call that you
got, unfortunately, in the middle of the night from American
Express, where we check to see whether or not beneficiaries can
confirm that they have received the services that they may or
may not have received. So that's very much built into part of
what we're doing now.
Mr. Towns. How long has that been in place?
Dr. Budetti. This system went into place the end of June of
last year. And so as of April of this year, we have counted
1,541 such interviews.
Mr. Towns. Okay.
Dr. Budetti. On the broader question of resources, we're
very grateful to the Congress for the resources that have been
provided. As you may know, the President has also asked for
some additional resources in this area. I think that at the
Federal level, we have had very good access to the kinds of
data that we need and it is a question of putting the systems
in place to deal with the information that we generate
properly. I think a lot of States would tell you that they do
face some resource constraints, notwithstanding that a lot of
their expenditures would be covered by the Federal Government.
So there are some ongoing discussions with States about that as
well.
Mr. Towns. I really, I think my question is, is it the fact
that you do not have the kind of resources that would make it
possible for you to put a plan in place that will help you to
be able to evaluate and to see in terms of what is really going
on? You know, I sort of get the feel that the technology in the
system is not in place to do that. And I know it takes some
money to do that, and sometimes I think that instead of putting
the money in, you know, we just sort of try and make do and
then we end up spending more by trying to make do.
Dr. Budetti. We're very pleased that under the Small
Business Jobs Act of 2010 and also under the additional funding
that was provided in the Affordable Care Act, that we have very
substantial resources. The Small Business Jobs Act is what
specifically called on us to go ahead with what we were
intending to do, which is to put into place the advanced
technologies that I was talking about, the fraud prevention
system, and that is in place and it has been up and running now
since the end of June of last year.
So we believe on the Medicare side, we have the technology,
we have the systems in place. They're going to grow and
continue to grow and become more and more sophisticated over
time. So I think that on that side, I think--I think we're in
good shape. I do think we face the challenge that we're facing
up to of translating that advancement on the Medicaid side.
Mr. Towns. I see my time has expired.
Mr. Platts. I thank the gentleman.
I now yield to the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Lankford.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would say to
the ranking member, I am very pleased to hear that the pastor--
it is rare for him to be in a bar late in the evening, so much
so that American Express calls him and says it is a rare event.
So glad to be able to hear that.
Let me bounce a couple of questions off of you as well, and
I have some real concerns on the RAC audit process. If there is
any one thing that I hear from hospitals, providers, and folks
the most, it is the full-body cavity search that has become the
RAC audit process.
I have several concerns. One begins just with the process
of it. As a Federal Government, we are designed to serve the
people, rather than them serve us. And the RAC audit process
seems to have put the whole process on its head, that they
exist there to serve us, and we are going to stay long enough
until we find some fraud.
The contingency fee process part of it, my fear is it's
turning this into a bounty hunter process, that we have outside
contractors that are coming in and they're going to stay until
they get paid, until they find something there.
That moves the system significantly towards we are going to
find more fraud, but it also moves the system significantly
towards a hostile, not helpful, environment in that.
Saying all of that, that is where we are, I feel. I don't
know if anyone disagrees with me on that. I have yet to find
anyone that disagrees with that. And I have had multiple
conversations with that sense, if you have got a disagreement,
I would like to hear about it.
But I also would like to hear how are we preparing people
for these RAC audits and what process is occurring currently so
when people arrive, it is an environment where we evaluate, as
we should, we should hold people to account. But this should
not be a hostile event.
Ms. King. Representative Lankford, as you may know, the RAC
program started with a demonstration.
Mr. Lankford. Right.
Ms. King. And we evaluated that demonstration, and we did
find a number of areas for concern. And there were some
missteps on the part of CMS in terms of the issues that were
explored there and, you know, perhaps overaggressiveness.
And I think that CMS, in implementing the national program,
took a lot of those concerns into account, and they devised a
system at CMS where all of their central players in the
operation would get together and agree on what kinds of
situations the RACs could look into, rather than having them
just go out on their own. So in the national program, I think
that part has been smoother.
Mr. Lankford. Still paying people a contingency based on
what they find?
Ms. King. That's the way the program was set up.
Mr. Lankford. The way it is set up.
Ms. King. To pay on--to pay on contingency.
But, you know, one more thing I might add about that is the
RAC program is designed to identify overpayments and
underpayments, and it is not specifically designed to look for
fraud. It's really looking at cases in which the agency has
paid too much or too little.
Mr. Lankford. Right. But a lot of the underpayment, I mean,
what do we have, a 4 percent national rate for underpayment?
Ms. King. The vast majority are overpaid.
Mr. Lankford. Yeah. They are really going in looking for
overpayments, obviously, on that. And it becomes an issue of
what is an overpayment and how complex this is.
My assumption is it is typically we overpaid you because we
shouldn't have paid you at all for this, because we disagree.
You shouldn't have had them in the hospital 2 nights, or we
disagree this shouldn't have been an overnight stay at all, or
this procedure or this coding.
So agree or disagree on that?
Ms. King. I agree, but they are following Medicare policy
when they're doing the audits.
Mr. Lankford. When the hospital responds back to it, when
there has been a denial, my understanding is there is about a
75 percent rate of turning that over. Am I correct or
incorrect?
Ms. King. When we did our work, we didn't have the
information about what the overturn rate is.
Mr. Lankford. The appeal rate seems to be extremely high
when we are looking for fraud, and we are fighting back and
forth on whether this should have been through the process or
not, whether it should have been a 1-night or 2-night or
overnight at all, or whatever it may be. And then they appeal
it and have a 75 percent appeal success rate. That tells me
there is still an issue. There is still a problem hovering out
there somewhere that we have got to be able to resolve, because
we are creating a hostile environment with providers.
This is someone we should be serving. We should hold people
to account, but we should also be serving them rather than
creating an environment where they are spending tens of
thousands to hundreds of thousands of dollars defending
something that was valid.
Ms. King. You know, we haven't looked at the implementation
of the national program, so I really don't know there whether
the appeal rate has gone down. And we did not have access to
the appeal data during the course of our work. So you're
raising valid concerns, but I don't know the answer.
Mr. Lankford. Mr. Budetti, you were going to say something.
Dr. Budetti. Yes, I would. I would just add a couple of
things to that. One, I would echo what Ms. King said, but I
would also add that CMS is listening to those kinds of concerns
that you've identified. We've certainly heard them as well. We
have put into place a demonstration project in order to work
with hospitals when there is a question as to whether or not
the patient should have been an in-patient or an out-patient,
instead of a demonstration where hospitals can rebuild, if that
is the determination, so that they don't lose the entire
payment, as they have under standard operating procedures that
have been in place.
We are also very much looking at all of those concerns, and
they're a matter of a great deal of internal discussion in the
agency at this time.
Mr. Lankford. I would encourage you to keep it as a matter
of a great deal of internal discussion so we can try to
evaluate it, because this obviously is an issue. I know this is
a project you are trying to launch on it, but we have got to be
able to resolve this.
With that, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Platts. I thank the gentleman. I now yield to
gentlelady from Minnesota, Mrs. Bachmann.
Mrs. Bachmann. Thank you again, Mr. Chair, and also Ranking
Member Towns.
One area to look for fraud is with the Medicaid providers
and others with the Medicaid--or the managed-care
organizations.
And this would be a question for Dr. Budetti, if you will.
And just briefly based on the concerns that the managed-care
organizations are using Medicaid premium dollars to cross-
subsidize other non-Medicaid State health plans, could you tell
the committee what data you are gathering to combat these
allegations, if any?
Dr. Budetti. Congresswoman, I think that you're aware that
in your State, Minnesota, that after discussions with CMS that
have been ongoing recently, that Minnesota has recently agreed
to repay to CMS the appropriate Federal share of the amount of
money that was contested. And we're currently reviewing the
State's submission on that matter and have every intention of
collecting the appropriate Federal share.
We are also----
Mrs. Bachmann. But if I could ask, Dr. Budetti, how are
they coming to the conclusion of what number? Because my
question is about what data are you gathering so that we can be
confident that States aren't taking Medicaid dollars and then
using them for a cross-purpose to subsidize a non-Medicaid,
non-Federal Medicaid State health plan. What specific data are
you asking the States for, so we can be assured this isn't
going on?
Dr. Budetti. I think that that question is very well taken.
I think that we need to continue to build our capacity to
collect the appropriate data on managed-care operations.
Mrs. Bachmann. So we aren't collecting any data to that
effect today?
Dr. Budetti. The emphasis has been on the fee-for-service
side, I agree with you on that.
Mrs. Bachmann. So we need to do better, it sounds like.
Dr. Budetti. We do need to do a better job in terms of
getting that degree of oversight, and we are engaging in doing
that.
Mrs. Bachmann. Thank you. I agree. I think that shows a big
hole that we have, because we are not even asking the right
questions. I think that goes to Ranking Member Towns. The right
question was asked of him at 1:30 in the morning. That is what
we need to be doing, asking the right question. And clearly we
are not.
Let me ask you also, Dr. Budetti, since 2006, CMS has now
spent over a hundred million dollars developing the one program
integrity system to merge Medicare and Medicaid data, and the
Medicare data has been collected, but to date the Medicaid data
has not been included. Now, this is significant. It has been 6
years.
Why is that, that the Medicaid data is not included, and
what role should the States play in--or are they, perhaps, in
delaying the collection of this data and are States withholding
information from CMS?
Dr. Budetti. We certainly recognize that the data that we
have been getting from the States are not adequate, and that's
been at the core of our restructuring of the National Audit
Program. We've been working very diligently over the last
couple of years to improve that situation and to get the right
kind of data.
There's a demonstration project going on with 10 States
that's designed to look at the data that we're currently
collecting, to identify the data that we do need to do proper
oversight, and as well as a number of other program operation
requirements at the Federal level, and then to get those data
from those 10 States and to use that as a model for improving
the flow of data from the States.
Mrs. Bachmann. I would agree, but that doesn't answer my
question why for 6 years we have Medicaid--Medicare data, but
we don't have Medicaid.
Dr. Budetti. Yes.
Mrs. Bachmann. There is just an absence. So the question
is, is the State holding out on us? Are they not getting the
data? Are we not holding them accountable?
So if you could get back to the committee and answer that
question. I just have one question----
Dr. Budetti. Sure.
Mrs. Bachmann. --for Ms. Yocum, if you could answer that
also in the brief time I have.
The GAO lists Medicaid as a high-risk program, and GAO has
previously issued reports that addresses CMS' lack of oversight
into Medicaid managed-care rates. So given that we have three-
fourths of Medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in some form of
managed care, could you speak to the data that is used by GAO
and CMS to address this aspect of Medicaid?
Ms. Yocum. Certainly. Right now, one of the big issues
across the Medicaid program are the different data systems and
the extent to which they actually talk to each other. There are
two different ways that managed-care data may be collected. One
is through its expenditure system. The second is through a
separate accounting system that looks at the managed-care
reporting itself.
Our work that we looked at on an actuarial soundness in
Medicaid managed care, we ended up going back to State plans
and to States' contracts with managed-care plans in order to
understand CMS' review and oversight in that area.
Mrs. Bachmann. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for indulging me
to be with the committee. It seems to me that there is a real
problem in that we aren't asking the right questions. And I
think we would be a lot farther down the road if we asked the
right questions. That is the purpose of my legislation that I
will be introducing shortly. But I thank the committee so much
for graciously allowing me to be here today, and I thank Dr.
Budetti for getting the answers to the committee to the
question that I asked.
Mr. Platts. I thank the gentlelady.
And Dr. Budetti, if you would follow up in writing to the
committee for the record in response to Representative
Bachmann's questions.
And I think the focus that you have touched on here, and
the ranking member and I were speaking about, it is so
important that unless we have that data, we really won't be
able to get to the root causes. And, you know, when I talk
about internal controls, ultimately our goal is to get to the
root causes of the improper payments, the fraud, the misuse of
funds, but without the data, it is hard to know exactly where
that is. So that focus, especially on the Medicaid side, is
going to be so important to ultimately reducing the improper
payment numbers for both Medicaid and Medicare.
I thank the gentlelady for participating.
I now yield to gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair.
And I might ask my colleague who has joined us, and welcome
her to the subcommittee--she indicated that we are not asking
the right questions. Because I'm late, if you would indulge me,
what pray tell is the right question?
Mrs. Bachmann. I think the question is we want to have an
independent third-party audit of where the payments are going.
We today----
Mr. Connolly. You mean the improper payments?
Mrs. Bachmann. Thank you. That is a better way to phrase
it, and I thank you for that correction for the gentleman.
We have not conducted for decades independent third-party
audits of the States. We aren't asking the meaningful data. In
our State of Minnesota, for instance, a bill has been presented
from managed-care organizations to our State of Minnesota. The
State pays it. It is almost like if you went to the grocery
store and you had maybe what you thought was $35 worth of
groceries in your grocery cart, and then the cashier said,
Please give me $300. And you said, Well, let me see the grocery
tape so I know what I'm paying for. And the cashier says, No,
I'm not going to give you the grocery tape. Give me $300.
We at the Federal Government aren't demanding the itemized
statement of what the managed-care organizations are charging
the States, and then the States are passing that bill on to the
Federal Government----
Mr. Connolly. I thank my colleague.
Mrs. Bachmann.--and we are just paying it. So thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
Dr. Budetti, maybe start with you. What is your response to
our colleague's concern certainly with her home State of
Minnesota, and I am sure other States as well, this idea that I
am paying $300, and I can't get the itemized bill to justify
why I am paying $300, for example, at the grocery store. Is
that applicable?
Dr. Budetti. We have acknowledged that the existing data
that are reported by the States in this area to the Federal
Government have proved to be inadequate for conducting Federal
audits. I would point out that there's two ways to think about
this. One is the Federal Government gets the data and does the
audits or has people do the audits. The other is the Federal
Government works with the States to make sure that the right
data are available and works collaboratively with the States to
do the audits.
The first model we're not--has not proved to be workable
with the data sets that the Federal Government has been
getting. We're working to improve those data sets. We're not
abandoning that approach. We're working very hard to improve
them.
But in the meantime, we know the States do have the data,
and so we are embarking on a new approach with collaborative
audits so that we will use our resources, with the States, to
audit the data that are in the States. So we're approaching it
from both sides. We don't want to wait until some future date
when the Federal Government has perfect data from the States.
We need to keep an eye on things right now, and that's what
we're doing with the States.
Mr. Connolly. Could I ask, given Medicare--we are talking
about Medicare?
Dr. Budetti. So for Medicare, of course----
Mr. Connolly. No, no. Wait.
Dr. Budetti. For Medicaid we don't have the data. The
States do.
Mr. Connolly. But Medicaid is not a new program.
Dr. Budetti. No, sir.
Mr. Connolly. And obviously the problem did not occur only
on this administration's watch. Why is it taking us so long to
sort of figure this out and try to figure out systems to put in
place to correct this defect?
Dr. Budetti. My understanding is that the current data set
that's collected was designed for the use of the program. It
was being used in other ways, and it has not proved to be
adequate for the way that we need to use it now. I'm not an
expert on the history of Medicaid's statistical information
system, however. But I'd be happy to get you some background.
Mr. Connolly. I think the subcommittee would appreciate it
on both sides of the aisle.
Let me ask you this. I am under the impression that U.S.
attorneys offices are focusing increasingly on Medicare fraud
and recovering sizable amounts of money from fraud from
vendors, medical practitioners, and the like. Is that a fair
characterization of sort of this administration's decision to
crack down on that fraud and trying to recover as much as
possible?
Ms. Maxwell, did you want to comment on that? It looked
like you were getting ready to comment.
All right. Dr. Budetti.
Dr. Budetti. I would be happy to yield to Ms. Maxwell. Sir,
there are fraudsters who stay in business after we catch them,
and they have assets that we can go after and recover. And in
that case, as you know, there have been substantial recoveries
in recent years. The most recent year was over $4 billion that
was returned from a variety of different approaches.
Then there are fraudsters who, of course, disappear as soon
as we identify what they are doing. They have no assets for us
to go after. We still want to catch them. We still want to
throw them in jail if we can. But that is why we need to
build--that is why we are building our system that is designed
to prevent fraud from occurring in the first place, because
many of those fraudsters we will never recover anything from.
Mr. Connolly. Right. Mr. Chairman, I know my time is up.
And all of us on the subcommittee have been very focused on
improper payments under your leadership. But fraud is an
important subset, obviously, and making sure we have the focus
of the Federal Government and the resources. And I must say I
am impressed that the Obama administration has taken it very
seriously. And I think the 99 U.S. attorneys offices are
important allies in this particular component. So the more
information I think we could get on that would be appreciated.
I thank the chair.
Mr. Platts. I thank the gentleman. We will proceed with a
second round of questions, and I yield myself 5 minutes for
that purpose.
Dr. Budetti, you talk a lot in testimony, written and oral
here today, about the automated provider screening process. And
in your written testimony you give a number of examples of how
it is helping to, you know, screen out either new applicants,
new provider applicants that are illegitimate, inappropriate,
as well as going back, and with a goal by 2015, to review all
existing 1.5 million Medicare suppliers and providers. When I
look at the numbers, and I have tried to on page 6 of your
testimony combine them, you talk about an initial review that
kind of knocked out 13,000 deactivations of providers. And then
you talk about an additional round, a second round that knocked
out approximately another 10,000, 11,000. If I total those up,
I come up to about 23,000, 24,000 providers in the review of
existing--that 1.5 million. And, again, from your testimony
apparently there has been about 275,000 existing providers,
suppliers, who have been rescreened.
And so if my numbers add up correctly, we are talking 8 to
10 percent of existing providers and suppliers, that when we
went back and looked at them, we knocked out for some reason as
not appropriate and were eligible for taxpayer funds. If that
number, 8 to 10 percent, is accurate, we are talking 120,000,
130,000 or more providers, if you translate that over 1.5
million. I mean that is obviously very disconcerting. Am I
looking at that accurately, that that is perhaps the scale of
the problem we are facing?
Dr. Budetti. So even one would be disconcerting as far as I
am concerned, Mr. Platts. So I would share your concern. I will
tell you that we started out with identifying the highest-risk
providers. So our initial efforts were focused on people that
we considered to be the highest risk. And those included people
that we had reason to believe were not licensed to practice in
the States in which they were eligible for Medicare, or they
were not in the national database, they were only in the local
systems. There were a number of criteria that we used to
identify them.
So we started out by running all 800,000 physicians who
were in the national database through the automated provider
screening system to identify the ones who did not appear to be
licensed in the place in which they were allowed--in which they
had Medicare billing privileges. And so we examined those. And
those represented a fair number of the ones----
Mr. Platts. Of that 800,000, about how many of the 800,000
came back as not being licensed?
Dr. Budetti. It was a fairly significant--I don't have it
in front of me, but I would be happy to get it to you.
We then proceeded to run all 1.5 million providers and
suppliers through the automated provider screening system to
establish a baseline for future analysis, because we are doing
several things. Not only are we in the process of revalidating
all 1.5 million providers and suppliers, but we are also in the
automated provider screening system putting into place an alert
system. And the alert system will tell us between times, not
just at enrollment, not just at revalidation, but if somebody
dies, if somebody is convicted of a felony that is relevant for
our concerns, if somebody loses their license, we will get pop-
up alerts to that effect so that we can take action without
waiting for the revalidation period. This is all new.
Most of what was done in the past was being done manually,
and was substantially less efficient, I would say. So now at
the same time that we are enrolling our new applicants, because
we do get approximately 20,000 new applicants per month to be
providers and suppliers of Medicare and Medicaid--in Medicare,
we are also engaged in the revalidation process that has gone
on, as you said. So the numbers may be a little different when
we have finished with everybody because we started with the
highest-risk weight.
Mr. Platts. So that 8 to 10 percent probably is high
because you were specifically targeting the high risk.
Dr. Budetti. Yes.
Mr. Platts. But as you say, even if it is 1 percent,
15,000, it is still a huge----
Dr. Budetti. We should do something about it. Know about it
and do something about it.
Mr. Platts. Yeah. That use of technology in the screening
and the rescreening and those flags that go up that if there is
a delicensing I think is critical to ultimately getting to
where we want to be.
Ms. Maxwell, in your testimony you talk about States that
have participated with CMS on Medicaid not very effectively,
and you reference two States that have withdrawn, and one in
particular that in participating in the partnership had only
recovered a minimal amount, a couple thousand dollars, but when
they withdrew they recovered about $28 million. Are you able to
identify which State that was that withdrew and what did they
do different, to the best of your knowledge, that was so much
more effective?
Ms. Maxwell. I am able to identify that State. It is the
State of Washington. And it is my understanding that the $28.9
million that they recovered was part of their ongoing State
Medicaid program integrity efforts.
Mr. Platts. Are you aware of what their efforts were that
were so different that they succeeded significantly better than
in the partnership with CMS?
Ms. Maxwell. No, I am not aware of what they were doing
that was different.
Mr. Platts. Why I ask that is that seems like that is an
example of a State that has a good State-based program in place
that, perhaps with the Medicare Integrity Institute at CMS,
that we would want to look at to try to share that approach
with other States--maybe will match up, maybe not, depending
upon the comparison of States--but that we learn from those
best practices out there and get that information shared.
So Dr. Budetti, are you familiar with what the Washington
State had done and whether that has been looked at to replicate
elsewhere?
Dr. Budetti. I can't speak exact precisely to that, but I
can tell you that we have put into place a system of
identifying best practices and sharing that among all of the
States. We have an active process for doing that, as well as
bringing people together. We have now passed the 3,000 State
employees who have been trained down at the Medicaid Integrity
Institute. And one of the activities that goes on certainly is
networking and sharing of best practices. If you would like a
little more information on the Washington program, I would be
happy to get it for you. But I do know that we do certainly
work our program integrity. Our Medicaid program integrity
activities certainly have been very supportive for all the
States, including Washington.
Mr. Platts. If there is any information that you have
available regarding Washington State and perhaps what they did
different that seemed to be much more effective than what had
been done in that partnership, that would be great.
I see my time has well expired. So I yield to the ranking
member for questions.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Let me begin
with you, Ms. Maxwell. Does OIG use any cutting-edge technology
tools of its own to help fight fraud?
Ms. Maxwell. Yes. The Office of Inspector General has
increasingly used a data-driven approach. We have developed our
own data warehouse that allows for the collection of data
across the Medicare programs, and we mine that. In particular,
we have used that approach in our strike force efforts. Since
2009, HHS and DOJ have created rapid response investigative
teams in nine cities around the country, and those cities are
targeted through the use of data.
Mr. Towns. Could you comment on the effective tools that
CMS is using in terms of tools they have in place and they are
using, and the new ones that have been implemented? Could you
comment on that?
Ms. Maxwell. The study that I am prepared to speak on
focused primarily on Medicaid program integrity. And the tools
I believe you are referencing are on the Medicare side, so I
don't have any comment on those.
Mr. Towns. All right. Let me ask you, Ms. Yocom or Mrs.
King, is it necessary to have so many categories of
contractors? Can't we consolidate some of the roles and still
reach our objective?
Ms. King. I think on the Medicare side, since its inception
Medicare has largely been run by contractors. There has been
some significant consolidation on the Medicare side. It used to
be that there were organizations called carriers and
intermediaries that processed Medicare fee-for-service claims.
They have been consolidated into the Medicare administrative
contractors. And now there are many fewer of them. And also the
program safeguard contractors have been consolidated up to the
same level as the Medicare administrative contractors.
That said, there are still different types of contractors
that have specific functions. But you know, I don't know that
that is--it is not something that we have looked at, but I
don't know on its face that that would be inappropriate.
Ms. Yocom. Sir, on the Medicaid side, GAO does have some
ongoing work that is looking at some of the contractors that
are participating in the Medicaid integrity group. And that
will be out this summer.
Mr. Towns. All right. Let me ask this. When you make
recommendations, do they follow it?
Ms. King. Largely. That is something that we keep track of.
And we go back once a year and we look at that. And I think
that our track record is many more recommendations are adopted
than not, of those that the agency agrees with.
Ms. Yocom. Overall, it is about 80 percent of our
recommendations get acted on by the agencies that we review.
Mr. Towns. Are the ones that they do not adopt, are they
saying that it is a lack of resources?
Ms. Yocom. I think it would be hard to describe at a global
level what the reasons are. Sometimes it may be resources,
sometimes it may also just be that they disagree and they don't
believe it is a high enough priority.
Ms. King. Sometimes I think it is conflicting priorities.
The agency has a lot of work to do, and we make
recommendations, and they are in agreement with them, but they
have higher priorities that bump them.
Mr. Towns. Right. Let me conclude, Ms. Maxwell, with you.
How widespread is the problem of lack of oversight of
contractors? And what is the ultimate effect on program
integrity?
Ms. Maxwell. Speaking with respect to the Medicaid program
that our reports touch upon, we did find instances of lack of
contract oversight by CMS, as I had mentioned. The contractor
was not held accountable to all the tasks in its statement of
work. On the Medi-Medi side, the annual assessment of the
Medicaid--the Medicare program integrity contractor that runs
that program did not actually assess all of the variables in
that task order.
Mr. Towns. I see, Mr. Chairman, my time has expired, so I
yield back.
Mr. Platts. Okay. I thank the gentleman. Just a quick
follow-up before I go to the gentleman from Oklahoma. On that
failure to fulfill all the task orders, all the requirements,
was there any consequences for not doing that that you are
aware of?
Ms. Maxwell. No. What we were told is that at the time--
which was early in the program--CMS did not expect for the
contractors to fulfill these particular aspects of their
statement of work. It is my understanding that they have
changed, and they are now holding the contractors more
accountable to all the tasks in their contract.
Mr. Platts. Thank you. Yield to the gentleman from
Oklahoma.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. Let me do a quick follow up
statement, finish out talking about the RAC audits. I do have a
statement from the AMA about the RAC audits I would like to be
added into the record.
Mr. Platts. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Lankford. Questions and issues that they had as well.
Is there a system in place--still with coding and billing, some
of those things are automated. Obviously, when they go through
an audit they can get a chance to look at those, and those will
bounce up. When I do my taxes, I go through a program, at the
end of it, it comes back and does a red flag for me on
everything and says, okay, double-check and make sure this is
contract.
For providers, do they have any system like that so that
before someone comes in and does a RAC audit, someone is
checked and rechecked locally, this might come up as a
question? This is not consistent with typical billing. Is there
anything like that that is in place for the providers?
Dr. Budetti. I do know that there are a number of reasons
why claims are not accepted the first time around and providers
get information back on the claims. But I really can't speak to
that, exactly that point in detail.
Mr. Lankford. This is submitted online. It is submitted
through a program, right?
Dr. Budetti. Most of those are now, yes.
Mr. Lankford. Right. That is what I assume. So what I am
asking, is there a way to be able to set that up so it is built
so it checks it locally before they ever submit it, that there
is a quick verification of that to say double-check this line
was left out, this code seems to be inconsistent with this one?
Ms. King. That is not something that we have ever looked
at. But my understanding is that the providers do use software
billing programs that would enable them to check for those
kinds of things.
Mr. Lankford. Okay. But you are saying that is not
something that----
Ms. King. That we have looked at.
Mr. Lankford. They purchase a separate one that actually
attaches to a third-party software somewhere that does that?
Ms. King. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lankford. Because obviously the goal of this is that it
is right the first time, not that we are paying chasing, and
not that we are trying to do a RAC audit to be able to come
down on someone on that.
Ms. Yocom. Our statement does talk about CMS's efforts on
the Medicaid side in this area looking for prepayment edits.
CMS has to date looked primarily just at the process for doing
this, not necessarily at the content of the individual edits.
They have identified some notable practices, some of which sort
of stop the claim and identify what information is necessary.
Ms. King. And on the Medicare side, we are doing a
significant amount of work on Medicare prepayment edits so that
Medicare would not pay claims that are not in conformance with
its policies or for providers who are not eligible. But I think
that you were asking questions that, you know, on the provider
side, what do they do so that by the time they submit a claim
it is clean.
Mr. Lankford. That is correct. The goal is that when it is
submitted it is clean, it has been checked and rechecked, and
then they have some confidence that this is going through on
it.
Ms. Maxwell, I am very concerned on the data matching, the
Medi-Medi program, in your testimony that in previous years we
spent $60 million on a program that recouped $57.8 million.
That doesn't seem like a real great investment in the process.
The question is, is this a program that can be improved? Is
this a program that needs to be terminated? Are there ideas
that have been submitted to what to do with it at this point?
Ms. Maxwell. The core issue that I bring up in the
testimony today is the fact that the program is supposed to be
matching Medicare and Medicaid data, and yet it doesn't have
the Medicaid data to match. So it is perhaps not surprising
that they are not finding as much as they would expect. And
certainly they are finding very, very little on the Medicaid
side for that reason as well. So to improve that program, as
well as the MIC program that we talk about, really it goes back
to the Medicaid data. We absolutely need national standardized
Medicaid data to make these programs worthwhile.
Mr. Lankford. Is there a reason that the Medicaid data
can't be standardized to the Medicare data as far as how it is
drawn in from a provider--obviously, most providers do both
anyway--that those systems can't be consistent?
Dr. Budetti. Just to engage this a little bit, Mr.
Lankford, the Medi-Medi program operates on a State-by-State
basis, so that the contractors who are actually the Medicare
investigative contractors work with the State. And as I said
before when I was talking about expanding our collaborative
audits, we believe that this is a framework that we can use for
enhancing our ability to work with the individual States. We
have some 15 States now, representing well over half of all
Medicaid expenditures, that are in the Medi-Medi program. A
couple of those State's, or one in particular we believe, has
recently shown that with appropriate use of the Medi-Medi
approach, it can have very substantial returns. And so we
believe that this is a way for us to build out part of our
collaborative approach with the States because of being onsite
with the States, working directly with them, and engaging them
with both the Medicare and Medicaid data.
Mr. Lankford. So what is an appropriate return? Obviously,
you know, spending as much as you get back in is not an
appropriate return.
Dr. Budetti. No. The return that we are seeing in more
recent times is much higher than that. I don't have the numbers
in front of me, but I would be delighted to share them with the
committee, because we believe they are very positive. But we
don't--we think there is more to do. There is definitely still
more to do.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Platts. Thank the gentleman. I have just a couple final
questions I want to try to get into the record, and then I
apologize, I have got a markup going on down the hall in Ed &
Workforce, and have amendments I need to get there to offer.
But a quick follow-up on the Medi-Medi issue and the States'
compliance or provision of data.
Ms. Maxwell, in your testimony you reference that while
there is Medicare Part A, B, and D information in, when it
comes to Medicaid, the projected time frame is another 3 years,
2015.
And Dr. Budetti, would you agree with that projection? And
if so, why another 3 years before--you know, that is 3 more
years of lack of information to act on to prevent fraud and
improper payments.
Dr. Budetti. Our current target is 2014, not 2015, I
believe, for the full--for getting the Medicaid data into the
integrated data repository, which then is accessed through the
One PI system. But I agree with you that we can't just sit and
wait for those data to be available. That is why we have our
pilots underway, to identify the best way to do this, and to
get States actively pursuing doing this, and why we are also
engaging the States in a hands-on collaborative way so that we
are not just dependent on the data that flow to us.
Mr. Platts. Right. Is there a point where--and maybe you
are already thinking of this or looking at this--where you look
at the Medi-Medi system and IDR versus your FPS and your APS
systems that you have now put in place and say Listen, we have
just got to cut our losses and move onto what apparently
appears to be more effective, as opposed to trying to fix what
has been going on for years in these older systems?
Dr. Budetti. Thank you for raising that question, because
that is actually a very important aspect of the fraud
prevention system is that it involves streaming data, live
data. It is as if you were, I don't know, looking at all of the
publications that were coming out every day and screening
through them for certain problems. Whereas the IDR is more like
the Library of Congress that has all of the reserve data in it,
which is extremely important for a number of purposes, not just
program integrity purposes, but a number of different
activities in CMS depend upon and use the IDR. But the IDR is
also the warehouse, the data warehouse upon which our models
for the fraud prevention system are based. Because if you have
5 or 6 years' worth of data, we can build very sophisticated
models, and then we put them into place to catch the streaming
data on the fraud prevention side.
So the two go hand in hand. One is not replacing the other.
In fact, they are very much a combined approach. And both are
extremely relevant. And the IDR for many aspects is an
extremely valuable tool that gets more important all the time.
Mr. Platts. So if you get that State data in there on the
Medicaid side, the IDR, all the more effective the traditional
approach is going to be to allow that One PI system to better
work. But also your new approach----
Dr. Budetti. Yes.
Mr. Platts. --and developing those analytics to really say,
you know, what is the pattern of fraud that we then try to put
in those flags in going forward.
Dr. Budetti. That is exactly right. They are intimately
related. The one is kind of the cornerstone of the other. It
also allows us to test the models ahead of time, before putting
them into place, by looking at historical data.
Mr. Platts. Great. I won't be in this chair a year from now
or 2 years from now, where hopefully all of this is more
fulfilled. Whether that is a colleague on my side of the
aisle--I am biased that we stay in the majority--or Mr. Towns
returns to the chair, as he and I have switched positions here
a number of times--remains to be seen. But I am certain whether
it is under the leadership of Chairman Issa and the full
committee, or Mr. Towns on the Democratic side, the importance
of these issues are going to continue to be looked at by this
subcommittee, whoever is in this chair. And we certainly want
to have success in going forward.
A final question, and I have got probably 12 more I would
like to ask but not the time to do so. And I am going to
conclude with I am going to say two quick ones, and I will say
quick.
But first is Dr. Budetti, with getting that State data in,
I mean the way I read it is there are regs and requirements in
place that the States have not adequately complied with as far
as providing the data that they are supposed to. Is that a fair
statement? And if so, what, if any, consequences have been
threatened to the States to help ensure compliance? Because we
are giving them one heck of a lot of money. And if they don't
want to comply with what we think is necessary oversight and
protection against fraud and misuse, you know, they need to
understand that they can't just continue on.
Dr. Budetti. So the States have been cooperating with the
existing requests which constitutes the Medicaid Statistical
Information System data. What we need to do now is to flesh out
exactly what data elements and what formats and what
periodicity, and so all the details of reporting data from the
States that we need to put into the new data that we are going
to be collecting from the States. And that is a work that is
taking some time. The States have different data systems. They
have different ways of handling the data. And so we need to
build that out extensively. But we do anticipate that we will
learn from the transformed Medicaid Statistical Information
System project, and we will then be able to do that.
Yes, Mr. Platts, under the Affordable Care Act we can hold
the States accountable for doing that. We want to make sure
that we are doing it in a way that is supportive for them and
for us, and to get it done in a way that is not disruptive.
Mr. Platts. Certainly the carrot versus the stick approach
hopefully is effective. But the States, are they being made
aware that yes, you will comply with this? We want to work hand
in hand with you, but ultimately if you don't, there is a stick
available as well to ensure compliance in some form?
Dr. Budetti. The Affordable Care Act spells that out quite
nicely, yes.
Mr. Platts. Final question to Ms. Yocom and Ms. King. You
know, GAO over the years has made a lot of recommendations,
some of which have been embraced, others that haven't. If you
had to highlight one or two of your recommendations that you
would see as most important to ensuring program integrity and
what you would estimate the effectiveness of those
recommendations would be in reducing that $65 billion improper
payments number, what would that one or two recommendations be?
Ms. Yocom. Well, on the Medicaid side some of our
recommendations are yet to come, and will be forthcoming soon.
I think the big areas where CMS needs to focus are on
continuing to work with the States on the data, continuing to
collaborate with States on program integrity issues. And the
collaborative audits are a very promising approach. We do think
that their refocused view is a good one.
Mr. Platts. And certainly in the testimony, the
collaborative approach has had much greater success than the
prior efforts kind of going----
Ms. Yocom. That is correct. Yeah.
Mr. Platts. Yeah. Ms. King?
Ms. King. And on the Medicare side, I think that we believe
that CMS has taken some very important steps in the last couple
of years. Certainly the new provider enrollment screening
measures, the implementation of the fraud prevention system,
which we are currently evaluating. And we are also looking at
prepayment edits. So we will have more to say about that later.
But certainly we see a positive direction.
Mr. Platts. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Towns?
Mr. Towns. Let me begin by thanking you, Mr. Chairman, for
saying that I might be in the chair. But I need to let you know
I am retiring after 30 years.
Mr. Platts. Actually, Mr. Towns, I apologize. We are both
going to be gone. So somebody will be in both of these chairs.
Mr. Towns. I just want to make that clear. Thank you so
much. But let me also ask, Mr. Chairman, that we hold the
record open to get the information that we requested in
reference to the indictment and conviction numbers. I would
like to get that to see in terms of what the rate, you know, of
conviction is versus indictment.
And of course I wanted to say again, Mr. Chairman, that I
really feel that we still have a lot of work to do. And I think
that my question at this point in time would be what can we do
on this side that might be helpful to you? You know, sometimes
as legislators, we just point our finger and point our finger
and point our finger. But we want to really, really come up
with a solution. So if there is something that we need to do,
let us know. I mean you can say it now or you can put it to us
in writing. Because we would like to just correct it. Because
there is still some serious problems. And the fact that--I
think that information in is important. And if you are not
getting the proper information in, then it is not going to help
you in the end. So if you have suggestions to us as to what we
might be able to do, I entertain that in my next few seconds.
Ms. King. Mr. Towns, if I just might clarify, we are
working to identify the rates of investigations and convictions
in both the criminal and civil fraud matters. And we have taken
2005 as a base year, and we are comparing it to 2010. That work
is not quite done yet, but will be done later this year.
Mr. Towns. Okay. Fine. So we should not hold the record
open, you are saying, to get the information. I mean, what are
you saying?
Ms. King. No, don't hold the record open because it is not
done yet. But we are close to finishing it.
Mr. Towns. But you will give us the information before I
retire?
Ms. King. Yes, sir.
Mr. Towns. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Platts. Thank the gentleman. We will keep the record
open for 2 weeks for that follow-on information that has been
requested. Certainly appreciate that.
Also, I would ask unanimous consent, I have a statement for
the record from the National Association of Medicaid Directors
that focuses on their concern about the duplication of efforts
at the Federal and State level, and the importance of a
seamless coordination so we are not spending money on
replicating what either we are already doing at the Federal
level or at the State level or vice versa. So without
objection, so ordered.
I want to thank all of our witnesses again. And you know, I
think that as I read through the testimony in preparation for
the hearing, and the staff's leg work in preparing and what we
heard today, is there are a lot of concerns about what has
transpired in the past and the ineffectiveness of program
integrity efforts. And as Mr. Lankford identified, one example
where $60 million spent to recoup less than that, obviously
that is not a good cost-benefit to the American taxpayers. But
I also think that what comes through is that CMS, in
conjunction with the Inspector General's Office and GAO, is
working forward in a way that is learning from the mistakes of
the past and learning what worked in the past, such as
collaborative efforts versus other approaches, and seeking to
put in place a truly effective program integrity system that
will bring down that improper payments number hopefully
dramatically in the years ahead. Because in doing so, we help
us address both the debt that we have as a Nation, but also
those dollars are truly benefiting those in need of these
health-care services, whether it be Medicaid or Medicare, as
opposed to lining the pockets of criminals and wrongdoers. So I
am encouraged that we are headed in the right direction, as we
need to.
The ranking member and I do have about 7 months left, so
that gives us 7 more months to work with, not torment you in
this partnership approach. And we look forward to that
continued dialogue as we go forward. So this hearing stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:14 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


