- ARE CHANGES IN SECURITY POLICY JEOPARDIZING USAID RECONSTRUCTION PROJECTS AND PERSONNEL IN AFGHANISTAN?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ARE CHANGES IN SECURITY POLICY JEOPARDIZING USAID RECONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS AND PERSONNEL IN AFGHANISTAN?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY,

HOMELAND DEFENSE AND FOREIGN OPERATIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 29, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-149

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-755                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on National Security, Homeland Defense and Foreign
Operations

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho, Vice        JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Minority Member
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                PETER WELCH, Vermont
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 29, 2012...................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Steven J. Trent, Acting Inspector General for Afghanistan
Reconstruction
Oral statement...............................................     5
Written statement............................................     7
Mr. J. Alexander Thier, Assistant to the Administrator and
Director of the Office of Afghanistan and Pakistan Affairs,
U.S. Agency for International Development
Oral statement...............................................     9
Written statement............................................    11

APPENDIX

Professional Services Council, Submitted Statements..............    29
The Honorable Jason Chaffetz, A Member of Congress from the State
of Utah, opening statement.....................................    43
Letter to The Honorable Jason Chaffetz from Steven J. Trent,
Acting Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction    45
Follow-up Questions for the record from Steven Trent, SIGAR, and
J. Alexander Thier, USAID......................................    46

ARE CHANGES IN SECURITY POLICY JEOPARDIZING USAID RECONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS AND PERSONNEL IN AFGHANISTAN?

----------

Thursday, March 29, 2012,

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on National Security, Homeland
Defense, and Foreign Operations,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:35 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz and Tierney.
Staff Present: Ali Ahmad, Majority Deputy Press Secretary;
Thomas A. Alexander, Majority Senior Counsel; Robert Borden,
Majority General Counsel; Will L. Boyington, Majority Staff
Assistant; Molly Boyl, Majority Parliamentarian; John Cuaderes,
Majority Deputy Staff Director; Mitchell S. Kominsky, Majority
Counsel; Justin LoFranco, Majority Press Assistant; Jaron
Bourke, Minority Director of Administration; Devon Hill,
Minority Staff Assistant; Peter Kenny, Minority Counsel; Rory
Sheehan, Minority New Media Press Secretary; and Carlos
Uriarte, Minority Counsel.
Mr. Chaffetz. The Committee will come to order.
I will state the Committee mission statement.
We exist to secure two fundamental principles. First,
Americans have a right to know that the money Washington takes
from them is well spent and, second, Americans deserve an
efficient, effective government that works for them. Our duty
on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee is to protect
these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to hold government
accountable to taxpayers, because taxpayers have a right to
know what they get from their government. We will work
tirelessly in partnership with citizen watchdogs to deliver the
facts to the American people and bring genuine reform to the
Federal bureaucracy.
This is the mission of the Oversight and Government Reform
Committee
I want to thank everybody for their participation in
today's hearing, which is entitled, ``Are Changes in Security
Policy Jeopardizing USAID Reconstruction Projects and Personnel
in Afghanistan?'' I would like to welcome Ranking Member
Tierney and members of the Subcommittee and members of the
audience that are here with us today.
National Security Subcommittee has a long history of
overseeing U.S.-funded reconstruction efforts abroad. Last year
alone, the Subcommittee held six hearings on Iraq, Afghanistan,
and the billions spent on earthquake relief in Haiti.
We have seen a common theme: the Federal Government appears
to be incapable, at least thus far, of tracking its
expenditures. Time and again it cannot readily provide data,
simple data, such as the amount of money spent, the number of
projects completed, the number of projects ongoing, and whether
projects are on time, on budget, and whether they were actually
completed. The simple request, for instance, know the location
or see a photo is often met with bewilderment and inability to
provide that information.
The failure to track this data in real time demonstrates an
extreme lack of oversight. It also tells this Congress that
bureaucrats in Washington have little visibility or control
over the billions of dollars spent overseas. I continue to work
on a piece of legislation that will hopefully rectify this.
Hopefully we can do that in a very bipartisan way.
Oftentimes, the Inspectors General are the last bastion of
accountability in the Executive Branch. Unfortunately,
President Obama has failed to appoint replacements for the
State Department, Defense Department, USAID, and SIGAR, the
Special Inspector General for Afghan Reconstruction, which is,
in essence, all the major players in Afghanistan. We don't have
even an appointment, let alone a Senate confirmation, for the
major people that are responsible for the oversight within
Afghanistan.
In fact, the State Department has not had an IG since
December 2007. This is just inexcusable and I think a
disservice to the American people, and it makes me wonder if
this President, President Obama, simply doesn't want somebody
looking over his shoulder and want people in there on a full-
time basis with the authority to get the job done. I think it
is inexcusable to have so many vacancies at this point.
In some cases there is significant disagreement between the
agencies and the oversight community. We saw this recently with
the Special Inspector General for Afghan Reconstruction and
USAID. On March 9th, 2012, Mr. Steven Trent sent a management
alert to Dr. Ken Yamashita regarding Afghan President Karzai's
Presidential Decree 62, PD 62, as it is called. PD 62 mandates
that U.S. implementing partners cannot use private security
companies after March 20th, 2012. Instead, the contractors and
nongovernment organizations must contract with the recently
formed Afghan Public Protection Force, or the APPF. So in
addition to providing goods and services at no cost to the
Afghan people, the American people must also pay President
Karzai for security.
Mr. Trent's management alert outlined several core
concerns: one, the transition to using the Afghan Public
Protection Force may cause taxpayers an additional $55 million
during the first year on 13 different projects. Part of this is
due to a staggering 20 percent profit margin demanded by
President Karzai. Number two, the Afghan Public Protection
Force may not be capable of providing adequate security for the
implementing partners; and, third, approximately 1.34 billion
U.S. dollars in taxpayer funded projects may be at risk of
modification or perhaps even termination.
According to International Relief and Development, a
nonprofit NGO, the transition to APPF may increase costs by
approximately 15 percent. This expense is then passed on to the
American taxpayers. In response to SIGAR's concern, Dr.
Yamashita wrote the following on March 13th, 2012: ``USAID
acknowledges the issues identified in the observations, but
rejects the SIGAR management letter in its entirety due to the
inadequate comparisons, speculative assumptions, and inaccurate
statements within the document.'' USAID did not merely object
to SIGAR's findings, it rejected them in its entirety.
We often see contrasts, we often see disagreements on
particular points, but what strikes me about this particular
one is just the total and complete dismissal of this report
from top to bottom. Thus, we are holding this hearing.
The purpose of today's hearing is to reconcile these
assessments. In doing so, we will take a broader look at
whether this new security policy makes sense, whether it is in
the best interest of the American taxpayer, and whether we can
exceed under this rubric.
The American people have little patience for government
waste and lack of progress in Afghanistan. If, after 10 years,
we are no closer to defining and achieving success, then
Congress and the Obama Administration should reassess our
future in Afghanistan.
I hope that our discussion today will provide some clarity.
I look forward to the hearing and the panel. I appreciate the
two gentlemen who are joining us today and their commitment to
our Country and our betterment, future. I really do appreciate
their expertise and look forward to a good discussion.
I would now like to recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Massachusetts, a friend, Mr. Tierney, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for
having this hearing.
Thanks to both of you gentlemen for coming here and
testifying today.
I can't let go unanswered just the comment that the
Chairman made with regard to not having appointments in various
important positions. I agree that there are a number of
important positions that need to be filled in this Country and
that are not filled, but I do take note of the insistence in
the Senate of having cloture votes on every single thing that
comes down the line, and the amount of obstruction that has
gone on with regard to the President's attempts to appoint
everything from the Consumer Protection Bureau to the FHFA
director to judges to the National Labor Relations Board.
When you have a minority party and minority leadership that
says that their sole goal in life is to make sure that this
sitting President doesn't win a second term, I think that that
is the indication of why things aren't getting done in this
Country in large scale, and particularly why we don't have
appointments in very important places and I would question
whether or not that is the best thing for this Country.
And I think if we want to start talking about working in a
bipartisan way, that is a darn good place to start. Let's fill
these positions so that we can move forward and keep this
Country safe and keep our economy moving on that basis. So
before we start loading up criticism at any one president on
that basis, let's get the congressional places functioning, and
particularly the Senate, with regard to allowing people to be
nominated and then have a debate and vote on that.
This is important business that we are talking about here
today. These are people that are working very hard to try and
make the policy of the past government and the current
government work in Afghanistan, and people are putting their
lives at risk. We have to make sure that we are doing
everything we can to keep them safe and that the security
mechanisms that are put in place actually are effective. I have
some serious questions about that and I have talked to Mr.
Thier about it and would be happy to have the conversation with
Mr. Trent about just how we are proceeding over there and
whether or not it is the most efficient way, whether or not it
is the safest way, and whether or not we are just throwing bad
money after worst on that.
I would just ask the Chairman, with unanimous consent, to
enter my written remarks into the record, then we can proceed.
I think it would be instructive to hear the witnesses and have
an exchange of questions.
Mr. Chaffetz. Without objection, so ordered.
In the spirit of flushing this out, my criticism of the
President thus far is that in most cases there hasn't even been
a nomination. So I agree the stagnation in the Senate is
clearly a problem, and a bipartisan problem. I don't know what
that other body does, quite frankly, all day. They ought to
give up the wheelchair races and the Wednesday night Bingo and
actually do something.
Mr. Tierney. If the Chairman would yield for a second. And,
therefore, you see the President's frustration. When he
nominates people, they end up having to withdraw because they
can't get action. So if the Senate would show a little bit of
an attempt here to work as a government should work, then I
think the whole thing would move a little bit more smoothly.
Mr. Chaffetz. And I would concur and work with you. My
criticism of the President thus far is the lack of nominations,
and we will continue to work on that, because I think
ultimately our goal is the same and I think we are unified in
that. We need people with authority, confirmed by the Senate,
in these active positions.
Nevertheless, maybe we will have another hearing about
that.
Let's move forward, though. Members will have seven days to
submit opening statements for the record.
We would now like to recognize our panel. Mr. Steven Trent
is the Acting Special Inspector General for Afghan
Reconstruction and Mr. Alexander Thier is the Assistant to the
Administrator for the Office of Afghan and Pakistan Affairs at
the U.S. Agency for International Development. Both gentlemen
have very distinguished careers and backgrounds, very well
qualified for their positions. We appreciate their
participation here today.
Pursuant to Committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn in
before they testify, so if the gentlemen would please rise and
raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. Let the record reflect the
witnesses answered in the affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, we would like you to
limit your testimony to five minutes. We will obviously submit
your entire opening statement for the record. But at this time
we will now recognize Mr. Trent for five minutes.

STATEMENTS OF WITNESSES

STATEMENT OF STEVEN J. TRENT

Mr. Trent. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Tierney, and
members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me here today
to discuss changes in Afghanistan's private security contractor
policies and their impact on USAID reconstruction projects and
personnel in Afghanistan.
President Karzai's decision to dissolve private security
contractors, or PSCs, and transfer the responsibility to an
Afghan state-owned enterprise ultimately affects all U.S.
international reconstruction programs. Under a two-year
bridging strategy, the new Afghan Public Protection Force,
known as the APPF, was to assume security responsibilities for
all development projects and convoys by March 20th of this
year, and for all military construction sites and bases a year
from now.
The transition most immediately affects AID, as the largest
single funder for development projects in Afghanistan. SIGAR
has conducted a number of PSC-related audits and is currently
conducting an audit of the cost of PSCs used by AID's
implementing partners from 2009 through 2011. Earlier this
month SIGAR alerted AID to issues we believed warranted
immediate consideration in light of this transition to the
APPF.
Our primary concerns are over increased costs and the
possible disruption or termination of reconstruction projects
if the APPF cannot provide the necessary security. Security
costs for reconstruction projects have steadily and
significantly increased in recent years. Our ongoing audit work
indicates that AID-implementing partners employing PSCs are
currently spending an average of 14 percent of the value of
their contracts on security services. We noted one project
whose security comprised 42 percent of the overall contract
value.
SIGAR's analysis found the transition to the APPF may
increase Afghan labor costs by as much as 25 to 46 percent and
expat labor costs by as much as 200 percent. In January of this
year, AID released an analysis of its implementing partners'
contingency plans for the transition. This analysis concluded
that if the APPF cannot provide necessary security, at least 10
major AID funded projects, valued at nearly $900 million, would
be at risk of termination. Another 19 projects, worth about
$450 million, would need to be modified.
Although AID disagreed with our alert letter, neither AID
nor any of the U.S. Government agencies involved in
Afghanistan's reconstruction systematically tracks security
costs. No one knows how much the transition to the APPF is
going to cost, but all agree it will cost more. How much more
will ultimately depend on the APPF's capacity to provide the
full range of security services. The true increase in cost may
not be known for a year or more as the fledgling APPF develops.
I think it is important to realize that the current rush to
establish contracts with the APPF is not the end game. At the
moment, we have more questions than answers about how the APPF
is actually going to operate. The bridging strategy called for
developmental assessments of the APPF at the 6, 9, and 12 month
marks. The six-month assessment, completed in September of
2011, found that the APPF was not ready to assume essential PSC
responsibilities, such as training, equipping, and deploying
guard forces to meet contract requirements. The December
assessment at the 9 month mark has not been finalized, and we
are now at the 12 month assessment point.
SIGAR has suggested that AID determine if funding will be
available to cover additional security costs for projects that
will continue after the transition and assess the effect
increased security costs will have on project implementation.
SIGAR also suggested that AID address increased security costs
before deciding to make a new award. In other words, AID should
carefully and objectively consider whether the expected
benefits of a reconstruction project outweigh the rising costs
of security.
Security is central to the reconstruction effort and SIGAR
will continue to closely monitor transition to the APPF, assess
transitional outcomes, and keep key policy and decision makers
informed about the results of our work.
Thank you, and I am happy to take any questions from the
Committee.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Trent follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED0] 74755.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.002

Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Thier?

STATEMENT OF J. ALEXANDER THIER

Mr. Thier. Thank you, Chairman Chaffetz and Ranking Member
Tierney. Thanks for the opportunity to discuss the potential
impacts of PD 62 upon the safety and security of our
development programs and personnel in Afghanistan today.
Over the past 19 years I have worked side-by-side with
thousands of American, Afghan, and international public
servants in Afghanistan, and these dedicated people risk their
lives for the greater good, and their efforts have improved the
lives of millions.
The safety and security of both USAID staff and
implementing personnel who work with USAID in Afghanistan are
the highest priority of our agency and for me personally. Many
people working with USAID in Afghanistan have sacrificed to
support U.S. national security and to help to bring stability
to the people of Afghanistan, and I have personally lost many
friends. We must not forget that these gains come at a great
cost.
For this reason, since the passage of PD 62, the United
States Government, and our agency in particular, has devoted
significant energy to working with our partners on this
transition required under Afghan law.
USAID's development assistance to Afghanistan continues to
remain a critical component in supporting our core national
security objectives and our efforts are a critical component of
the whole of government's civil military effort to advance
these objectives. I also believe that our programs there are
delivering meaningful results. It is really critical to keep in
mind the situation that Afghanistan faced a decade ago. I first
served in Afghanistan nearly four years during the civil war,
when the country was literally dismantling every vestige of a
functioning state that it had once had.
But since 2002 we have supported Afghanistan's impressive
development progress in vital areas, despite operating under
some of the world's toughest conditions. This includes enormous
progress in education, health care, and economic growth.
Over the last 18 months, USAID has been adjusting our
programming and our business model in Afghanistan to ensure
that our portfolio reflects both the most effective and cost-
effective priorities.
Under PD 62, responsibility for security services in
Afghanistan for civilian development programs and projects
transferred to the APPF as of March 20th, 2012.
USAID has made a concerted effort with its partners to
reduce overall reliance on PSCs and the need for armed guards
in the last 18 months. Many, in fact most, of our partners do
not use armed guards and have reduced their need for these
services through community engagement and other tested
approaches. As of March 1st, 2012, only 32 of 91 USAID projects
required protection by PSCs, and of the 59 remaining projects,
which represent 75 percent of our funding, they do not require
armed security and, therefore, will not utilize APPF for
guards.
USAID has worked intensively with those partners who do
require APPF with the NATO training mission in Afghanistan to
manage this transaction without sacrificing security and to
ensure that our critical efforts to stabilize Afghanistan
continue. The transition model is a two-part process. First,
partners contract with the APPF for services and their PSC
guards convert to APPF guards; same guards, different uniforms.
Second, the partner may choose to contract with a risk
management company to provide security, advice, and consulting.
In recent months, particularly after the September report
that Mr. Trent has discussed, the APPF has significantly
improved its capabilities and many of the necessary milestones
for the APPF transition have been reached. Of the 32 USAID
projects that have indicated that they will contract with the
APPF, as of this week, 23 have successfully contracted and the
remaining 9 projects are at various levels of negotiation. The
APPF is already operational in several key sites and interim
licenses granted by the Ministry of Interior have provided
additional time for remaining programs to find a solution to
their security requirements. Enormous credit must be given to
NATO team, who worked tirelessly with the Afghan government and
USAID and our partners.
In addition to addressing security concerns, USAID has also
been carefully monitoring the costs associated with this
transition. We have conducted an assessment of security costs
for 15 of the 23 projects that have converted from PSCs to APPF
and RMC contracts. This initial assessment indicates that
overall average costs based on a side-by-side comparison,
including all costs associated with security for those
projects, is 16 percent higher under the APPF and RMC model. As
the process of transition to APPF proceeds, we will continue to
monitor costs and seek opportunities to reduce overall expenses
without sacrificing security.
We are committed to a continued joint effort working
closely with the NATO mission, Congress, the Afghan government,
our Inspectors General, both internal and SIGAR, and
international partners to sustain and improve on the
development investments made during the past decade.
Thanks for the opportunity to discuss this critical issue,
and I look forward to your questions and advice.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Thier follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.006

Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you both. I will now recognize myself
for five minutes.
I would ask unanimous consent to insert into the record a
written statement from the Professional Services Council. They
have 350-plus members and I would like to insert that into the
record. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Thier, to simplify this, to read through this letter
from USAID that came back from Mr. Yamashita, who is the
Mission Director there for USAID, there isn't going to be an
increased safety concern, it is not going to cost more money,
you are not going to have projects pulling out. Is that an
oversimplification? That is in essence what they are saying, is
pretty much don't worry about it, nothing is going to change.
Mr. Thier. Let me say that we are concerned, as we have
been since day one and, in fact, before PD 62, about all of
these issues because they are constantly evolving. What the
mission response and my testimony represents is the best
information that we have as of today, because it has been a
very rapidly evolving situation. We were, indeed, six months
ago very concerned about the potential that some of our
important development programs may shut down as a result of
this transition not succeeding. What we have seen, in fact, is
that of the 32 projects that say that they require security, 23
of them have successfully contracted.
Mr. Chaffetz. I understand that. The question is, is it
going to cost more money?
Mr. Thier. I think there are three issues. One is whether
we are now concerned that projects are going to shut down on
the immediate time frame, and my response to that is that our
current indications as of today are that none of our projects
are going to shut down.
Mr. Chaffetz. Okay, so none are going to terminate.
Mr. Thier. Right.
Mr. Chaffetz. Nobody is going to leave. The risk that Mr.
Trent shows up there, which you look at the worst case
scenario, that is what they are supposed to do, is highlight
the worst case scenario. So you are saying it is going to be
zero and the Inspector is telling us that there could be up to
$899 million worth of projects that are abandoned.
Mr. Thier. I certainly can't say that it is going to be
zero. What I know is that of the projects that we were
concerned about, none of them are now indicating a likelihood
of shutting down in the near term. Now, I certainly can't say
that that won't be the case in the future, but we----
Mr. Chaffetz. That is what Mr. Yamashita said. He said that
none of them today are saying--said already been analyzing and
preparing the transition for years and not one partner has
stated that the organization would withdraw from Afghanistan
because of the transition to the APPF.
Mr. Thier. And that is exactly right. As of today, not a
single one of our partners is planning to shut down----
Mr. Chaffetz. Safety is an obviously huge concern. Since
2003, USAID partners and personnel, there have been 1,000
people that have either been killed or injured; roughly just
over a third of those people have been killed. One of the
biggest concerns is safety. You don't see any disruption in the
safety of what these people are doing? Because, as you rightly
point out, these people are putting their lives on the line in
the most difficult of circumstances. You don't see any decrease
in the safety of these people that are out there working for
us?
Mr. Thier Thus far we do not have indications. And this is
obviously from our partners who are going through this process
and making these contracts. We do not have any indication that
there is any decrease or increase in security. And there are
really two critical facts here: one, that our reliance on armed
guards has dramatically decreased in the last 18 months, in
part because we wanted to decrease our need or necessity for
the APPF and PSCs for both cost reasons and security reasons
leading up to this transition.
Of those remaining who still feel the need for these
services, they have gone forward. They are the ones who are
responsible for the safety and security of their employees, and
I talk to these people very day. They would not do this unless
they were confident, as of today, that the safety and security
of their employees was going to be okay under this model.
Now, that may change, but at the moment they are all saying
we are willing to make this transition because we feel
comfortable with the way things have worked out.
Mr. Chaffetz. And the cost? You don't anticipate this is
going to have an increase in cost?
Mr. Thier. At the moment, we are trying to look at this
very intensively, and we ordered this side-by-side comparison
of 15 projects, and what our implementing partners have said,
based on their current contracts and their plans, that we see a
16 percent cost increase.
Now, I can't guarantee that some projects won't be more;
others won't be less. We are also continuing to try to get some
of our projects off of this entirely, which is, frankly, a much
greater degree of cost savings than the incremental cost of the
transition. But our analysis, which is looking at the actual
contracts that have been signed and what our partners say they
need today to secure their sites has a roughly 16 percent
increase over 15 out of 23 contracts that have been signed.
Mr. Chaffetz. This would be the 20 percent profit margin
that the President is wanting to put in who knows what bank
account?
Mr. Thier. Well, it is split between several contracts. And
whether the increase is coming from the risk management company
side of the house or the APPF side of the house, I would have
to let you know; I don't have that breakdown.
Mr. Chaffetz. Mr. Trent, I obviously want to give you time
to respond to this, but I will come back to you. But in the
essence of time, let me recognize the Ranking Member for five
minutes.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
So this question is for both of you. Take it in whichever
order you want. My understanding is for those remaining
projects that require security, the deal is that now they are
going to have APPF forces there, who I don't know that we have
a great deal of confidence in their abilities on that; there
has always been trouble with the training of the security
forces of Afghanistan.
So they are going to come in, and then for those that are
still having trouble deciding how they are going to operate in
this system, we are going to be able to have management risk
companies, who are essentially going to be the same people that
used to be contracting for the job to now layer on and oversee
them. Then we are going to pay them on a cost-plus basis and
add on the 20 percent profit.
So if I work this calculation all the way out, is the ISAF
forces, NATO and the United States and others, contribute money
to Afghanistan, Afghanistan uses all of that money to try to
build a security force, they then take the funded security
force and assign it to these projects, which are paid for by
the United States and other countries' money for the
development of that; charge them for the security by the people
who are paid for by these people on a per person basis on cost-
plus; and then manage them with people that used to be there
without further management or whatever, one less layer, and pay
for them and then add a 20 percent profit to it. Is that about
right, Mr. Trent?
Mr. Trent. Congressman, we have paid a large amount of
money through MLI to buy weapons and various equipment. Your
characterization, I think, has certainly a consideration. I
think that is not--I can't say it is an unfair way to look at
it. I would be interested in AID's response to that.
Mr. Tierney. So would I.
Mr. Thier?
Mr. Thier. Thank you. So let me just clarify one thing
about I think the way this is functioning. The guards who were
working for the private security contractors on March 19th
changed their uniforms and go to work for the APPF. So this is
not a----
Mr. Tierney. Without any further training.
Mr. Thier.--not a separate guard force. And in most cases,
I think in all cases thus far, the same guards who they were
paying for for their private security contractors have now
become APPF guards. So literally a change of uniform on that
day. So the same people who they relied on and paid and trained
to fulfill that role are the same people who are guarding them
on March 21st, but wearing the APPF uniform.
At the same time a number of private security contractors,
and perhaps other companies, have signed up to become risk
management consultants.
Mr. Tierney. These are the same people that used to have
what now are the APPF people when they had the old uniforms.
These are the people that managed them----
Mr. Thier. Exactly. The old model was essentially some
expatriate managers with Afghan guards, and that has now been
split into two things: the Afghan guards now work for the APPF
and the expatriates, if they are hired, work for these risk
management companies, advising the firm on security.
So what was previously one contract has now become two
different contracts, one for the Afghan guards, one for the
expatriate guards. And that is voluntary. The implementing
partners don't have to sign up with the APPF, but if they want
those services they do. They don't have to sign up with the
risk management company, but if they want those services they
do.
So that is the basic model of how this is meant to
function.
It is true that the international community has supported
the standing up of a guard force to make this transition. It is
our goal with the APPF, as with many of the other Afghan
entities, to wean them off of----
Mr. Tierney. Let me just focus us back. So, so far we have
taken one entity for security, made it into two. It is already
funded by the United States and others on that basis. So you
have just now broken it into two and you are now paying them on
a cost per person basis; you break it down for the gun, for the
uniform, whatever expenses are there, right?
Mr. Thier. I would have to look at the contract to see how
it is actually worded in terms of the costs, so I am sorry I
don't have that level of specificity.
Mr. Tierney. But there is going to be a 20 percent profit
margin allowed on those contracts, right?
Mr. Thier. My understanding of the 20 percent is that it is
not a profit in the--this is a state-owned enterprise. It is
not a profit in the sense that this is something that is going
to be used as profit to be distributed to individuals.
Mr. Tierney. You say that. Given the history of corruption
and ineptitude in this country, you think that adding
additional layers and opportunities and another 20 percent is
not an opportunity for further graft and corruption and driving
a wedge between people in that country and their government?
Mr. Thier. What is critical in this regard is that this
entity, like all of the other Afghan entities that we are
supporting, needs to have very rigorous accounting and
oversight mechanisms to ensure that that doesn't happen.
Mr. Tierney. Which brings me to the next problem. You
fairly well admit that you don't have great vision into any of
these contracts, particularly when it comes to security. Is
that going to change? Are you telling us that now you are going
to start looking at these security contracts and tracking the
money?
Mr. Thier. Our people review every contract. I am just
saying that I specifically don't know the mechanism that you
are asking about, about whether it is costed out by the
individual or in a different way. But certainly our contracting
officers are required to review these contracts and have
approved every single one.
Mr. Tierney. I want to come back and revisit this, but I
know my time is up.
Mr. Chaffetz. Well, I just want to follow up on that line
of questioning here. It is my understanding that USAID issued a
blanket waiver for sole source subcontracts between U.S.
companies and the APPF. How does that further your ability to
look into the money that is going out?
I would also say that SIGAR has issued a table here. I
don't know if you had a chance to look at Table 1, which
basically outlines things, for instance, such as martyr
contribution, pension payments. They even have a line item of
profit, 20 percent of above total. So if you could look at
that, that is on page 4 of what they issued to you.
Where do you take exception with what they put out there?
Mr. Thier. Maybe somebody can hand me the----
Mr. Chaffetz. I will give you a moment to highlight that.
Let me allow Mr. Trent to explain this Table 1, because if
you are summarily dismissing the report in its entirety, they
are pretty detailed and specific about food stipend and
training and martyr contribution, hazard pay, to be determined
by the customer, what the AK-47 rifle costs. Where would USAID
find fault in this table?
Go ahead, Mr. Trent, if you could explain. I want to make
sure Mr. Thier has an chance to catch up to it.
Mr. Trent. This is the APPF fee schedule off of the APPF
website that was published, that we used to calculate our
estimation of increased cost. All of these items, I think there
are 14 various categories from basic salary to medicine,
etcetera, can be lumped into what is referred to in the
industry as a burden rate.
We calculated a burden rate for current PSC operations
under current AID implementing partners' contracts, from which
we pulled a number of invoices for the year 2011. We determined
the burden rate. We took that basic salary, average salary rate
and we punched it into the APPF fee schedule, which is the
table that is under discussion here. And that is how we arrived
at our estimation that costs were going to increase between 25
and 46 percent.
I have no information that costs are other than what are
published on the APPF website.
Mr. Chaffetz. Mr. Thier?
Mr. Thier. Thanks. So as to these costs, I don't have
disagreement, per se, with----
Mr. Chaffetz. But the administrator, the person on the
ground, Mr. Yamashita, he summarily dismissed it, said it was
inaccurate.
Mr. Thier. Well, I think what he was concerned about was
the conclusion of the estimation of cost increases that were
used in this report versus our own work, because, as I said, we
actually looked at 15 different contracts side-by-side to
capture every single aspect of the security costs that would be
incurred, and we came up with a far lower figure. And in
talking to our implementing partners, we did not come to the
same conclusion about the need to triple the number of
expatriates. So I don't think he was disagreeing with the
table; I think he was just disagreeing with the conclusion
about the estimated cost increases when you compare apples to
apples.
Mr. Chaffetz. That is not exactly what he said. He said he
disagreed with the report in its entirety, which would lead me
to believe he disagrees with this table.
But, Mr. Trent, do you care to respond to that?
Mr. Trent. I would like to say that the--and this goes a
bit back to a prior question, but the increased costs that we
foresee are not--security costs do not hinge on a signed
contract, and having contracts now signed or even the initial
lay-down of contracts side-by-side. The true cost of security
is going to hinge on APPF's ability to deliver security
services as we move forward passed this contract signing phase.
That is where we have serious concerns over APPF's capacity.
The September 11th assessment was damning, if you will, on
APPF, and as I understand, I have heard that there has been
significant progress made since then. We are concerned that the
December 9 month assessment has not been completed or
published, which I think would have given certainly SIGAR a
better insight as to what progress had been made between
September and December. We are now at the 12 month assessment
point, and we look forward to seeing the documentation on
increases of APPF capacity between September and the next
assessment that comes out, if and when that is finalized and
published.
So I think it is important to understand that expatriate
costs that we estimate here are not, we did not imagine that
the RMCs and the IPs were going to go out on March 20th and
hire additional expat staff. As APPF capacity is either built
or isn't built to meet the needs of the implementing partners'
adequate security, we have the estimations from OSAC and PSC,
as well as a number of implementing partners, they will hire
more expats to fill the security gaps that the APPF cannot
fill, if they are not able to develop the capacity; and that is
where we see the increase in expat costs coming in the next
year.
Mr. Chaffetz. Mr. Thier?
Mr. Thier. No, I just wanted to respond because I very,
very strongly agree with Mr. Trent and just want to make clear
that, first of all, we do not know what is going to happen in
months from now, and I don't want you to have----
Mr. Chaffetz. Okay, wait, wait, wait. Let's examine that
comment because what the Inspector General is saying, they are
foreshadowing what might happen in the future, and you
summarily dismissed it; no, absolutely none of that is going to
happen. No increased costs; there is not going to be increased
safety costs; nobody is going to leave the country. Don't worry
about it. You guys are flat out wrong.
You are very nice gentlemen, you are very nice to Mr. Trent
here, but don't sit here and tell me that you agree with him
when the person on the ground said we totally disagree with you
and everything that you wrote.
Mr. Thier. Because I think we are talking about very
different things, and this, I think, is a critical point to
make. We are analyzing the situation, a rapidly evolving
situation on the ground as it exists today. We are talking to
our partners every day. Literally, I had to change my testimony
because a new contract was signed overnight. So the situation
is evolving.
What I can tell you is what we know right now.
Mr. Chaffetz. But isn't what the Special Inspector here
doing is looking into the future and giving a warning shot,
saying, look, beware? Isn't that fair? That is why I am just
stunned that you would just summarily dismiss all of this. But
you are saying we don't know what is going to happen.
Mr. Thier. We don't. We can't know what is going to happen.
I don't think any of us can say that we know what is going to
happen. We have very elaborate contingency plans that try to
think through all of these issues. I think that what I am
trying to clarify here is that we don't know whether costs will
go up; we don't know whether costs will go down.
Mr. Chaffetz. But you just----
Mr. Thier. We don't know whether the need for guards will
go up or whether the need for guards will go down. What we are
seeing----
Mr. Chaffetz. So then why is the Inspector General wrong?
Mr. Thier. I think that all--he is not wrong. What we
found----
Mr. Chaffetz. That is not what was written.
Mr. Thier. All we found is that the conclusions in this
report we do not feel are supported by the data that we
currently have in hand, and that is the best that we can do, is
to look at what we have now and make a determination about what
we think is happening.
It is really critical because I think what we all have to
understand here is that six months ago, when we saw this
report, we all had very grave concerns about what was going on,
and we are working literally on a day-to-day and hour-to-hour
basis to make this transition as successful as possible and to
reduce the costs not only for these contracts, but over all
that we incur for security in Afghanistan so we can spend more
of the taxpayers' money on the things that we are trying to
accomplish there.
Mr. Chaffetz. Okay, I am sorry. I have gone way over my
time.
I recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
You know, we have real issues with a lot of things that are
happening over there in terms of insight into contracts, and
particularly subcontracts and the whole contracting process. In
the trucking contracts there was no insight at all to the
subcontracts; they had no idea who were the drivers, no idea
who was providing security. No oversight on that.
On the oil delivery, the Department of Defense and
Department of State couldn't even tell us who the company was.
They knew the name of the corporation. They had no idea who the
principals were or where they were organized. No insight into
that contract. The Defense Logistics Agency and the food
contract now arguing over almost $1 billion or $2 billion of
costs because they drew up what appears to be a questionable
contract and their lack of oversight in coming to terms even
over a multi-year period on that.
This is a concern here. You have very little insight into
these contracts and now somebody comes along and says this is
what we foresee could happen. It seems to me you plan for the
worst. You hope for the best, but you plan for the worst. I
think Mr. Trent has given you the worst case scenario of what
might happen here. You are acknowledging that you don't know,
it might happen. So are you planning for what Mr. Trent has
said may well happen, or are you just hoping for the best and
not planning for the worst?
Mr. Thier. No. We are planning for the worst. We have----
Mr. Tierney. How?
Mr. Thier.--with our implementing partners, detailed
contingency plans about what happens if, what happens. We did
this all the way through this transition process and we
continue to put those in place.
Mr. Tierney. Well, what if all 32 remaining companies that
need security end up needing the APPF, find out that that is
not really totally up to speed, end up having to hire risk
companies on top of that and then paying the 20 percent on
that? What is the cost increase when all that happens?
Mr. Thier. We don't know the answer to that question.
Literally on a project by project basis we require contingency
plans to think through all of these eventualities. Some of
those projects may choose to increase their RMCs; some of them
may choose to operate in a different fashion.
Mr. Tierney. But as you do that, at some point you have
that information and you aggregate it, and you turn around and
you say this is the worst case scenario by our best analysis. I
suggest that that is not a bad plan right now, to go and do
that.
Mr. Trent, when you talked to people and you got your
projections, I assume you went and talked to some of Mr.
Thier's partners, the people that he deals with on the ground,
right?
Mr. Trent. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Tierney. It would be the same people, Mr. Thier, that
you talk to.
Mr. Thier. Absolutely.
Mr. Tierney. So, Mr. Trent, you got one story and, Mr.
Thier, you got another? Because Mr. Trent is saying that when
he talked to them they saw some issues, and you are saying that
you had a nice talk with them and they got everything planned
out and everything is okay.
So, Mr. Trent, tell me a little bit about how your
conversation with those people went.
Mr. Trent. Well, Congressman, we met with six of AID's
implementing partners. One of them indicated to us very clearly
that they would be withdrawing if security services could to be
provided. Let me, if I may, say Dr. Yamashita's response to us,
there are two tipping points here, the first being March 20th
and contracts to be signed and the risk of reconstruction
projects, disruption or termination on the 21st and people are
walking away from jobs.
I think that Dr. Yamashita's letter to us, one, exhibits
some of the frustration that is ongoing in this process by all
people involved and, two, I think it is focused more on March
20th and that everything is going to be all right on March
20th. And from what I understand, there are a number of
contingency plans in place with existing guards with USAID on
March 20th. There is a flurry of contracts, more being signed
every day.
But the implementing partners, OSAC, PSC, have indicated to
us that it is the ability of the APPF to deliver the security
that is ultimately going to be the tipping point on the risk
that development of projects face, and that the IP,
implementing partners, face. So I think there is some
explanation for the tone and tenor of the AID response to SIGAR
in respect of focusing on the 20th and all the efforts that
were underway to sign contracts so that everything was fine on
the 21st, everything kept going on the 21st.
But the bigger issue here, from our perspective, from
SIGAR's perspective, is the capacity of the APPF to function,
and we are concerned about that in light of the general
ministerial capacity in Afghanistan, and that we were trying to
stand up a 25,000 man organization here in a relatively one,
two year period, and we find that there are just numerous
issues involved with that that are going to have real risk
impact on developmental projects as we go forward.
Mr. Tierney. Mr. Chairman, just as an aside, I might
suggest that would be a great hearing for us to have. We have
had hearings in the past on capacity of the security in
Afghanistan, but this specific aspect of maybe getting in an
international crisis group or some other third party analysis
of that and our own folks and see where we are at on that,
because I agree with you, this is going to be a huge
determinative what happens going forward.
Let me just get back, if I can, Mr. Thier, to the 20
percent issue. For some reason it is sticking in my craw that
we particularly fund the standing up of these security folks
and then we pay for a per person basis. And even though it is
not a supposedly profit-oriented group, I assume the ones
making the profit are going to be the so-called management risk
people; they are going to make a pretty good profit. But then
why are we paying 20 percent on top of that? And how do we
explain that to the taxpayers? We just keep circling our money
back and at some point somebody is taking it out, but it ain't
us.
Mr. Thier. To put it simply, my understanding of the 20
percent is to make the APPF self-sufficient, it is not to
distribute profit to any individual that is not part of the
charter; it is to make the organization able to carry on its
business operations in the future.
Mr. Tierney. What is the per person cost for if not that?
It is broken down to how many different things, Mr. Trent,
twenty something?
Mr. Trent. Fifteen items.
Mr. Tierney. Fifteen items. And they are paying for each
single thing down there to make themselves sufficient. So why
the 20 percent on top of that?
Mr. Thier. Again, my best understanding of it is that what
they are trying to do is to make this a self-sufficient entity.
Part of what this APPF is designed to do, frankly, is to
protect what is hopefully going to be a growing private sector
in Afghanistan as well, so they were looking at the standing up
of this new entity as something that would be around for a
number of years and would need to be sustaining so that they
could provide those security services as they continued to come
online. Again, it was not to provide profit to any individual.
Mr. Tierney. I don't buy it, but I hear your explanation; I
thank you for it. So when you talk about some of these
implementing partners saying that they are no longer going to
need security, what are they doing differently that allows them
to negate that cost?
Mr. Thier. Several things have been done. Some projects
that required significant amounts of private security have gone
away. For instance, we are doing much less in terms of things
like road building, because we feel we have built enough roads
and the roads that are built need to be maintained. So that has
diminished the need.
Some projects have gone to more of a community engagement
approach, and that is combined with the fact that we have tried
to cut out subcontracting levels, something that you raised
before, and often contract directly with the Afghan
implementing partners, who the for-profit companies were
subcontracting with. And by cutting out that layer and having
more Afghans doing the direct implementation and having a
greater degree of community engagement, that has also required
a lesser amount of guards.
Overall, in the last 18 months, there has been a dramatic
overall reduction in our need for security, and given how these
costs have risen over the last few years, that savings is
enormous, because that is money that is now going directly to
projects instead of to the security to protect them.
Mr. Tierney. What is AID's plan to get the remaining 32
onto that notion or that idea that they won't need security
either? In other words, putting it all down into the local
people's capacity to build their own roads, take care of their
own water treatment facilities, do whatever other projects you
have, and then being so invested maybe they won't find their
neighbors coming in and trashing them when they are working on
them, or at least they will protect against that.
Mr. Thier. I think in some areas it is going to remain
necessary to have some of those projects with that sort of
protection, both because the expatriate managers of programs in
Kabul and other urban centers will continue to require that
level of surety. In some cases it is equipment that needs to be
protected.
So there will continue to be some small, I think, but
diminishing demand for those services. We also continue to work
in extremely dangerous locations side-by-side with the
military, and particularly in those locations there is often a
need for security and, frankly----
Mr. Tierney. What is the military for?
Mr. Thier. Well, our military is there to perform a
different mission, and we don't want them performing the
mission of protecting our AID programs, so they can do the job
that they were sent to Afghanistan to perform.
Mr. Chaffetz. There was a 90-day extension granted by the
Afghan government. Why was that?
Mr. Thier. As we were all working madly to reach the March
20th deadline successfully, it was evident that all of the
projects would not have contracts with either the APPF or the
RMCs in time, so we negotiated with the Ministry of Interior to
grant licenses anywhere from 30 to 60 to 90 days for those
companies that had entered into the negotiation or contracting
process to ensure that there were no disruptions in that
process, and they granted those licenses just days before the
transition, and that has opened up the space for the remaining
companies to enter into those contracts without having any
disruption to the security that they are provided.
Mr. Chaffetz. Mr. Trent, do you care to add anything to
that?
Mr. Trent. I would like to add one thing to Congressman
Tierney's comment on the profit.
Mr. Chaffetz. Sure.
Mr. Trent. And certainly SIGAR doesn't have any opinion on
profit amounts; 20 percent, 5 percent, 8 percent, 100 percent,
we don't have a position on that. But I would point out that in
the APPF schedule of fees there is an administrative and
overhead cost which is 65 percent of base salary of an Afghan
guard. One would think might serve to make the APPF a stand
alone agency with those administrative costs. And then we have
profit on top of that. But that is just to point out; I make no
judgment on that.
I would also like to mention that we are conducting, this
alert letter originated out of a large private security
contractor audit of AID implementing partners, private security
contracts, which is still ongoing. But during that audit we
looked at 35 of the largest AID projects conducted in
Afghanistan between 2009 and 2011, and those 35 projects
accounted for 70 percent of all funds disbursed by USAID during
that time period; and of those 35 projects, 29 of them all had
security services, most through PSCs and one through their own
internal security. So during that time frame SIGAR's
observation was that all the large USAID projects are
associated, or were during that three-year time frame,
associated with security up until December of this year.
Mr. Chaffetz. I recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts.
Mr. Tierney. Mr. Trent, let me just ask you this. When this
report was written, and now after this hearing, what ideally
would be the result that you would hope would come from this?
Mr. Trent. Well, the alert letter was sent just to
communicate to AID our concerns over what we see as a clear
possibility for increased costs. We would hope that AID would
take those considerations as they move forward and at some
point here security costs and overhead charges, if security can
be termed to be part of the overall overhead for a project or
contract, at some point we would want all implementing agencies
to be considering the perceived benefit from projects against
the overhead of what it costs to administer and implement the
project; and with security costs going up, we hope that AID, as
well as other implementing partners, will be factoring that in
to their decisions.
When we go to conduct an audit on a particular program, and
I am being somewhat hypothetical here, and we see overhead
charges at 70 percent of the cost, we make no comment on
whether that is appropriate or not, but what we would like to
see is a reasoned determination from the outset of that project
that the risks and the realization that the overhead exceeds
the money going into the project, that there was a policy
decision made knowingly, objectively made to carry out the
project notwithstanding the security costs or the overhead
costs. From an audit perspective, we would like to see that.
So that is all we are asking AID to do here, is to consider
those costs and plan for them.
Mr. Tierney. Mr. Thier, can we accommodate that?
Mr. Thier. Absolutely. I mean, as I think you know, the
first time we met, when I was a private citizen, I have been
writing about and concerned about for years rule of law in
Afghanistan and the costs of our reconstruction effort, and one
of the pleasures of having this opportunity to serve in the
government has been to try and bring these practices to bear on
what we are doing. I think that we have made some great gains
in the accountability of our program in Afghanistan in the last
18 months, and we will continue to do that.
Let me also be clear. We welcome the SIGAR's role. We
welcome our IG's role. We have worked with them very
effectively over the last year and a half, and we will continue
to do so.
Mr. Tierney. Well, thank you. What I really want to know,
and I hope what this Committee wants to know, is are you going
to make the kind of analysis that Mr. Trent just described, and
give us a feeling of whether or not you have considered all
those things and what the benefit is particularly when the
costs outweigh, the management costs and the overhead outweigh
the project costs itself, so that this Committee can then look
to you to find out why we are proceeding with a particular
project if that is the case. So if you would do that for us.
If you would also project out those 32 projects that are
going on in the worst case scenario for us, just in case. Give
us that reasonably soon so we have an idea on that. And,
lastly--and you can do those things?
Mr. Thier. Absolutely.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you. And the last thing is why has the
assessment or the progress of the APPF not been released?
Mr. Thier. I am afraid I can't speak to that. The December
report, I have never seen that report and I can't say why it
has not been released.
Mr. Tierney. It must concern you?
Mr. Thier. I understand that it is the U.S. Government, the
Afghan government, and ISAF that jointly conduct that, and I
honestly have no idea what is in that report or why----
Mr. Tierney. But it should weigh heavily on you because
that is such a large part of your analysis going forward, I
would think. Have you made any requests for it or asked to see
it?
Mr. Thier. I have not personally. What I would add is that,
as Mr. Trent and I both acknowledged, the situation has evolved
so substantially in the past few months that I don't know
whether the conclusions of that report would still be relevant,
but it would certainly be interesting to see.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope that we would
press for it as well and move on from there.
Thank you both gentlemen.
Mr. Chaffetz. I just want to give each of you an
opportunity. Is there anything that you would like to add as we
conclude here? We will start with Mr. Thier and then Mr. Trent.
Mr. Thier. Thank you.
Mr. Chaffetz. Mr. Trent?
Mr. Trent. I would just point out that the next assessment,
Congressman Tierney, is due out this month, the 12-month
assessment, and I think we are all looking forward to seeing
that one, and we certainly hope that that is finalized and
published here in the next month or two.
Mr. Chaffetz. I want to thank both of you for your
commitment to this Country and the work that you do. It is
difficult.
I need to tell you that in this particular situation I do,
again, find it stunning, the tone of Mr. Yamashita's genera
comments. I think that I am concerned when there is such a
disparity between the two entities. I think everybody is
probably trying to achieve the same goal, but personally I am
offended by the direction that Afghanistan is going.
When we talk about same guards, different uniforms, and
then we are adding on profit and overhead, that is their words,
not my words, profit and overhead, we are going to spend more
for exactly the same thing in order to pad somebody's bank
account. I hope we don't wake up one day and just find all this
money sitting over in Dubai or something like that, which I am
afraid is really what we are ultimately doing.
I don't think we have visibility in what has happened in
the past. I don't think we have visibility in what is moving
forward in the future. In fact, I think this nation-building
exercise is a huge debacle. I feel for the people who are
pouring their hearts and souls and lives into trying to help
what is happening here in Afghanistan, but we need more
exposure and oversight.
I don't expect somebody with a pencil and a pad of paper
standing next to each person, but we are moving, in my
estimation, in the wrong direction. We pay for everything. The
American taxpayers have poured out their pocketbooks time and
time and time again, and for the Afghan government to come in
and say, well, now we need a profit, that is a deep concern.
Mr. Tierney. Mr. Chairman, might I just jointly ask before
any of those contracts get signed or we get committed to them
with a 20 percent profit, can we get from your folks an
explanation, a heads up that it is going to happen and a full
explanation of why they think it is necessary to put that
amount in there, and then have a conversation about that? I
find it just incredibly disturbing that that is going on and I
would like to think that we can get out in front of this.
Mr. Chaffetz. And to add on to those comments, my concern
is that USAID has just issued unilateral waivers. They can go
sign these contracts and, I guess maybe that is the recognition
that there is no other option. The Afghan government is saying
you have no choice, you have to do this. I think we are being
pushed around and I don't think the State Department is doing
enough to stand up for what we are doing. We are paying for
everything; we should be able to provide the security that is
needed there.
Mr. Thier, go ahead.
Mr. Thier. So just to answer the waiver question, the
purpose of a sole source waiver, if you have no other source,
and in this case the sovereign Afghan government has required
this, so you are exactly correct, Mr. Chairman, the only reason
for that waiver, it does not diminish any kind of oversight or
anything like that, it just says that there is not a
competition because this sole source is in fact required.
And just to respond, Representative Tierney, just to be
clear, there have been 23 contracts signed already, and those
are in operation.
Mr. Tierney. Shame on us. Shame on us, because there is an
option: You tell Mr. Karzai that everything stops unless he
stops this sort of thing, I don't want to use a word that will
get taken out of context, but when you put it out there that
you can't do this unless you pay us another 20 percent on top
of all the other costs or whatever, enough is enough.
I have watched his act for a long time and I know he is a
man trying to do a job and things of that nature, but there is
enough questionability going on about the nature of
transactions in that country and who is making the profit and
where the money is going, not being able to be traced or
whatever, that somebody in our chain should have stood up and
said it may be a sole source, but there is always one last
option, we just don't do it.
Just like you won't put the APPF out there; we won't put
our people at risk if those are the terms. And instead we
rolled over again. So there are remaining contracts. Maybe we
ought to think about watching them a little bit closer.
Mr. Chaffetz. Can USAID provide us an explanation, at least
try to extract from the Afghan government why there is a 65
percent overhead on the cost of the personnel plus the 20
percent profit? I mean, this is just taken from their website.
So I think it does demand an explanation and you are in the
best position to get that explanation.
Mr. Thier. Absolutely. Your concern about the 20 percent is
loud and clear, and I will make sure that we get a more
comprehensive explanation of exactly what those funds are
intended for.
Mr. Chaffetz. And I guess I would ask that SIGAR watch that
closely. We don't want to just see them change the name,
suddenly you see overhead go to 85 percent and suddenly they
get rid of that word profit. I think they are probably being as
honest as they can here. I think they are saying, yes, this is
the Dubai account and we will go ahead and just transfer that
right into the Karzai family account. So please keep your eye
on that; it is sickening, this whole thing.
With that, this Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 9:33 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74755.031


