- A LOOK AT THE FISCAL YEAR 2010 CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL REPORT OF THE U.S. GOVERNMENT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A LOOK AT THE FISCAL YEAR 2010 CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL REPORT OF THE
U.S. GOVERNMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION,
EFFICIENCY AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 9, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-7

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-257 PDF                    WASHINGTON: 2011
____________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Government Organization, Efficiency and Financial
Management

TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania, Chairman
CONNIE MACK, Florida, Vice Chairman  EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York, Ranking
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma                 Minority Member
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas                  Columbia
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 9, 2011....................................     1
Statement of:
Dodaro, Gene L., Comptroller General of the United States,
U.S. Government Accountability Office; Daniel I. Werfel,
Controller, Office of Management and Budget; and Richard L.
Gregg, Fiscal Assistant Secretary, U.S. Department of the
Treasury...................................................     4
Dodaro, Gene L...........................................     4
Gregg, Richard L.........................................    34
Werfel, Daniel I.........................................    26
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Dodaro, Gene L., Comptroller General of the United States,
U.S. Government Accountability Office, prepared statement
of.........................................................     6
Gregg, Richard L., Fiscal Assistant Secretary, U.S.
Department of the Treasury, prepared statement of..........    36
Werfel, Daniel I., Controller, Office of Management and
Budget, prepared statement of..............................    28

A LOOK AT THE FISCAL YEAR 2010 CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL REPORT OF THE
U.S. GOVERNMENT

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 9, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Government Organization, Efficiency
and Financial Management,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2247, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Todd Russell
Platts (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Platts, Lankford, Gosar,
Farenthold, Issa, Towns, Cooper, Connolly, and Norton.
Staff present: Ali Ahmad, deputy press secretary; Robert
Borden, general counsel; Sharon Casey, senior assistant clerk;
John Cuaderes, deputy staff director; Linda Good, chief clerk;
Frederick Hill, director of communications; Christopher Hixon,
deputy chief counsel, oversight; Sery E. Kim, counsel; Tabetha
C. Mueller, professional staff member; Cheyenne Steel, press
assistant; Ronald Allen, minority staff assistant; and Beverly
Britton Fraser, minority counsel.
Mr. Platts. The committee will come to order.
I apologize, one, for keeping both my colleagues and our
witnesses waiting. I am coming from a breakfast meeting I was
hosting for Pennsylvania National Guard and it was, while
focused on maybe military issues, related to our discussion
here today in that one of the takeaway points from the acting
Adjutant General of the Pennsylvania Guard, General Craig, was
the bargain, when we talk about trying to rein in spending and
defense spending that the Army National Guard costs 5 percent
of the total budget for the military, yet is 40 percent of the
Army combat resources, and on the Air Guard 7 percent of the
budget and about a third of the Air Force resources.
In other words, what a good bargain the Guard is when we
try to wrestle with spending, how to deal with the out of
control spending that we currently have. So a different issue,
but related to what we are going to talk about here today.
The Subcommittee on Government Organization, Efficiency and
Financial Management is gathered here today to talk a look at
the fiscal year 2010 Consolidated Financial Report of the U.S.
Government, prepared annually by the Office of Management and
Budget and Treasury, in conjunction with each other, and
audited by the Government Accountability Office. This hearing
will set the stage for our oversight of executive branch
financial management systems throughout the 112th Congress,
examining both Government-wide accountability issues and the
fiscal implications of program spending decisions.
The financial statements in the accompanying audit present
two separate but equally important issues of concern for the
subcommittee. First is the story told by the numbers
themselves, what the statements reveal about our fiscal future.
Second is a process by which those numbers are derived, what
the audit shows in terms of how well the Government keeps the
books and demonstrates accountability.
Unfortunately, we have another disclaimer of opinion for
2010, which has been the case since the Government-wide audit
was first required. When I was chairman of this subcommittee
from 2003 to 2006, we looked at this report every year, and the
issues seem to be almost the same 5 to 8 years later, and the
challenges we are dealing with.
We would like to make some progress over the next 2 years,
particularly in the area of improving internal controls, so
that we can address the root causes of the problems that we are
facing on the financial front. We would also like to bring more
attention to financial management issues.
At our first hearing we were pleased to hear from members
of the task force assembled by the Federal Accounting Standards
Advisory Board to look at ways to improve the Consolidated
Financial Report. Today we are honored to have the auditor of
the report, as well as the authors. We have with us the
Honorable Gene Dodaro, Comptroller General of the United
States, with the Government Accountability Office, which is
responsible for conducting the audit and for establishing
governmentwide auditing standards and standards for internal
control.
General Dodaro, we are delighted to have you with us.
Always great to have a fellow Pennsylvanian here with us.
Also, we have the Honorable Daniel Werfel, Controller and
Director of the Office of Federal Financial Management, Office
of Management and Budget. This office oversees financial
management practices at Federal agencies and prescribes the
form and content of agency financial statements.
Finally, the Honorable Richard Gregg, First Assistant
Secretary of the Department of the Treasury. Mr. Gregg's office
is responsible for compiling the Consolidated Financial Report.
Certainly, thank each of you for being here today and, most
importantly, your written testimony you provided and gave us a
chance to look at ahead of time, and your oral testimony here
today, as well as being willing to take questions. The insights
that each and all of you have are so important to this
subcommittee's work, and we are not just glad to have you here
today, but look forward to partnering with you as we go forward
over the next 2 years of this session and really doing our
utmost to have the Federal Government be more accountable, more
transparent, more efficient in how we use the resources of the
American people. So thanks for your testimony.
With that, I would like to recognize the distinguished
ranking member, former chairman of this subcommittee as well as
the full committee, Mr. Towns, for an opening statement.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
This hearing on the issue of the Federal Government's
financial report for fiscal year 2010 is very timely and
important, particularly as the body is working to finalize the
Nation's budget. I thank you for holding it, Mr. Chairman and I
noticed that some of the things that we are talking about and
dealing with, we had when I was chairman, then had them when I
was ranking, then had them when you were chairman. Now I hope
that we can get rid of while I am ranking, because when I come
back and I am chairman, I want these things to be gone.
Two weeks ago we held a hearing on how best to present the
information contained in the Consolidated Financial Report so
that it is clear and usable by Congress and the public. Today
we get into the details of what the financial reports actually
say about the financial conditions of this country.
For 14 years in a row, GAO has been unable to give an
opinion on the audit of the Government's financial statements.
As we have seen in the past, there are still serious financial
management problems at the Department of Defense. There is a
continuing problem with government agencies not reconciling
their balance sheets for transactions they do with each other.
And GAO is telling us that the process of preparing the
Government's financial statement is ineffective. GAO has been
reporting the same problems to Congress year in and year out
for more than a decade.
Treasury reports that government agencies have greatly
improved accounting for the transactions they do with each
other. Happy to hear it. Mr. Gregg's written testimony says
that the balance sheet difference fell from $102 billion in
fiscal year 2009 to $40 billion in fiscal year 2010. This is
encouraging and we are looking for continued improvement.
I am also aware that some government agencies have made
substantial improvements in preparing their financial
statements. It is commendable that 31 out of 35 of the largest
government agencies have received clean audit opinions from
GAO. Others, it seems, have stood still, didn't move. The DOD
still needs to invest significant time and personnel resources
in improving its financial statements. It is good to note that
OMB and Treasury are working with DOD to resolve some of its
more serious accounting weaknesses.
I have been hearing constant references to the shrinking
window of opportunity for making policy changes to meet our
ongoing challenges in producing credible financial reports. We
still have too much work to do. I hope that the window is not
closed by now.
I thank our panel of witnesses for their testimony and look
forward to their observations of what further policy changes we
can make and how we can improve the process of producing
reliable financial statements.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On that note, I yield back.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Towns.
Would any of the other Members like to make an opening
statement?
[No response.]
Mr. Platts. The record will be kept open for 7 days if
there is anything you want to submit in writing. If not----
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, I just have an opening
statement to insert in the record.
Mr. Platts. OK, without objection.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the Chair.
Mr. Platts. With that, General Dodaro, if you would like to
begin.
Actually, if we could have each of you rise for the oath.
Raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Platts. Thank you. Sorry about that.
General Dodaro.

STATEMENTS OF GENE L. DODARO, COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF THE UNITED
STATES, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE; DANIEL I.
WERFEL, CONTROLLER, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET; AND
RICHARD L. GREGG, FISCAL ASSISTANT SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF THE TREASURY

STATEMENT OF GENE L. DODARO

Mr. Dodaro. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Towns, Congressman Cooper, Connolly, and Gosar. It is very much
of a privilege to be with you this morning to discuss the
results of our audit of the 2010 financial statements of the
U.S. Government. I commend you, Mr. Chairman, and this
subcommittee for having this hearing. It is very important to
make sure that there is sustained attention to look at the
status of the outcomes of the financial audits across the
Federal Government every year.
Now, this past year, as was mentioned in the opening
statements, again, at the governmentwide Consolidated Financial
Statement level, GAO was unable to give an opinion on the
accrual-based financial statements of the U.S. Government.
There are three main reasons for that: serious financial
management problems at the Department of Defense; the inability
of Federal agencies to properly account for intragovernmental
activity and reconcile balances between agencies; and, last, an
ineffective process for preparing the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
We have made many recommendations to Treasury and OMB. They
have implemented many; they are in the process of implementing
others. So we are hopeful that there is continued progress in
addressing these weaknesses.
Also, I would note in the 2010 statements we were unable to
give an opinion on the statement of social insurance, which in
the prior 2 years we were able to. This was due to management
disclosures of significant uncertainties underlying the
assumptions in preparing those statements.
Also, 2010 was the unveiling of a new statement of
sustainability which shows the Federal Government's fiscal path
over a long period of time. This is something that is a very
good development and should aid the Congress and the citizens
in understanding a long-term path. Now, this report and
statement disclosed, similar to what was disclosed in GAO and
CBO long-range simulations, that the Federal Government is on
an unsustainable fiscal path over a long period of time.
So we think this new statement of sustainability, along
with the citizens guide that has been prepared now for a while,
will be added education tools that can be used to help
illustrate the serious financial challenges facing the Federal
Government.
Now, if you go down from the governmentwide to the agency
financial statements, the picture there is a big more
encouraging. Twenty of the 24 largest Federal departments and
agencies in the Federal Government were able to obtain an
unqualified opinion. That is up from six in fiscal year 1996,
which was the first year that all departments and agencies
across the Federal Government were actually required to prepare
financial statements and to have them audited. They have also
been able to produce these statements on an accelerated
timeframe and have moved now to being able to produce them 45
days after the close of the fiscal year, which is a good
development as well.
Now, in addition, our report points out a couple of
material weaknesses across the Federal Government. One is the
problem of improper payments. The current estimate in the
report is $125 billion. I am very encouraged, however, to
report that by actions by the administration and the Congress,
and this committee's support through passage of the Improper
Payments Elimination and Recovery Act last year, there are
efforts under way to tackle this problem.
But it is probably going to get worse before it gets better
because not all agencies and programs are reporting right now
any improper payments. But targets are being set,
accountability is being fixed, and I think this is a very
important endeavor, particularly given the serious challenges
we have facing our Federal Government and from fiscal
pressures. In addition, you have a $290 billion tax gap between
taxes owed and taxes collected. So these areas are important
for the Federal Government to tackle going forward.
So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, I think that it is very
important for sustained attention to be made by the Congress. I
would encourage this committee to have continuing hearings on
these subjects. We just updated our high-risk list and
testified before the full committee. A couple areas came off
the list, but the lesson learned is through high level
attention by departments and agencies, with sustained
congressional oversight, progress is possible, it is needed,
and given the fiscal pressure facing our Nation going forward,
I believe financial management needs to be a top priority of
the administration and the Congress.
I thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy
to answer questions at the appropriate time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dodaro follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Platts. Thank you, General Dodaro.
Mr. Werfel.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL I. WERFEL

Mr. Werfel. Thank you, Chairman Platts, Ranking Member
Towns, Congressman Cooper, Congressman Connolly, and
Congressman Gosar, and other members of the subcommittee for
the invitation to be here today to discuss the Consolidated
Financial Report of the United States and Federal financial
management.
Improvements in financial management are paramount to the
effectiveness stewardship of taxpayer dollars. The annual
results of agency financial statement audits are an important
indicator of progress in carrying out our stewardship
responsibilities effectively. For the past several years, the
vast majority of Federal agencies have achieved an unqualified
or clean opinion on their annual financial statements, and
auditor-identified weaknesses across the Government have been
steadily declining.
As Mr. Dodaro just pointed out, fiscal year 2010 was
somewhat of a high watermark for us in terms of 20 of the 24
major CFO Act agencies achieving a clean opinion. Also worth
noting that we reported 31 auditor-identified material
weaknesses across government. When you compare that to the 61
material weaknesses that were reported in 2000, you see that
steady progress was made across the last decade.
Mr. Dodaro also pointed out that all major agencies are
meeting the 45-day deadline for producing audited financial
statements, a timeframe that actually exceeds the official
statutory deadline of reporting by more than 100 days.
Of course, although we are making great progress, not all
of our financial audit goals have been met. In particular, four
agencies did not achieve a clean opinion in fiscal year 2010,
which in part led to the disclaimer on the Government-wide
financial statement. Our office is committed to working with
those agencies to make the necessary improvements in financial
reporting practices so that all agencies achieve acceptable
results on their annual audits.
While audit results signal financial management success in
many areas, there are critical financial management objectives
not currently evaluated or addressed through standard financial
statement audit activities. Informed by recent discussions
surrounding the 20-year anniversary of the CFO Act and my
experience as the day-to-day leader of Federal financial
management efforts across government, I believe there are three
improvements to our financial reporting model that represent
the greatest opportunity to drive bottom-line results for
taxpayers: first, improving reporting on where Federal taxpayer
dollars are spent; second, instituting stronger internal
controls to mitigate government waste and error; and, third,
increasing access to reliable information on the cost of agency
operations.
As highlighted in my written testimony, while the current
financial audit process does not address these issues directly
or comprehensively, the administration and the Federal
financial management community are focused on improving results
in these areas. In particular, through the Accountable
Government Initiative launched by this administration, we are
preventing and increasing the recoveries of improper payments,
eliminating unneeded real estate, turning around
underperforming technology modernization projects, creating
performance benchmarks for improved financial operations, and
providing unprecedented transparency into Federal spending.
Important early results are being achieved. I thank Mr.
Dodaro for recognizing the efforts that the executive branch is
undertaking to attack the improper payments problem. In fiscal
year 2010 we saw a decrease in the overall governmentwide
improper payment rate, and that decrease helped prevent $3.8
billion in improper payments that would have otherwise been
made. Also, Federal agencies recaptured $687 million in
improper payments made to contractors and vendors. That is a
300 percent increase in recoveries from the prior year, fiscal
year 2009.
Despite this progress, more work and tools are needed to
address improper payments. I think it is important for me to
note that the President's 2012 budget recognizes this and
includes in that budget a suite of program integrity proposals
that, if enacted, would result in over $160 billion in savings
over 10 years.
I would like to also mention that the President's budget
includes a bold new proposal related to civilian real estate.
In 2010, the President directed agencies to accelerate efforts
to realign civilian real property and save $3 billion by fiscal
year 2010. The President's new proposal builds on the success
so far and expands that savings opportunity to $15 billion.
This is achieved through the creation of an independent board
that will make recommendations for up or down vote by Congress
on the elimination or consolidation of excess Federal civilian
assets, including realignment and streamlining of agency field
offices.
In sum, we have built a foundation of strong accounting
practices, internal controls and reporting processes that are
leading to better audit results. This has positioned us to
achieve better bottom line results in terms of error reduction
and cost efficiencies. But our work is not done and I am
confident it will continue to drive critical improvements in
all areas of Federal financial management.
Thank you for inviting me to testify today. I look forward
to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Werfel follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Werfel.
Before I go to Mr. Gregg, we are delighted and honored to
be joined with the full committee chairman, Mr. Issa.
Mr. Gregg.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD L. GREGG

Mr. Gregg. Thank you, Chairman Platts, Ranking Member
Towns, members of the subcommittee, for inviting me to testify
today on the financial report for fiscal year 2010 and the
audit. Your interest in improving financial management is
greatly appreciated.
The financial report is prepared from all the financial
statements of the 35 largest Federal agencies and other
information provided by more than 100 smaller independent
agencies. In fiscal year 2010, 31 of the largest agencies
earned unqualified or clean audit opinions on their financial
statements.
For fiscal year 2010, as Gene had mentioned, the GAO was
again unable to express an opinion on the governmentwide
financial statements, including the statement of social
insurance. The disclaimer on the remainder of the statements
stems from three longstanding material weaknesses: first,
serious financial reporting issues at the Department of
Defense; second, the Government's inability to adequately
account for and reconcile intragovernmental activity and
balances between agencies; and, third, the Government's
deficiencies in the process for preparing the consolidated
financial statements.
I will cover a few key issues included in the financial
report and, following that, I will talk about some of the
financial management improvements we are working on with OMB
and other agencies.
As noted in the financial report, the Government's budget
deficit for fiscal year September 30, 2010, decreased slightly,
from $1.4 trillion to $1.3 trillion. On an accrual basis, the
Government net operating costs for fiscal year 2010 increased
from $1.3 trillion to $2.1 trillion, due primarily to
substantial increases in estimated actuarial costs for veteran
benefits and Government employee programs, which are not
reflected in the budget deficit. The Government's recorded
total assets of $2.7 trillion and total liabilities of $16
trillion, comprised largely of $9 trillion in debt held by the
public and $5.7 trillion in Federal employee and veteran
liabilities.
The financial report also discusses the long-term fiscal
challenges of funding Social Security, Medicare, and other
social insurance programs. The Government's financial
statements currently project a social insurance shortfall of
$31 trillion over 75 years. The important message conveyed in
this year's report is consistent with previous years that the
sooner action is taken to resolve these shortfalls, the smaller
the revenue increases and/or spending decreases necessary to
return the Nation to a fiscally sustainable path.
The Department of Treasury, in cooperation with GAO and
OMB, issues a annual citizens guide, and this 10-page document
utilizes user-friendly graphs and charts to provide a summary
of the financial report's key information to the public.
I would like to now talk about a number of initiatives that
were taken over the past year to improve this report and
financial management in general.
We have reduced differences in transactions between
agencies in fiscal 2010 from $102 billion to $40 billion on an
absolute value basis. We have reduced the number of GAO audit
findings from over 150 to 52 in fiscal year 2009. OMB,
Treasury, and DOD are focusing on a few key areas to resolve
DOD accounting and processes. We will then move on and broaden
the scope of the work of DOD.
Another issue we are working on is creating a general fund,
and this fund will provide dual entry accounting for some of
the central government activities. This was not included in the
accounting system that we have developed over the years; this
has been a gap, in my view, of the accounting process, and we
are in the process of filling that gap.
Treasury is also expanding the governmentwide electronic
invoice portal that will enable Government agencies and vendors
to improve control, streamline purchases, and reduce costs. We
are also working with OMB and agencies to develop a system and
process that will resolve longstanding differences in
transactions when one agency does business with another. Also,
Treasury has, in the last 6 months or so, expanded the use of
electronic transactions for payments, savings bonds, and tax
collections. These three initiatives, when fully implemented,
will save $600 million over the first 5 years.
We have also taken steps to sharply increase the debt
collection within Treasury. We are looking to expand that to at
least $5 billion over the next 10 years. In a couple days you
will have a hearing with Commissioner Lebryk on debt
collection.
Finally, Treasury is supporting OMB to reduce improper
payments by establishing and supporting the administration's
VerifiedPayment.gov portal to prevent ineligible recipients
from receiving payments from the Federal Government.
Treasury looks forward to continuing its good working
relationship with OMB and GAO and the agencies to make further
improvements in financial management reporting and financial
management in general.
That concludes my statement. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gregg follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Gregg. And we do look forward to
our hearing on Friday on debt collection and working closely
with Treasury and your recommendations of changes in law that
may be necessary to strengthen debt collection efforts.
We will begin a questioning round, 5 minutes each, and
hopefully we will have time to come back around for a second
time.
I am going to begin with the big picture and the issue of
sustainability and the statement of sustainability, kind of a
new addition here to the CFR, and the very stark statement,
General Dodaro, that you included in your written statement,
that we cannot sustain the level of public debt that we are
taking on driven by a number of issues, demographics and
medical costs in particular.
In the big picture--and I think I know the answer you are
going to give, but I don't want to put words in your mouth--
when we look at that issue of sustainability, the direction we
are heading and the amount of debt we have and are taking on
without significant changes, what would be the No. 1
recommendation that you think we as a Congress should be
looking at to change that trend, that debt level trend to get
us back onto a sustainable level? What category spending or
area? What is your most important recommendation?
Mr. Dodaro. The size of this problem is so large that the
Government has to look at entitlement spending, revenues, and
discretionary spending. Everything needs to be looked at in the
Federal budget and dealt with in order to bring this problem
under control. And I think it is being driven largely by rising
spending and health care costs and demographic changes, as you
point out. Those are the primary drivers, but the solution is
something that needs to be holistically looked at across the
spectrum of the Federal Government's activities. If that is not
done, this will not be solved.
Mr. Platts. Is it accurate for me to say, though, and I
agree with everything has to be on the table and looked at to
be more responsible in our spending, but the specific issue of
entitlements, that given that they are now roughly two-thirds
of our expenditures, that while we can make improvements in
discretionary across the board, including defense, unless we
get our hands around entitlements and specifically Medicare
spending, that everything else will almost be for naught if we
don't deal with that issue?
Mr. Dodaro. That is correct. Entitlement spending has to be
dealt with in order to deal with this problem; that is the
primary driver behind the cost increases and needs to be an
effective part of the solution if there is going to be a
material change in this path.
Mr. Platts. Given the importance of entitlements, and a
question actually to all three of the witnesses, one of the
other significant concerns I have with the consolidated
financial reports is the disclaimer on the statement of social
insurance. Given how important getting our hands around
entitlement spending is to fiscal sanity, that we have a
statement of social insurance that really, I think we all
agree, is not an accurate reflection of the cost of Medicare in
particular because of assumptions that were made regarding
Medicare costs going down in response to the health care bill
passed just over a year ago.
If all three of you could address that and how you look at
those assumptions and the accuracy of inaccuracy of the
assumptions made in the statement of social insurance.
Mr. Dodaro. Basically, we start with reviewing the report
by the Social Security-Medicare trustees, and in that report
the trustees disclosed a number of uncertainties with regard to
the cost assumptions, particularly in the Medicare area; this
isn't quite true in Social Security. And the uncertainties
settled on a couple of key factors: one being whether or not
the scheduled reductions in cutting back the payments for
Medicare providers was going to take place as scheduled over
the period of time, it was about a 30 percent reduction over a
30-year period was assumed.
And, of course, as we know, Congress, last year, deferred
that scheduled payment reduction by the first year, during the
first year. Second, there are assumptions in the estimates
about productivity gains that would be enhanced by other
providers in the system, and there is real uncertainty as to
whether or not those productivity improvements would be
realized at the size they are estimated and, more importantly,
sustained over a period of time.
So given those uncertainties, the auditors for HHS, which
originally looked at the statement of social insurance,
disclaimed an opinion and we agreed with that decision and
sustained that on our statements.
Mr. Platts. Mr. Werfel.
Mr. Werfel. Chairman, thank you for the question. The first
thing I want to point out in response is that I would argue
that historically accounting and the process that we have gone
through has looked back on the previous year or years and the
effort is to capture the transactions, capture the value of our
assets, the value of our liabilities.
What we are entering into now with things like the
statement of social insurance and the statement of fiscal
sustainability is forward-looking accounting, where we are
doing projections. And some of the projections here, as noted,
are 75 years into the horizon, and that creates additional
elements of uncertainty when you are looking to establish
metrics and measures looking out over a 75-year horizon.
So I think that it is to be expected that as the trustees
or HHS or others look to assess these values, that they are
going to have qualifying statements and concerns about some of
those uncertainties. And when you apply the auditors' scrutiny
to that, what typically is looking backward at whether the
books are kept to looking forward to a 75-year projection, I
believe there are going to be times where those uncertainties
are going to cross a threshold and create a discomfort level
for the auditor in order to render opinion, and there will be
times where those uncertainties will not cross that threshold.
I think the last 2 years the uncertainties did not cross
that threshold, and what that tells me is that the process that
we have, the process that HHS and Social Security and the other
agencies undergo to develop their tables, to develop their
numbers, to report this information is generally sound, but
there will be moments in time where those uncertainties exceed
a threshold by which the auditors don't feel comfortable
rendering an opinion.
I would urge that the values that are reported still have
value, and they still should be looked at closely and
considered by Congress. But I think that we have to recognize
that when you get into the business of auditing statements that
are projecting 75 years into the future, you are going to run
into situations where issues of uncertainty affect the audit
opinion.
Mr. Platts. Mr Gregg.
Mr. Gregg. Mr. Chairman, I think we have pointed out a
number of times in the fiscal sustainability area that they
were not projections, they were really mathematical
extrapolations. I think it is important to keep that in mind. I
think that is what they are, and they are based on the math,
not saying this is what we think is going to happen.
On the trustee report, I think a couple of things there
that I would just add to what Danny said. First of all, the
huge piece of legislation and trying to figure out what is
going to happen 75 years out is very difficult and, second, I
think as a result of when it was passed, it was not as much
time as the actuaries normally have to assess that sort of
thing. I think those were factors.
Having said that, it does look like that the HHS actuary
did another illustrative sample of what the costs might be and,
looking at that, the savings are still very considerable. And
just to reiterate what Danny said, I think the process that the
Medicare and Social Security trustees go through in having
accurate data has been there for several years and I think that
we will get back, at least I hope we will get back to a clean
opinion for that report in the years ahead.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Gregg.
Before I yield to the ranking member, the one aspect of
that, and I appreciate when you are talking 75 years in
projections or extrapolations, but a key part of those
assumptions were a 30 percent reduction in provider
reimbursements, which we have never done, and every year,
historically, the record shows, we won't do that, as we did not
in the very first year. We didn't even make it 1 year without
reversing that legislation.
Given that reversal, my hope is that when the statement of
social insurance is issued for 2012, a year from now or less
than a year from now, that HHS is going to look at what did
occur and that those savings were not achieved in those
provider reimbursements and are not likely to ever be achieved,
so that we get a more realistic understanding of where Medicare
stands. Because unless we are realistic and honest about
Medicare, we will never be honest about our fiscal picture and
truly getting our hands around this challenge.
I am way over my time. General Dodaro.
Mr. Dodaro. I just want to add that while there are various
alternative assessments and projections, if you will, or
simulations, over any scenario over the long range it is not
sustainable, and I think we shouldn't overlook that point while
we debate the numbers and timing.
Mr. Platts. Exactly.
Mr. Towns.
Mr. Towns. Mr. Chairman, I am prepared to yield to the--oh,
he is no longer here. OK. I was getting ready to yield to the
chairman of the full committee, but he disappeared. OK. Because
I am sensitive to that chairmanship thing, you know.
[Laughter.]
Let me begin.
First of all, I want to thank all of you for being here.
The Federal Government made $125 billion in improper payments
in fiscal year 2010. Some of these payments were overpayments
and some were underpayments. Some were made without sufficient
documentation to support them and some should not have been
made at all.
In recent years, Federal agencies have been given more
tools to deal with improper payments and, of course, Congress
passed the Improper Payment Elimination and Recovery Act in
2010. OMB has issued guidance as well. Even though not all
improper payments are an indication that fraud has taken place,
the potential for fraud, waste, and abuse remains extremely
high.
Mr. Gregg, with the law on your side and all the guidance,
why have the improper payments continued to increase every
year?
Mr. Gregg. I will give my answer and defer to OMB to some
extent. We are making, just Treasury alone makes a billion
payments a year on behalf of agencies, and the pressure to get
everything done accurately and timely is tremendous on the
agencies and Treasury.
At the same time, I think we can and we are doing a lot
more. Until fairly recently, under the direction of OMB, we
really hadn't had agencies starting doing business intelligence
assessments of going into the payment files and looking for
potential problems before the payments reached Treasury, and I
think that is a very important step.
There are tools out there that we just haven't been using
fully, and I think that we are working on that with OMB to get
those tools in place to go work with the agencies to do pilots
to say what are the potentials here, some of it may be fraud;
some of it is also just errors. But being able to identify
those through sophisticated analytic tools.
The other thing we are doing that Dave Lebryk will talk
about on Friday is on the debt collection side we are looking
to do the same thing, we are looking at the debt portfolio that
we have and trying to identify how best to find those debtors
and go out and collect the money even though the payments have
already been out and the debt is there.
We are looking for ways to use better tools that we now
have available to find people who owe the Government money, to
determine whether or not someone is who they--we may have a
file from an agency that says someone's name is John McDonald
and our debt file may say Jack McDonald. We now have tools that
will help us identify whether or not that is the same person.
We obviously don't want to try to collect a debt that isn't
owed by someone, but through those tools we are going to be
able to really hone in and say, yes, that is in fact the same
person.
So I think there is a lot going on, and I would defer to
Danny Werfel for more on the improper payments.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much.
Mr. Werfel.
Mr. Werfel. Thank you, Mr. Gregg and thank you, Congressman
Towns. I would start by saying that progress is being made. The
error rates in key programs are going down and they are going
down at the governmentwide level. But the challenge and the
mathematical reality is as outlays outpace those error rate
reductions, the error total grows.
So we are up to $125 billion, but we are up to $125 billion
in an environment where the Medicare error rate went down, the
Medicaid error rate went down, the key Social Security program
error rate went down, and the list goes on. So one of the
things to reflect is to understand, I think, that important
mathematical nuance to understand the progress that is being
made.
But also it raises how important this is, because as more
money goes out the door, it raises the stakes for how important
it is to get these payments right, because a 1 percent error
when $100 is going out is very different than a 1 percent error
when $1,000 is going out. And that is the situation we have
right now; more money is going out the door even though the
error rates are declining, improper payment amount goes up.
Why is this happening? We are doing, I think, a better and
better job of understanding what makes up our errors. In some
situations you still have agencies making basic mistakes. It is
within their direct control and they should, in the immediate
term, be able to take steps to better address the errors;
whether the payments are going to clearly ineligible
individuals, whether they have been suspended or debarred, or
something that is very basic.
But in many situations, Congressman, the effort to identify
whether someone is eligible for a payment is extraordinarily
complicated and involves a variety of different factors, and
when you go down and audit that payment, you find that mistakes
are made. I think a good example of that is in the earned
income tax credit, which has the highest error rate of any
program.
The eligibility characteristics for someone to be eligible
for the earned income tax credit are very challenging. For
example, an individual has to have lived with their dependent
child for more than 6 months. We don't have a global childhood
residency data base to validate that, and we find a lot of
improper payments occur when we go down an audit and find they
didn't live with their dependent child for more than 3 months,
or something of that kind.
So part of the challenge is finding those third-party data
sources and figuring out better ways to validate eligibility.
That is really, if I could boil it down in one bullet or one
phrase, the real challenge we have, is how can we do a better
job than we are doing today validating eligibility when those
eligibility assessments are very complex.
Mr. Towns. Let me just ask this, Mr. Chairman. You can sort
of understand, in terms of dealing with the public and private
sector, but when government agencies deal with each other, it
seems to me that we should be able to correct this and be able
to move forward. Is there anything else that we need to do? I
am talking about the Congress.
Mr. Werfel. Well, first, if I could just jump back to
improper payments. I mentioned in my testimony, in my oral and
both my written, that in the President's budget we have a suite
of proposals that relate to driving down improper payments in
key programs, in Social Security, HHS, IRS, and Labor, that, if
enacted, we believe would save $160 billion over 10 years. So
the first thing would be to call your attention to those
provisions and ask for help in getting them enacted.
In terms of the intragovernmental transactions, I think
that the process that we have today for accountability has
driven us to be on the precipice of a solution; it is a chronic
material weakness that GAO has identified as a key source of
our disclaimed opinion. We have had fits and starts over the
years in defining a solution, but, with Mr. Gregg's leadership,
solutions are emerging right now for improvements on
intragovernmental transactions.
So what I would ask of the Congress is to continue to call
us before you and hold us accountable. I am telling you now
that I believe we are on the precipice of a solution that is
going to drive significant improvements, and call me back and
hold me to that commitment.
Mr. Towns. Right.
Mr. Gregg. Congressman Towns, I just would add to Mr.
Werfel's statement that I think one of the issues on the
intragovernmental--and I was here when we did the first audited
financial statement a number of years ago.
Mr. Towns. I was here too.
Mr. Gregg. Then went away. But I think we, in Treasury,
felt that it should be able to correct itself with the
agencies, and I came to the realization with my staff last year
that it is not. So I made a commitment that someone needs to
take responsibility for this to develop a system and a process
and a small team of accountants to work with the agencies when
there are differences. If we can't solve this, we ought to pack
up our bags and go home, because this is, as the saying goes,
not rocket science. It is not easy, but it certainly is not
rocket science, and we should get this fixed.
Mr. Towns. I agree with you, Mr. Gregg.
On that note, I yield back, Mr .Chairman.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Towns.
Dr. Gosar.
Mr. Gosar. Mr. Werfel, you referenced the percentage of
mispayments and fraud. I actually question the accuracy of
those numbers, because these are self-reported numbers and, as
a businessman, I understand how those things can be skewed,
particularly the statistics and accuracy of those numbers.
So I also believe in a checks and balances system,
especially when we are grasping accurate numbers for policy
assumptions. Were entities like Congress, the American people,
the CBO misled, when calculating the cost of PPACA or
Obamacare, as we know it, by using bad accounting methods?
Mr. Werfel. I am sorry, I am not sure what your question
is.
Mr. Gosar. Let me reiterate. Were entities like Congress,
the American people, and the CBO misled when calculating the
cost of PPACA, which is Obamacare, utilizing bad accounting
methods?
Mr. Werfel. No, I don't think they were misled. I think one
of the important things that we do when we report our financial
reports and our estimates is we report with that all the
assumptions that were made, and those assumptions can be
challenged. This is somewhat of a thick book and it is thick
because there are footnotes and alternative analyses and
alternative presentations; and I think that what we have
empowered is a situation where academics, think tanks, Members
of Congress and GAO can debate these numbers and have a healthy
dialog about whether the estimates and the projections and the
extrapolations that are being reported are valid.
And hopefully if there is enough information to challenge
these numbers, then that debate will come to the fore. That is
really our job and I consider that my mission at OMB, to make
sure that whatever we are reporting, that our assumptions, our
underlying assumptions are clear so that experts and others can
fairly criticize them and hold them under a light and debate
their reliability.
Mr. Gosar. Well, it really becomes a he said, she said
without an authority in the middle. So, with that said, how do
you do the accountability for the new 68 nebulous discretionary
grants as described in HHS policy?
Mr. Werfel. I need a clarification on the question. How do
we do the accounting of what----
Mr. Gosar. How do you do accounting on the new 68
nebulously written discretionary grants as described in Health
and Human Services policy in that bill? How do you account for
that?
Mr. Werfel. Well, it depends on what you are asking about
those dollars. Are you asking about if the discretionary grants
are----
Mr. Gosar. Well, let's go further.
Mr. Werfel. The appropriation should be clear in terms of
what its amounts are. The question then becomes what
information about those dollars are you interested in
understanding, and then I can talk more about how they might be
accounted for and supported.
Mr. Gosar. Well, let me be more specific. It says can use
such sums as necessary. How do you do accounting for that?
Mr. Werfel. Well, the accounting statements that we are
reporting on today, for the most part, look backward at what
the agencies spent. So we have financial systems, automated
systems that help us track which money from HHS goes to which
grantee, and we can tell you almost to a daily basis exactly
how much money has gone out the door.
If you are asking how much would be spent in the future by
a particular grantee, that is not something that we estimate in
the financial statements; they are considered an appropriation
that would be looked at in the budget, but predicting how much
of that appropriation would be spent is not something that I am
aware we put a report out on.
Mr. Gosar. So you couldn't score it.
Mr. Werfel. Well, if it is an appropriated amount, you
could certainly understand what the limit is. You can't go
above the appropriated amount. So you would know the ceiling,
but you might not know where you might fall under that ceiling.
Mr. Gosar. But by definition it says such sums necessary. I
want to take it down to the provider level. You know, you can
skew numbers any which way. For example, in dialysis. We are
actually withholding payment from dialysis patients to show
better numbers on self-reporting numbers. This is where the
fraud is, and we can't even get a grip on this.
What we need to be able to do is have numbers that are
apples to apples for comparison. And if Congress can't get
this, neither can the American people. And we can't even look
at what agencies look at, and this is just the tip of the
iceberg. So I question even the reality of what these numbers
actually are.
Do you understand my frustration here?
Mr. Werfel. In the area of Medicare fraud and improper
payments, I could not agree with you more; we have a
significant problem, an estimate that exceeds $60 billion, and
it is unacceptable. I can sit here today and tell you that the
error rates are trending down, but I can't say that we are at
an acceptable level. So I completely agree with your
frustration.
Mr. Gosar. And it is not just those mispayments; it is also
misuse from the agency itself in not paying out providers and
hospitals and patients. It is on the same aspects. It is not
just mispayments; it is withholding of payments.
Mr. Werfel. Now you are venturing into a programmatic area
that I don't have familiarity with, so I apologize.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Dr. Gosar.
Mr. Cooper.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the witnesses for being here.
At a time when record numbers of Americans are questioning
the Federal Government's ability to manage its own affairs. It
is kind of amazing, this hearing is in one of the smallest,
hardest to find rooms on Capitol Hill, is not even covered by
C-SPAN 3. This is a missed opportunity for anyone who is
concerned about the future of the Federal Government, because
what you gentlemen are discussing is, in my opinion, the most
comprehensive report on how the Federal Government is doing. It
is the only one that uses real business accounting, so-called
accrual accounting. That is not cruel, it just tries to take
into account what is on the Government credit card, which Lord
knows every family, every business, every government needs to
focus on.
So it is amazing to me, when people are concerned not only
about government finances, but their own personal finances, and
people worry about the stocks that they are holding in the
stock market and they look at the annual report they get from a
company, and here you gentlemen have worked hard to present a
report to the American people, even with its own handy citizens
guide to make it extra easy for people to understand. People
are getting their favorite companies' annual report. Somehow
they don't even know their favorite country's annual report
exists.
What we are discussing here today is one of the best kept
secrets in America. To my knowledge, there is not one
businessman I have ever met who knows this report exists. There
is not one business lobby that makes this a priority to focus
on this. There is not one newspaper in America that regularly
uses accrual accounting to describe the situation we are in.
And this is an amazing, well, it is a missed opportunity
for my friends in the other party, because the first plank of
the Republican contract with America was no more congressional
hypocrisy. We should play by the same rules we require of the
regular citizens, and regular businesses of any size have to
use real accounting. But not the Federal Government? So why
aren't we holding ourselves up to the private sector standard?
So you gentlemen know this already because you are
accounting experts, and it is hard for you sometimes to
translate your knowledge to average members, but in response to
Dr. Gosar's question, I would urge him to look at the
conclusion section of the citizens guide, handy citizens guide,
which says two very helpful sentences here: The United States
took a potentially significant step toward fiscal
sustainability in 2010 by enacting the ACA, what he chooses to
call Obamacare.
It also says the legislative changes for Medicare and
Medicaid and other parts of the health care system hold the
prospect of lowering the long-term growth trend for health care
costs and significantly reducing the long-term fiscal gap. That
should be our primary job here on the Hill, to lower the fiscal
gap.
Now, accounting will never be perfect; it is just an
approximation of what goes on. But this is the best report we
have, and very few people know about it. So I look forward to
the first lobbying group in Washington celebrating and
spreading this report. I look forward to the average Rotarian
back home being able to access and know about this report. It
is true it is available on the Web, but nobody knows when they
are reading the Wall Street Journal everyday, as I did this
morning, that they are reporting cash numbers only. So they
really don't know what is on the national credit card, and I
think they are entitled to know that.
There are many things we could go into into the details of
your report. I am thankful that you gentlemen prepared this
report, and you sometimes get grief and misunderstanding when
you do it. Let's work on improving the mistake in payments;
let's reduce that to the bare minimum. You gentlemen are
working hard on that already.
But the key thing is not to miss the big picture: that this
is a more important look at the Federal Government than
probably any other document, and if you were to poll Members of
Congress, most of them have never read it, have never heard of
it, and don't know its significance, even though they guard
their investments pretty carefully and care about which stocks
they invest in.
Well, this is our only country, and we need to make sure
that the American people are aware of this because, in simple
terms, the deficit, if you want to call it--of course, the
proper term here is net operating cost--is much higher than the
cash number, and it is higher for some very specific reasons
and reasons that aren't necessarily fun to go into, because a
lot of that discrepancy has to do with veteran spending and
military retiree spending and civil service spending and things
like that, using traditional cash measures, we are keeping up
with. We are not admitting what is on our credit card.
So I hope we can work together to increase the prominence
of this report, increase its accuracy, and let's make this even
more of a gold standard than it is already today.
I see my time has expired, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Cooper. Appreciate your
attention to the time.
If I could briefly respond. One is your statements, I
think, about the importance of this report are right on point,
and maybe jointly, in a bipartisan way, to offer to Treasury I
think this past year the report was issued on December 21st
with little fanfare, no press release, just issued, I believe,
is that this subcommittee would gladly partner with Treasury
come this December to do a joint announcement of this report to
start the process of getting more people aware of it and aware
of its importance, and to set the stage for that in what would
be going forward.
So, Mr. Gregg, if you don't mind taking that back to
Treasury as a formal request, that as we prepare next year's
report, that we look at partnering with this subcommittee for
the release of it and, again, raising awareness.
Also, Mr. Cooper, I know in the past you have introduced
legislation regarding accrual accounting, and I share with you
today that I would like to work with you this session on the
possibility of reintroducing that legislation, because I think
we need to hold ourselves to the same standards that are we
holding State and local governments and the private sector to.
Yield to Mr. Lankford for questions.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you very much. I do want to just be
able to followup with the conversation with Mr. Werfel earlier
about a lot of focus looking forward in the next 75 years, and
it is a challenge to be able to look back and try to do both
simultaneous on that. I will continue to emphasize the
importance of being able to look back for the accountability
side of that is a very big deal, while we are busy looking
forward to seeing what is happening next, which is important
for all of us. Accountability, we have to know what was just
behind us so we are able to be able to do our task as well and
to learn the lessons that we have seen behind us.
Your report is very good in being able to mention several
items that are up. I don't know if we have mentioned before the
real property comments that you made in it. Extrapolate a
little more on what you anticipate as far as the release of
some of these properties, the jobs that are related to those
and how we begin to transition from a piece of property that is
underutilized or not utilized at all to having that then gone.
What do you see as the process?
Mr. Werfel. Thank you for the question, Congressman
Lankford. There are many areas of inefficiency and waste in
government that we are looking to attack, and the real estate
holdings of the Federal Government are one of them.
We have 14,000 properties that agencies have identified as
excess, but there are an additional 55,000 assets beyond that
have been classified as underutilized by agencies but have not
yet been placed in excess and, therefore, are not in the cue to
be gotten rid of. And then I have concerns that beyond that
55,000 there are additional assets that have not been scrubbed
closely and looked at for realignment opportunities.
The process that we have today is somewhat bureaucratic.
Mr. Lankford. There is a surprise.
Mr. Werfel. Yes. There are three problems with our process
for getting rid of a property. The first is red tape.
Unfortunately, every property, whether it is a warehouse in a
rural location or an office building in a downtown location
that is no longer needed, needs to go through the very same
process, which, depending on how good the agency is at doing
it, could take anywhere from a year to 2 years, which is
unacceptable in terms of the more critical needs we have to not
be maintaining these assets at a cost to taxpayers.
The second reason is incentives and financing. It costs
money to relocate; it costs up-front money to get an asset
ready for sale, and often we allow these short-term costs to be
a barrier to long-term and broader savings. So we need to think
about how to address that.
And the third area is politics. We have found it, in many
case, to be difficult to remove the Federal presence from an
asset that is underutilized because local officials or
congressional delegations rally around keeping that Federal
presence there, even if there is an opportunity for realignment
and consolidation.
We looked at different ways of addressing these three
areas, and one area that we have had some success is in the
Defense Department's base realignment and closure program,
whereby vesting the process in an independent commission and
giving them the flexibility and empowering them to make
decisions on bundled opportunities, a lot has been done.
Mr. Lankford. I saw that in your report as well. Who are
the individuals that you are currently recommending and what is
the process to try to pull that together?
Mr. Werfel. Ever since the President's budget came out and
we had this proposal in there, we have been getting contacted
by commercial real estate experts and other community
development experts around the country who would like to
participate. We need legislation for this to occur. BRAC was
put in place by legislation. This civilian realignment proposal
would be the same.
The moment we get it enacted, and I hope we get it enacted
soon, we will begin putting together this commission. We
propose a seven member commission or seven member board, and we
are already starting to gather names for that. But I think it
would be premature to get started before Congress acts.
Mr. Lankford. Let me just reaffirm that, to continue to
push on both us and for you to be able to think through this as
well. It is a big issue for us to have this many properties
that are sitting idle, underutilized or not utilized at all,
while we are dealing with a budget deficit. That is a low
hanging fruit piece. We should be pushing on and continue to
move forward to get those things into the private sector.
I would encourage you, as well, to continue to push on your
55,000 number. I am skeptical with you that is all we have.
Based on the fact that you can look at--I am in Oklahoma. If
you look to the west of Oklahoma, almost all the country is
owned or controlled by the Federal Government. When you look
west, there are a lot of properties and pieces that are sitting
out there that should be available to the public sector that
are now very tightly controlled by the Federal Government, so
whether that is a building or whether that is property, we need
to look at that.
And as far as your red tape, I completely concur. I am a
freshman this year, and when I walked in my district office,
there is an IBM Selectric typewriter that is sitting there that
has apparently been there for a very long time that they are
trying to work out of inventory, and it has taken forever to
get a typewriter out. I can only imagine what it is going to
take to get a building out. So press on and we will try to help
where we can.
Mr. Werfel. Thank you.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Lankford.
Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
these hearings. And let me echo what my colleague, Mr. Cooper
said. I think this actually is one of the most important
hearings we could have if you want to get a handle on the
fiscal situation of the Federal Government, and I want to
express my shock at learning that C-SPAN 3 is not here.
[Laughter.]
But let me just pick up on the last point that our
colleague, Mr. Lankford, was making on property, because I have
had experience, actually, in my jurisdiction of acquiring
excess Federal property, and one of the concerns I guess I
would have is the valuation of that property. I think you
mentioned, Mr. Dodaro, a figure of something like $2\1/2\
trillion estimated assets held by the Federal Government.
Whatever the number is, in local government we value property
based on highest best use.
So it is one thing to say X property is excess, and if we
decide that is going to go to Oklahoma City as a park, that has
one value. If, on the other hand, we decide, no, we are going
to actually develop it as a research park with office buildings
and lots of workers, well, that has a very different value. And
I guess I would be concerned about how we value property and
when we dispose of excess property.
Talk about politics. From the Federal Government's point of
view, if we really mean it about the fiscal situation and
addressing it, we want to sell it or dispose of it for the
highest best use, not the lowest use, and that, I assure you,
is not so easy. With the best of intentions it is not so easy.
Would that not be correct, Mr. Werfel?
Mr. Werfel. It is. In fact, one of the questions that I
sometimes get when I raise this issue of why politics can
prevent the assets is if you have an asset that is mostly
empty, why would the local jurisdiction have concerns? And it
is really about what happens to the property afterwards; it is
the competing stakeholder interests that emerge, whether
someone wants it for a park or someone wants to develop it
commercially or sometime wants it gifted to a local university
for education purposes. All noble objectives. The problem is
those competing interests come into play and there isn't a
rational process to reconcile them.
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Mr. Werfel. That is why this independent board, we believe,
is the correct solution, because it would be empowered to move
quickly to determine what the right impact is for the
community, for the taxpayer, and reconcile those issues in a
condensed period of time and reach a decision.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. Dodaro and/or Mr. Gregg, improper payments in terms of
$125 billion a year, estimated, right? What is the scale or the
ratio between military, Pentagon, improper payments and
civilian agency improper payments?
Mr. Dodaro. I believe most of the $125 billion are civilian
agency payments, half of which are in Medicare and Medicaid,
although in Medicare the Part D prescription drug program does
not yet have an estimate, so that will have to be added in the
future. The DOD one is relatively low.
Mr. Connolly. Of the $125 billion?
Mr. Dodaro. I believe so.
Mr. Connolly. Let me ask about the 75 year projection. I
was just thinking 75 years ago was 1936. The idea that we can
project 75 years into the future with any accuracy and
anticipating actions by a Congress, by a series of presidents,
by the public, technology. I mean, think back 75 years and ask
oneself how accurate would we have been in 1936 in predicting
2011. So I guess I would ask you to comment on how valuable is
a 75-year time horizon really.
Mr. Dodaro. Well, I think it is very important, recognizing
there are a lot of uncertainties and inherent difficulties in
doing it, for the Government to have a longer term view of some
of its policy decisions at the time. One of the concerns that
we have had is if you look at just the next budget year, or
even 5 years out, you really don't understand comprehensively
the long-term consequences of policy decisions. So I think some
things have to be there.
In some of these areas we know the population is already
here and will turn a certain age at a certain period of time,
so there is relative certainty to some of the assumptions in
the estimates. Now whether it is 75 years, 30 years, 20 years,
the importance is to have a longer term perspective of it.
Mr. Connolly. General Dodaro, I would agree with you, but I
would suggest 75 years may be so long as to be meaningless.
Very misleading in terms--I mean, if you look at, for example,
demographics. If you looked at a 75-year horizon, I assure you
demographic projections were profoundly inaccurate in terms of
population estimates and fertility rates and human behavior and
spacing of families, for example. So I just think that, yes, I
agree with you we need a longer time horizon, but 75 may be not
the tool we hope it to be.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is up.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
Ms. Norton.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would just like to add to what my colleague said about 75
years. I think 75 years is dangerous. When it comes to things
like Social Security and Medicare population-based, perhaps,
there will be people here who fasten upon such a figure as if
it were the Bible, because that is what numbers can do to
people. It makes you look like fortunetellers.
And I think the reason your report has credibility is that
it is, so far as you can humanly do, science-based. The
configurations, even the best of you say 5 years out, even 10
years out, are wildly off base, so I would like to also see a
spike put in 75 years, as if that is something anyone could
rely upon, except for population-based notions, which turn out
to be more accurate than perhaps some others.
I note on page 12 of the GAO report it talks about the
notion of the Government's return on some of its investments.
At page 12 it says in December 2007 the United States entered
into what has turned out to be the deepest recession since the
end of World War II. Gross domestic product fell 4.1 percent
from the beginning of the recession through the second quarter
2009. Then you note that GDP has grown slowly; unemployment
remains at a high level.
In the second paragraph you note the economic recovery that
the Government's actions to stabilize the financial markets and
to promote economic recovery resulted in assets of $400
billion, which is a net of about $75 billion in valuation
losses.
Now, this is a very little talked about notion. We always
hear about what, of course, is most prominent, and that is what
the Government loses. Would you elaborate on this recovery of
some of these assets? Break them down. Many would be surprised,
perhaps in a short period of time than anticipated.
Mr. Dodaro. This is in the----
Ms. Norton. GAO report?
Mr. Dodaro. No, it is in the management discussion analysis
that is prepared by Treasury and OMB, it is not our report.
Ms. Norton. Well, whoever wants to discuss it, be my guest.
Mr. Dodaro. OK.
Mr. Werfel. Congresswoman, I will share at a very high
level. I think we are going to have to get back to you on some
of the specific breakdowns of the assets. I happen to know that
the Federal Government has purchased, according to our report,
$225 billion in mortgage-backed securities; we have $75 billion
back in principle and interest; we have made $378 billion in
TARP disbursements and been repaid $204 billion.
I think the important point here is that some of the
investments, in particular that the Treasury made as part of
our Economic Recovery Act, either through the HERA legislation
or the Issa legislation, were set out with an expectation of a
return, where money is paid back to us or investments that we
are made provide value to us that improve the bottom line
associated with these financial statements.
And I would agree that it is a point that sometimes gets
lost. When the TARP bill was passed, it was widely reported
$700 billion were authorized, and I think there was a notion at
that high level that $700 billion was gone.
But, as it turns out, and as it is playing out and as is
reported here, that $700 billion is not the cost of that
legislation, and it is remarkably lower than that. And part of
that is due to the fact of being repaid and part of that is due
to the fact that investments that were made by the United
States continue to have value and, in some cases, the
Government and the taxpayer actually have made a profit on
those investments.
Mr. Gregg. We can get back to you with a more full
description, but yesterday Treasury announced that they had a
repayment from AIG of $6.9 billion, and right now we have 70
percent of the amount that we have gone out in investments have
been repaid, and the quote is that we are looking to have
little or no money actually for those types of investments
actually cost the taxpayers anything. So the money has been
coming back through those investments, AIG and other entities
that we have had under management, and it is a continuing
process, but good progress has been made.
Ms. Norton. Well, I must say I think it is a disservice not
to report to the American people, who were very concerned, and
rightly so, that the Government had to lay out so much money,
not to report every jot and tittle of every cent we have gotten
back, every amount we may have made over what we expected and
in what period of time. For those who read deeply into the
newspaper, frankly, to get back as much as we have gotten back
in so short a period of time turns out to be a big surprise,
and one of the best kept surprises of this recovery.
And I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Platts. I thank the gentlelady. And if the witnesses
would work with the gentlelady for any specifics, additional
information that she is looking for.
We need to wrap up in about 8 or 9 minutes. I am going to
try to get through a couple more questions here for those who
have. I am going to kick it off on a specific issue, and this
goes to frustration. I hear from constituents often that when
we have either wrongful conduct in the Federal Government or
just mismanagement, there is never any consequences. And one of
the three major impediments identified by GAO to a clean
opinion was the inability of so many of our Federal agencies
and departments to adequately account or reconcile
intragovernment payments, between agencies.
In General Dodaro's statement there is referenced that
Treasury and OMB require our 35 largest agencies, our CFOs to
quarterly do that reconciliation. But as the general's
statement says, a significant number of these entities did not
adequately perform those reconciliations for fiscal years 2010
and 2009. I guess one question is, General Dodaro, I don't know
if you have with you today, but what is a significant number?
How many of those 35 did not adequately do it on a quarterly
basis?
And then specifically to our Treasury and OMB witnesses,
what, if any, consequences occurred regarding those CFOs'
failure to comply with your department and agency requirement?
Was anyone disciplined, suspended, fired for not doing what
they are required to do? Because when they don't do this, as
GAO is telling us, this is one of the major impediments to us
fully understanding what is going on and getting a clean
opinion. Yet, we have a significant number of agencies not
complying with OMB and Treasury.
So I guess, first, General Dodaro, if you have a number.
Mr. Dodaro. I can provide the specific number. Mr. Gregg
might actually know the specific number. But I couldn't agree
with you more that there ought to be consequences.
Mr. Platts. Mr. Gregg, I don't know if you know, of the 35,
how many agencies, departments of those 35 did not comply with
the quarterly reconciliation.
Mr. Gregg. Well, I don't know offhand, but the thing that
has been missing, and I alluded to it before, is that what
happens is that agencies do business and one agency may not
identify when a trade comes in that actually what it is, so our
job at Treasury, now that we have taken this on, is to build
some kind of system where we make sure that they can easily
identify that they are talking about the same transaction.
And then the role that I have also agreed to take on is
that we are going to be following up with the agencies, and if
they don't get those reconciled quickly, we are going to be
after them and we will elevate it as high as we need to in the
agency to get those taken care of. We can't do this once a year
and be successful; this has to be an ongoing process. And it is
not just quarterly, it is an ongoing transaction process that
we need to stay on top of, and we haven't been doing it,
Treasury hasn't been doing it, no one has been doing it sitting
in the seat of being responsible and holding the agencies
responsible.
Mr. Platts. And that is my point here, is accountability.
That is what the American people expect of us. And if we have
rules in place that are to seek that accountability and those
requirements are not then followed through on, there have to be
consequences so that we send that message.
And if this is across all agencies and departments that
they understand, the personnel understand that if they don't do
their jobs, there will be consequences for their failure to do
their jobs. It sounds like we have not had consequences in the
past, but Treasury is trying to put in place a system to allow
more stringent requirements and consequences to be imposed.
Mr. Gregg. Treasury, the Financial Management Service does
send out a report after each financial report comes in and, in
essence, kind of grades the agencies on how they did. The CFOs
at the agencies don't especially appreciate getting that.
Mr. Platts. Is that report given to the head of the agency
as well?
Mr. Gregg. It is given to just the CFO, the highest level.
Mr. Platts. If I could make a suggestion that report card,
since it's the CFO that has this responsibility and you are
giving him or her their own report card, well, as a parent, I
want to see my child's report card to hold them accountable.
Let's make sure the agency head sees that report card so they
can hold their CFO accountable, because otherwise the fox is
guarding the hen house.
So I have great respect for our CFOs in the work, but if
they are not doing a good job their agency head needs to know
it. So if you can followup with me on that request that
Treasury look at that change in how you distribute the
information to the agency head.
Mr. Gregg. I will do that.
Mr. Dodaro. Mr. Chairman, I would say Treasury is in a
difficult position because they are on a peer level. So I think
your idea is exactly right. OMB, on behalf of the President or
the President has to send the direction to the agency heads to
get this solved.
Mr. Platts. That is a very important point. If we can have
OMB's engagement on this as well, to partner with Treasury and
this subcommittee, that we really have consequences. Again,
this is one of the three main criteria that is highlighted as
why we can't get a clean opinion, so I think it has to be one
of the issues we are most serious about going after.
Mr. Werfel. I agree and I think alerting the agency head of
some of these key metrics is something we are certainly
interested in doing, and we will work with Treasury and you on
that.
The other thing I would just add is that I do think there
is a positive development that has occurred over the last 5
years of more and more a demand from OPM for quantifiable
metrics in Federal employee performance evaluations, and in the
CFO realm we have a treasure trove of quantifiable metrics to
hold CFOs, not just the CFOs themselves, but their entire
teams.
So I can't sit here and say that all the right people are
seeing all the right impacts on their performance evaluations
due to some of the weaknesses that we see, but I can tell you
that it is getting better and it is entering into the fray.
Mr. Platts. And getting that treasure trove of information
to that CFO's superior is I think what I am asking in this
regard specifically, so that we can do a better job.
I have other questions but I don't know, Mr. Towns, if you
have anything else.
Mr. Towns. I just have a very quick one. How does the IG
play in this? The point is, it seems to me, that they can
provide some technical assistance here that might help us. Do
they have a role anyway?
Mr. Werfel. Congressman, the IGs have a central role.
Ultimately, the IGs are responsible for the financial statement
audit element, the audit element. The IGs often contract with
independent audit firms, although they don't all do that, but
the IGs are overseeing the audits of their agencies and,
therefore, are a central partner in helping figure out what the
financial management weaknesses of the agency are and how to
address them.
So they do play a central role, it just so happens that
they don't always write the audit report; sometimes they hire
an independent auditor to write the audit report for them. But
they bless it and they have to sign off on it.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much. Because I think that is
very, very important.
Thank you.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Towns.
Dr. Gosar.
Mr. Gosar. Real quickly, gentlemen. Are the Federal Reserve
numbers accurate, to your understanding, in the terms of the
accounting method?
Mr. Dodaro. I believe they have an independent audit done
and that the numbers--we don't have any basis to question the
numbers at this point. I would add, though, that due to
legislation and the Wall Street Reform Act, we now have at GAO
broader responsibilities to audit the emergency lending
facilities at Federal Reserve, and we are doing that now and
expect a report by this summer.
Mr. Gosar. Wonderful. Can I just followup with a real quick
question, then? Do these accounting issues impact monetary
policy like quantitative easing at the Federal Reserve level?
Mr. Dodaro. Just to clarify, the Federal Reserve is really
not included in the report.
Mr. Gosar. I understand.
Mr. Dodaro. So I would say we at GAO are statutorily
prohibited from reviewing monetary policy.
Mr. Gosar. Thanks.
Mr. Dodaro. I would, Mr. Chairman, if I might, add just on
the 75-year question that came up earlier, I just want to
clarify for the record that the trustees, Social Security and
Medicare trustees, are required by law to use the 75-year
number.
Mr. Platts. And I am going to close with two quick
questions, just to make sure my understanding is correct,
before we adjourn for the joint session.
On Medicare Part D, when we talk about improper payments,
Medicare and Medicaid, half of that $125 billion number, it is
my understanding that when we look at the Medicare Part D--and,
Mr. Werfel, you referenced that the improper payments rate is
going down--Medicare Part D currently is not part of that
number, that they are not being assessed for what improper
payments are, is that correct?
Mr. Werfel. That is correct. I was referring to Medicare
fee for service and Medicare Part C. Both of those have
separate error rates and both of those have declined, although
they are still at unacceptably high levels. We are in the
process of developing an error measurement for Part D.
Mr. Platts. And given the size of Part D, the importance of
that----
Mr. Werfel. Yes. You can anticipate that given the size of
the outlays, even if we somehow achieve a 1 percent error
rate----
Mr. Platts. We are talking billions still.
Mr. Werfel [continuing]. We are still talking big numbers.
Mr. Platts. Yes. And on the issue of Medicare Part D, we
currently have in law a 30-day payment requirement for Medicare
payments. Is that something that, given a billion transactions
that Treasury is handling and the number that Medicare is
handling, by having that 30-day payment requirement, which we
want to pay providers as quickly as possible, but given the
volume, is that too short to better ensure accuracy and the
honesty of the claims we are paying?
Mr. Werfel. It is certainly something to look at. One of
the goals of the improper payments legislation is to understand
the root causes of these errors and understand what kind of
adjustments need to be made. And if there is a sense that the
timing is too short to do the necessary due diligence, that
should come in HHS's financial report and be reported out, and
then we would want to talk to you about those types of
statutory changes. But I think we need to certainly evaluate
that as we go forward, in terms of that timing.
Mr. Platts. Thank you. I certainly appreciate all three of
you, your service to our Nation and your expertise in this
area. We look forward to partnering with you as we go forward.
Just one cautionary reminder. If we are talking next year
about this, at least for one more year I believe I will be the
chairman; I don't know about after that. But if we see as one
of those major impediments being intragovernment payments, I am
going to be asking what did we do with that CFO report card
where there wasn't adequate compliance on at least a quarterly
basis, and that we are going after that issue. So just to put
you on fair notice.
We will keep the record open for 7 days for any other
additional information from witnesses or for Member statements,
and our thanks to our witnesses for being here. This hearing
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:04 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


