- PROTECTING TAXPAYER DOLLARS: ARE FEDERAL AGENCIES MAKING FULL USE OF SUSPENSION AND DEBARMENT SANCTIONS?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING TAXPAYER DOLLARS: ARE FEDERAL AGENCIES MAKING FULL USE OF
SUSPENSION AND DEBARMENT SANCTIONS?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY, INFORMATION
POLICY, INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS AND
PROCUREMENT REFORM

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 6, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-91

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-966 PDF              WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Technology, Information Policy, Intergovernmental
Relations and Procurement Reform

JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma, Chairman
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania, Vice       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia,
Chairman                             Ranking Minority Member
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              JACKIE SPEIER, California
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on October 6, 2011..................................     1
Statement of:
Shaw, Steven A., Deputy General Counsel for Contractor
Responsibility, Department of the Air Force; Richard A.
Pelletier, Suspension and Debarment Official, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency; Nick Nayak, Ph.D., Chief
Procurement Officer, U.S. Department of Homeland Security;
and Nancy J. Gunderson, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office
of Grants and Acquisition Policy and Accountability, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services....................    31
Gunderson, Nancy J.......................................    49
Nayak, Nick..............................................    43
Pelletier, Richard A.....................................    38
Shaw, Steven A...........................................    31
Woods, William T., Director, Acquisition and Sourcing
Management, Government Accountability Office...............     7
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Gunderson, Nancy J., Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of
Grants and Acquisition Policy and Accountability, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, prepared statement
of.........................................................    51
Lankford, Hon. James, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oklahoma, prepared statement of...................     4
Nayak, Nick, Ph.D., Chief Procurement Officer, U.S.
Department of Homeland Security, prepared statement of.....    44
Pelletier, Richard A., Suspension and Debarment Official,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, prepared statement of    40
Shaw, Steven A., Deputy General Counsel for Contractor
Responsibility, Department of the Air Force, prepared
statement of...............................................    33
Woods, William T., Director, Acquisition and Sourcing
Management, Government Accountability Office:
Cover of GAO report entitled, ``Suspension and Debarment,
Some Agency Programs Need Greater Attention, and
Governmentwide Oversight Could be Improved''...........     9
Prepared statement of....................................    13

PROTECTING TAXPAYER DOLLARS: ARE FEDERAL AGENCIES MAKING FULL USE OF
SUSPENSION AND DEBARMENT SANCTIONS?

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 6, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Technology, Information Policy,
Intergovernmental Relations and Procurement Reform,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2247, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James Lankford
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Lankford, Connolly, Murphy,
Speier, Kelly, Chaffetz, Walberg, Labrador.
Staff present: Ali Ahmad, communications advisor; Richard
A. Beutel, senior counsel; Will L. Boyington, staff assistant;
Molly Boyl, parliamentarian; Ashley H. Callen, counsel; Linda
Good, chief clerk; Jaron Bourke, minority director of
administration; Paul Kincaid, minority press secretary; Adam
Koshkin, minority staff assistant; Mark Stephenson, minority
senior policy advisor/legislative director; Cecelia Thomas,
minority counsel.
Mr. Lankford. We are going to wait just a couple of
moments. Our ranking member is on his way over. So we won't be
starting immediately, but we will be starting promptly.
[Pause.]
Mr. Lankford. I want to give you a quick update, as well.
We have votes that have been called, of course, about 10:15
today. So we are going to get started and go through this
panel, opening statements and such, and see how far we can get
before they call the votes, then we will make that judgment
call as we go. Just wanted to give everyone a quick scheduling
update.
With that, the committee will come to order. The Oversight
and Government Reform Committee exists to secure two
fundamental principles. First, Americans have a right to know
that the money that Washington takes from them is well spent.
And second, Americans deserve an efficient, effective
government that works for them.
Our duty on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee
is to protect these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to
hold government accountable to taxpayers because taxpayers do
have the right to know what they get from their government. We
will work tirelessly in partnership with citizen watchdogs to
deliver the facts to the American people, bring genuine reform
to Federal bureaucracy. This is the mission of the Oversight
and Government Reform Committee.
I would like to thank all the witnesses on both panels for
participating in today's hearing. I hope this is an informative
hearing where witnesses can share best practices and form
relationships going forward that will encourage our mutual due
diligence.
The Federal Government spends more than $500 billion on
contracts each year. Most contractors are patriots who fulfill
their contractual obligations to the Federal Government in
spite of the mountains of Federal forms and frustrations. They
provide indispensable products, they deliver quality services
to Federal agencies. But unfortunately, this committee has
examined instances in the past in which certain contractors
tried to defraud the Government, where they demonstrate a
pattern of inability to deliver on their contractual
commitments.
One of the tools that agencies have to address this
unethical, fraudulent or chronically poor-performing
contractors is the remedy of suspension and debarment. Today we
will hear testimony that while some agencies are effective in
using this administrative remedy to weed out bad actors who
waste taxpayer dollars, other agencies are simply not
fulfilling their responsibility to suspend or debar.
This hearing will explore the following question: Why is it
that some agencies are able to uncover problems with their
contractors and take dozens of suspension and debarment actions
each year, while other agencies with similar or larger contract
spending initiative virtually no action? While I hope it is
because some agencies have high quality contractors and they
have not experienced any contracting issues, it is unlikely
that there are no poor-performing or dishonest contractors
working for the agencies that have not suspended or debarred
any contractors. Common sense would seem to suggest these
agencies are not looking for and thus not uncovering fraud on
the part of their contractors.
In some cases, though, these agencies may simply accept
poor performance or staff may not complete the followup
paperwork or help others avoid the same bad contractors in the
future.
GAO's work bears out our suspicion that agencies that focus
on using the tool of suspension and debarment and make it a
priority are successful at rooting out future waste and fraud
by excluding the contractor from future business with the
government or forcing the contractor to take needed corrective
measures. Clearly, it takes a concerted effort to identify
candidates for suspension and debarment, develop the necessary
factual record and at the same time, provide the required due
process safeguards for contractors.
The alternative, however, is not an option. Agencies that
put in the necessary work to implement a robust suspension and
debarment program can expect to see returns on their investment
in terms of programmatic fraud or waste avoided. In addition,
because the governmentwide exclusion that can result from
suspension or debarment actions, having an effective suspension
and debarment program also serves to strengthen the integrity
of the overall contracting system. It sends a clear message
that dishonest contractors or shoddy work will not be accepted,
which protects taxpayer dollars from flowing to sub-par
contractors.
This committee is a watchdog for the taxpayers' money. But
we also think it is reasonable to expect each agency to be
diligent, ferreting out bad actors they know in the contracting
world so that we can stop contracting fraud. The American
people deserve our attention.
I would also like to thank Chairman Towns, who held
hearings on this same subject in 2009 and in 2010. He has put
sunlight on this process, and we will continue to do that until
it is fixed.
I look forward to hearing the testimony today about how we
can keep unethical contractors out of the Federal system.
And now I would like to recognize the distinguished ranking
member, Mr. Connolly, for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Hon. James Lankford follows:]

Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
calling this important hearing.
The GAO report in the context of the final report of the
Commission on Wartime Contracting, which we heard the other
day, should be a deafening alarm bell about wasteful spending
that could be curbed through the use of functional suspension
and disbarment programs. The National Security Subcommittee
held a hearing last month examining potentially corrupt
Department of Defense contracting in Afghanistan. Earlier this
week, the Commission on Wartime Contracting told our committee
that an estimated $31 billion to $60 billion has been lost to
fraud or waste through contracting in Iraq and Afghanistan
alone.
What is most extraordinary about this figure is not how
large it is, but that the Commission told us that it isn't even
comprehensive. The Federal Government lacks not only the tools
to manage overseas DOD contracts, but even the mechanisms to
account fully for the money we lose.
If there is one lesson we could learn from this experience,
it should be that rushing into foreign wars unprepared can be
incomprehensively expensive. The GAO report we are considering
today is just as troubling as the Commission on Wartime
Contracting report. GAO reassures us that the Department of
Defense OIG recently reported that the Services and DLA had an
effective suspension and debarment process, apparently based on
the fact that DOD issues more suspensions and debarments than
any other Federal agency.
No wonder. Between 2006 and 2010, DOD spent $1,776 billion
on contracting. That is to say, $1.7 trillion, for those of us
who would otherwise lose count of the zeroes. It is
approximately 15,000 percent more money than any other agency
spent on contracts, so it should follow that DOD would also
issue more suspensions and debarments.
While it is very disturbing that some agencies have issued
zero suspensions and debarments, unless we are to assume that
their contracts are pristine, given the volume of DOD contracts
and relative paucity of suspensions and debarments relative to
the amounts, we must be vigilant in reducing waste in that
department.
Rather than looking only at the total number of suspensions
and debarments for agencies, maybe we should consider the
numbers of suspensions and debarments per contracting dollar.
For each $1 billion DOD has spent on contracts, it issued an
average of 0.9 suspensions and debarments. By contrast, the
Environmental Protection Agency, which has a witness in today's
hearing, has issued 42.6 suspensions or debarments per billion
dollars contracting dollar spent. By this measure, EPA would
seem to be far more attentive to protecting taxpayer dollars,
frankly, than DOD.
Of course, the number of suspensions and debarments per
contracting dollar is only informative if we know that there is
some fraud or waste that the suspensions or debarments should
address. The purpose of suspension or debarment is to protect
the taxpayers, not to enact punitive measures against
contractors, most of whom are patriotic Americans trying to
serve the public as you indicated, Mr. Chairman.
In the case of DOD, we know from the recent commission
report, sadly, that such fraud and waste is so rampant in Iraq
and Afghanistan as to be virtually unquantifiable. The United
States has spent in excess of $200 billion in contingency
contracting to support the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan over
the last decade. According to the final report of the
Commission on Wartime Contracting, up to $60 billion of those
taxpayer dollars were lost to waste, fraud and abuse. It is
imperative that we improve suspension and debarment procedures
for DOD so that we don't repeat the waste of money identified
by the Commission on Wartime Contracting.
I greatly appreciate the willingness of the representative
from GAO, DOD, HHS, DHS and EPA to appear before us today to
discuss this important topic. It is clear there is wide
variation in the methodology used to determine suspension and
debarment. And replicating best practices to reduce waste must
be our urgent task so that those agencies have more uniformity
and predictability in this process.
I thank you again, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
Members may have 7 days to submit opening statements and
extraneous material for the record.
We will now welcome our first panel. Mr. William T. Woods
is the Director of Government Accountability Office in the
Acquisition and Sourcing Management Team. Pursuant to committee
rules, all witnesses will be sworn in before they testify. Mr.
Woods, would you please rise and raise your right hand?
[Witness sworn.]
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. Let the record reflect the witness
has answered in the affirmative. You may be seated.
In order to allow time for discussion, and obviously we
have already discussed this as well, the votes that are being
called at some point, I would like you to limit your testimony,
you are the only member of this particular panel, so 5 or 10
minutes, we will give you a little bit of flexibility on the
time there. But we would like to be able to pummel you with
random questions as well, once you get through your testimony.
So in order to be able to receive your testimony, obviously
your written statement will be made part of the record as well.
You are recognized.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM T. WOODS, DIRECTOR, ACQUISITION AND
SOURCING MANAGEMENT, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Woods. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Connolly. Thank you so much for inviting the Government
Accountability Office to be here this morning to address what
you both have recognized is an extremely important topic in the
area of government contracting.
We need a robust suspension and debarment process in order
to ensure that the Federal Government does business only with
responsible contractors, and that we avoid doing business with
dishonest contractors, those that commit illegal acts and those
that are irresponsible and unethical.
I am very pleased to be able to release our report this
morning, which we did for this committee as well as the Senate
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee,
addressing the suspension and debarment issue on a
governmentwide basis. That report is GAO-11-739, and with the
permission of the committee, I would like to have that inserted
into the record.
Mr. Lankford. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

Mr. Woods. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My statement today will cover the work that we did to
prepare that report, the specific objectives that this
committee asked us to address, our findings as a result of that
work and our recommendations.
But first, I would like to provide just a very, very brief
overview of the process. First of all, in terms of definitions,
a suspension, both suspensions and debarments are exclusions
from the Federal contracting process. Suspensions are a
temporary remedy, generally lasting about 12 months. There is a
provision for extending that up to 18 months if the Attorney
General so requests.
Debarments, on the other hand, are for a fixed period of
time, generally 3 years, although those can be extended as
well.
Suspensions and debarments are covered in some detail in
the Federal Acquisition Regulation. There is also a parallel
process for grants, assistance, loans, loan guarantees and that
sort of thing which are covered under the Non-Procurement
Common Rule [NCR]. But both procedures are somewhat similar and
they are reciprocal. In other words, if an entity is debarred
under the Federal Acquisition Procedures Rules, that entity is
considered to be debarred as well under the Non-Procurement
Common Rule and vice versa.
Our first objective was to determine what entities are
listed on the Excluded Parties List System. The Excluded
Parties List is a list maintained by the General Services
Administration, an electronic online system that contains all
of the entities that have been subject to suspension, proposed
for debarment or debarred. That, as I said, is maintained by
the GSA. The individual agencies that take the actions are
responsible for entering data, names, etc., into that EPLS
system.
And our first objective is really to understand what is in
that system. Frankly, I was somewhat surprised at the numbers.
Because as indicated in my testimony, Figure 1 on page 4, the
vast majority of entities that are listed are listed as a
result of statutory exclusions. For example, the Department of
Health and Human Services might debar or exclude a contractor
or an entity for health care fraud. Export control violations
are another matter where statutes specifically provide that if
a violation is found through a judicial process or in some
cases an administrative process, the Congress has decided that
those entities shall be listed on that Excluded Parties List
System.
Now, they may have had nothing to do with Federal
contracts. But the consequence of listing on that system is
that they are precluded from obtaining a Federal contract.
When we looked at that, we found that about 84 percent of
the cases in the Excluded Parties List System were as a result
of these statutory debarments. The remaining 16 percent were
either actions taken under the Federal Acquisition Regulation,
or actions taken under the Non-Procurement Common Rule.
Our second objective was to look behind those numbers and
to determine which agencies are active and which agencies are
relatively inactive in the area of suspension and debarments.
At the request of this committee, we focused just on the
procurement-related actions. So on that 16 percent or so that
are listed on the Excluded Parties List System as a result of
either Non-Procurement Common Rule actions or actions under the
Federal Acquisition Regulation.
I refer you to Appendix 1 on page 10 of the statement that
lists all of the major agencies, those that have done about $2
billion or more in contracting over the period that we looked
at. We looked back 5 years, from 2006 through 2010. As you have
already correctly pointed out, the Department of Defense is far
and away the largest user of the suspension and debarment
system.
We wanted to get a snapshot and an idea of what are the
variables at play and what are the reasons why some agencies
appear to be quite active in this area and other agencies less
active. So we chose a judgmental sample. We wanted to get a mix
of Defense and civilian agencies. Within Defense, we chose the
Navy and Defense Logistics Agency. We wanted to look at some
large agencies. We looked at Health and Human Services, we
looked at the Department of Homeland Security.
Within the Department of Homeland Security, we looked at
two entities, one that appeared to be relatively active in the
area, that was the Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau,
and one that appeared to be relatively inactive, that was the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. We wanted to get a feel
for what are the factors that really account for the variation
in these numbers. And we found that three factors account for
that variation.
First, the agencies with the active programs have a
dedicated program with dedicated staff. It happened that the
staff on all of the four agencies that we looked at with active
programs had dedicated full-time staff.
The second factor was that each of the four agencies with
the active programs, and for reference, you may want to refer
to Figure 2 on page 5 of my statement, which has a graphic
display of what I am outlining at this point.
But the second factor that we found is that the active
agencies had detailed policies and procedures, not just
mirroring what is in the Federal Acquisition Regulation, but
providing additional detail to their acquisition and non-
acquisition personnel on how to deal with contractors that are
poor performers, that have been convicted of certain
transgressions or are simply unethical. But detailed policies
and procedures were an important component of an active
process.
And the third component was an active referral process.
What that means is that agencies went out of their way to train
people on how to take advantage of the suspension and debarment
process. They had active inspectors general who routinely made
referrals to the suspension and debarment official. They had
contracting officers who would also make a practice of making
referrals to the suspension and debarment official.
So those are the three factors that we found at the four
agencies with the most active programs. Conversely, we found at
six agencies that had less active programs, we found an absence
of those three factors.
Our third objective, and again at the request of this
committee, was to take a look at the interagency coordination
process. For that, we looked first at the committee that is
called the Interagency Suspension and Debarment Committee. This
is a committee that was created by executive order in the mid-
1980's. Recently, it received statutory recognition and
statutory direction in the 2009 Defense Authorization Act,
where Congress outlined specific responsibilities for this
interagency committee. So we wanted to take a look at how that
committee was functioning, and what are the challenges that it
was facing.
Briefly stated, the main function of that committee is to
serve as the lead agency determination forum. When an entity
may be running afoul of the law, may be suspected of some
conduct that might lead to a suspension or debarment, the first
issue on the table is which agency ought to take responsibility
to pursue that. And that question gets resolved at this
Interagency Suspension and Debarment Committee. They often act
very quickly, through an email process or telephone, to quickly
decide on which agency needs to step forward and take
responsibility for pursuing either a suspension or debarment
against the entity.
But we found that this interagency committee faced
challenges. First major challenge was resources. They have no
dedicated personnel. They have no budget. And we found that
that raised some issues for that committee in terms of having
to borrow staff from the members that actually, the chair and
vice chair, in particular, that actually sit on that committee.
The second challenge that they faced was participation.
There are members on the committee from all of the major
agencies and many of the second tier agencies, if you will,
that do less activity in the procurement arena in terms of
dollar spending.
But participation in the monthly meetings of that committee
is not what it really should be. There are many agencies that
simply do not participate to the level that one would expect
for this important area. And they were challenged, for example,
in preparing a report that the Congress directed in that
legislation that I referred to earlier, Congress directed them
to prepare a report on their activities and the activities of
their member organizations. And it took quite a while for them
to get the cooperation of all of the agencies in order to
prepare and submit that congressionally required report.
We had a number of recommendations in our report. And just
very briefly, first of all, we wanted for the six agencies that
had the relatively inactive programs, we wanted them to adopt
the practices that we outlined that we found at the agencies
that had an active process. All of the agencies concurred in
that recommendation.
Our second set of recommendations was directed to the
Office of Federal Procurement Policy within the Office of
Management and Budget. And that was for the Office of Federal
Procurement Policy to issue a memorandum to all Federal
agencies, outlining what it takes to have an active, robust
suspension and debarment program.
Second, we wanted the Office of Federal Procurement Policy
to require and provide guidance to all agencies to cooperate
with the Interagency Suspension and Debarment Committee.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my prepared statement. I would
be happy to respond to questions the committee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Woods follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Woods. With that, I would
recognize myself.
Thank you for your report. It is very thorough. We do
appreciate that, and the details that you put into it from
there.
You answered several of my questions that I had initially,
and that was dealing with the factors, both the three
consistent factors that you saw, and then those that were not
being effective in suspension and debarment, those three
factors being absent as well. So that is very helpful to know.
When you talk about dedicated staff, how many staff are you
talking about typically in these agencies? Is this 1,000
people? Is this four people?
Mr. Woods. It did vary. Sometimes it was only one or two
people. Sometimes it was more than 10, less than 20.
Mr. Lankford. Okay, so it is a small group from the agency
that has been set aside and specifically tasked full time to
that.
Mr. Woods. It ranged in terms of full time, sir. Some of
the agencies did have full time dedicated staff. But other
agencies had part time staff, or staff who had other
responsibilities, but one of their major responsibilities was
to make the suspension and debarment process work.
Mr. Lankford. Did you see a shift in effectiveness? Was it
basically the size of the program where one agency may be very
large, for instance, the Department of the Navy that you talked
about, obviously very large and a lot of contracts there, they
would submit a larger staff, another agency with fewer people,
did you see a correlation in that as far as the number of
people that were involved?
Mr. Woods. We did not see a correlation. We did see
differences, and as you pointed out, the Navy had one of the
larger staffs, and many of them were full time. But we did not
observe a correlation between the size of the staff and the
effectiveness of the program.
Mr. Lankford. Okay, the actual process of suspension and
debarment that they have to go through, the paperwork to fill
out, to complete, is there anything in that process that you
determined, this is bulky, this is difficult, this is a
disincentive to do suspension and debarment based on the actual
bureaucratic red tape of doing it? Is there anything you
discovered in that?
Mr. Woods. The process is relatively straightforward. The
process is also, in the regulation, it specifically requires
that agencies adopt as informal a process as possible to avoid
that kind of red tape. One of the hallmarks of the system is,
the action needs to be taken quickly, because the whole purpose
of suspensions and debarments is to protect the government's
interest. And often we need to move very quickly in order to be
able to do that.
So the Federal Acquisition Regulation requires that the
procedures be streamlined and as informal as possible.
Mr. Lankford. Obviously we will be visiting with people as
we go through this from HHS or FEMA and other things that you
have mentioned as well in your report on that. Specific
recommendations that you have made as you have made these
recommendations, they have been received well by those
agencies? Do you think it was just a matter of they were very
busy in other areas and just didn't pay attention to the
suspension and debarment areas? What did you discover from
that, and what has the follow-up been like?
Mr. Woods. First of all, we were very pleased that all the
agencies concurred with the recommendations. What we found
during the course of the review is that even at the agencies
that had the less active programs, that steps were being taken
at each of the agencies to get serious about the suspension and
debarment process. And there is a description in the report of
several agencies with specific steps that those agencies are
taking to do that.
Mr. Lankford. Let me shift gears on you a little bit. The
statutory exclusions, I know that was not a part of your total
research on that. How do you feel like that is being applied
and who puts that on the list? So when it is not a bad actor in
the sense that it is a statutory exclusion for whatever reason,
how are they getting on that list and who is managing getting
them off of that list?
Mr. Woods. For example, let's take health care fraud. That
would fall within the bailiwick of Health and Human Services.
So that agency would be responsible for putting entities that
have run afoul of health care provisions, be it payment
provisions or outright health care fraud, they would be
responsible for putting those entities on the list.
Mr. Lankford. So they are getting them on there. Who is
responsible for getting them off? If they have been cleared,
let's say it has been 5 years, is it an automatic removal on
that? Or for those statutory areas, are they lifetime?
Mr. Woods. Very often the statute will provide for a
specific period of time, be it years, or whatever. When that
period has expired, those entities should no longer be listed.
Mr. Lankford. But that is automatically being pulled? The
agency is not having to pursue to go back and say, this needs
to be pulled now, it has now been 3 years?
Mr. Woods. I believe so. But you may want to ask the second
panel about that.
Mr. Lankford. I want to be able to make sure, obviously,
that people that have been debarred for a period of time, that
is actually pulled off so they can be redeemed, I guess, at the
end of it.
Let's talk real quickly about grants as well. You mentioned
obviously grants and the contracting world being together, and
this reciprocal list on it. Just in your overview and looking
at it, is that a good thing, to be able to have grants and
contractors together on this reciprocal list? And if so, are
agencies effective on getting to this list? This is a bad actor
in the grant world, so that people in the contracting world can
also know that as well.
Mr. Woods. We do not have any insight into the grant
process. Because our review was just focused on contracts. But
the reciprocal nature is one that the Congress decided in the
mid-1990's ought to be part of the system. We didn't come
across any reason to think that was an unwise decision, either
then or now.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Woods.
With that, I yield to Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, Mr.
Woods.
By the way, where are you from?
Mr. Woods. I am from the Boston area originally. Is my
accent giving me away?
Mr. Connolly. A little bit. Fully rounded vowels.
Mr. Woods. I wish Mr. Lynch were here. [Laughter.]
Mr. Connolly. I also am from Boston. But Mr. Lynch talks
more like you than I do, probably, yes.
Thank you for your testimony. How often does suspension and
debarment occur based purely on non-performance criteria?
Mr. Woods. There are various codes in the system. To be
honest, I don't know the answer to that question, as to the
frequency. But that is something that one could use the codes,
because when an agency enters an entity into the system, they
are also required to use one of the many codes so that someone
could identify the reason that the entity is listed, and be in
a position to answer your question.
Mr. Connolly. Just seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that non-
performance ought to be one of the reasons. That is a pretty
big one.
You make the point, well said, that obviously different
agencies are subjected to different statutory criteria, and
therefore, they have to conform to that. That explains some
variation among Federal agencies for terms and conditions for
suspension and debarment.
But surely there ought to be a uniform process in every
agency, so that we don't have the kind of variation you have
described in terms of active programs and less active programs.
What is the reason for the fact that some agencies have
inactive programs?
Mr. Woods. I think it is that they haven't paid sufficient
attention to it. We found HHS, for example, is very active in
the Medicare fraud area, and in fact has a substantial number
of entities listed. But when you look on the procurement side,
that agency spends a fair amount of procurement dollars. But we
were surprised to see that over the 4-year period that we
looked at, they had no suspensions and debarments based on the
Federal Acquisition Regulation.
Mr. Connolly. That is astounding.
You cited the fact that DOD had the most. But of course, as
I said in my opening statement, that is to be expected. But if
you actually looked at it on a per billion dollar contracting
dollar, if you will, actually they are far below some other
agencies, like EPA. Given the fact, I don't know, are you
familiar with the report of the Commission on Wartime
Contracting that we heard from the other day?
Mr. Woods. I have looked at that report, yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. So the fact that there is an estimate of $31
billion to $60 billion of waste, fraud and abuse, how many
contractors were debarred or suspended based on that finding,
do you know?
Mr. Woods. I don't know that, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Presumably there ought to be some.
Mr. Woods. One would think.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. I mean, if it is at the higher end, you
are matching Medicare fraud, waste and abuse.
Mr. Woods. That is certainly a lot of money, and we were
pleased that the Commission did focus on that and had specific
recommendations as to how to improve the process.
Mr. Connolly. Is conflict of interest one of the reasons
for suspension and debarment?
Mr. Woods. I don't believe that that is listed in the
Federal Acquisition Regulation as one of the specific causes
called out in the regulation.
Mr. Connolly. But if a determination is made that there is
a conflict of interest, that you engaged in a conflict of
interest either in the RFP process or the proposal writing
process or whatever it might be, you could be subject to being
listed and prevented from contracting for some period of time,
is that not correct?
Mr. Woods. Yes, sir. There is catch-all language, if you
will, in the Federal Acquisition Regulation that permits the
suspension and debarment official to take action for other
reasons that that official considers so serious as to warrant
listing on the system.
Mr. Connolly. One of the criticisms one hears sometimes
from contractors about that is that it can be, first of all,
the penalty is severe. And a conflict of interest can sometimes
be very much subjective judgment. For example, you may be a
large contractor and you have been asked to provide your
expertise for a Federal advisory panel, scientific panel,
defense panel, intelligence panel.
And even in advance, I know of cases where consent was
gotten that if we do that, we don't want to be prevented from
bidding on some contracts. Subsequently, somebody comes along
in the IG's office and determines, wait a minute, you were on
this panel and you have been on a contract, you won the
contract, and we call that a conflict, and you are going to be
listed.
My time is up, but how are we also making sure that when we
decide to lower the boom that we have determined that this is
fair and that the entity has had a fair opportunity to make its
case?
Mr. Woods. A couple of things. First of all, the decision
to list someone or to exclude the party would be made by the
agency suspension and debarment official, not by the Inspector
General or anyone else that might expect one doing it.
Mr. Connolly. But the IG's office may be determining there
is a conflict of interest.
Mr. Woods. And they would then therefore make a referral to
the suspension and debarment official.
The other safeguard is that there are procedures for the
entity to bring contrary facts, to make arguments to the
suspension and debarment official as to why they should not be
listed.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. My time is up, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. Mr. Walberg is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Woods, for being here and for the work that GAO does.
Your report found that agencies with a quarter of the
contract obligations of HHS have significantly more activity in
this area. Specifically, the Department of Interior, with
annual contract obligations of approximately $23 billion, had
94 percent procurement-related, or 94 procurement-related
actions and 10 grant-related suspension and debarment actions.
Department of Transportation, with contract obligations of
approximately $23 billion, had 11 procurement-related
suspensions or debarments and 193 grant-related actions.
HHS in contrast, though, has $80 billion in contract
obligations, and during the same time period, had zero
procurement-related actions and 29 grant actions. In your
opinion, is HHS failing in regard to suspension and debarment?
Mr. Woods. We were surprised at those numbers as well, sir.
We did not look at the two agencies, Interior and
Transportation. But when we did look at Health and Human
Services, we were surprised at the number, the absence of any
activity in the suspension and debarment arena, given the size
of their procurement spending.
Mr. Walberg. What it does, or did lack in this area, and
would this have ben something, is this something that you would
say, judging by all of the other studies that you did, is
acceptable?
Mr. Woods. In response to your first question, they lacked
the three attributes that we specifically found at the agencies
with the active programs. They lacked the dedicated staff, the
policies and procedures and the active referral process. When
we talked to the officials at Health and Human Services, they
in fact acknowledged that the suspension and debarment tool was
under-utilized at their agency.
Mr. Walberg. Going along that line, then, if you could
explain what you mean by detailed policies or guidance. What
does that look like?
Mr. Woods. Certainly. At one level, the Federal Acquisition
Regulation provides the policies and procedures. And it is
quite detailed. What we would expect to see, and in fact what
we found at the agencies with the active programs, was even
further detail in their implementing guidance. In other words,
roles and responsibilities, who actually implements and is
charged with implementing the various provisions in the Federal
Acquisition Regulation.
We found those answers in the four agencies. We did not
find those answers at the other agencies.
Mr. Walberg. Okay. I yield back.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you for yielding on that. Let me do one
quick followup question, if the gentleman would yield.
Mr. Walberg. I will yield.
Mr. Woods, just to clarify, if these agencies, very large
as they may be, would just reassign two or three people to
focus in on that, we have the potential of finding a lot of bad
contractors that we can protect the rest of the Federal
Government from through suspension and debarment. So we are not
talking about a massive shift in agencies. We are talking about
even reassigning two or three people, is that correct?
Mr. Woods. We are not talking about a massive shift. And in
fact, some of the agencies complain to us that they cannot,
they are not in a position to devote full-time people. They are
not in a position to hire people. And we understand that in
today's budget environment.
But reassigning people or carving out some part-time
responsibility for individuals, even a small number of
individuals, would have the kind of impact that you just
described, sir.
Mr. Lankford. Terrific. Thank you for yielding, Mr.
Walberg.
Mr. Murphy is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for your testimony. I want to talk to you a
little bit about the portion of your testimony related to the
Interagency Suspension and Debarment Committee. The 2009
Defense Authorization gives them some increased powers and
responsibilities. But you clearly seem to suggest that there is
a lot more that they could do. They are a coordinating agency
but have very little teeth.
What specifically would you recommend that we do in order
to give that committee the kind of teeth that would, at the
very least, allow them to collect more information or get the
people that do not have active programs at the table? Or maybe
at an even sort of next level, give them something more than
just the power to convene and monitor? What do you suggest we
do there?
Mr. Woods. We think the action needs to come from the
Office of Federal Procurement Policy. And we think it would be
relatively simple and straightforward for the Office of Federal
Procurement Policy to issue guidance to all Federal agencies to
cooperate much more fully with the Interagency Committee in
terms of participation in the process, in terms of responding
to data requests, in terms of providing staff where possible to
support the activities of that committee.
Mr. Murphy. Does that committee have enough staff?
Mr. Woods. That committee does not have any dedicated
staff.
Mr. Murphy. So where does that committee staff come from?
Mr. Woods. The chair and the vice chair, at least during
the period of our review, would use their own resources from
their home agency to carry out the activities of the committee.
Mr. Murphy. So let's say that directive comes down and
there is a requirement that data and information is provided.
The question is, so what? What does that really do, just to
have more information or more resources at the Interagency
Committee if they don't really have any power to compel
particular agencies to step up and change their practices?
Mr. Woods. I am not sure that is really needed. We have the
Office of Management and Budget that has the kind of teeth that
you were referring to. We have the Office of Federal
Procurement Policy, within OMB, who is charged with the
responsibility for making this system work. We think the
pieces, the mechanisms are there. It is just a question of
using those mechanisms.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Murphy.
With that, Mr. Woods, I appreciate very much your
testimony.
I would like to take a short recess in order for the clerks
to be able to prepare for our second panel. We will try to do
the testimony of our second panel and get that into the record
and then we may have to come back to be able to pummel you with
questions and be able to go through that process.
With that, we will take a short recess.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, could I just, before Mr. Woods
goes----
Mr. Lankford. You most certainly may.
Mr. Connolly. Just a quick question. Legislatively, would
it be helpful, do you think, if we had some legislation that
tightened up some of the reporting requirements and
standardization issues your report has covered?
Mr. Woods. I am not sure additional legislation is needed
at this point. The Congress was very clear a couple of years
ago on the importance of the Interagency Committee, on the
roles and responsibilities that the Congress expected that
committee to play. And the administration issued a change to
the Federal Acquisition Regulation to reinforce and implement
the direction that the Congress gave.
I think, again, the pieces are there, it is just a question
of managing that and stressing the importance of this area.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lankford. I would think a day like today does stress
the importance of that area.
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Woods.
We will take a short recess and reset.
[Recess.]
Mr. Lankford. I would like to go ahead and begin if we can.
We now welcome our second panel. Mr. Steven Shaw is the
Deputy General Counsel for Contractor Responsibility at the
Department of the Air Force, where he is also serving as the
Air Force Suspension and Debarment Official. Mr. Richard
Pelletier is the Suspension and Debarment Official for the
Environmental Protection Agency. Dr. Nick Nayak is the Chief
Procurement Officer at the Department of Homeland Security. Ms.
Nancy Gunderson is the Deputy Assistant Secretary for the
Office of Grants and Acquisition Policy and Accountability for
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, where she
also serves as the Department's Suspension and Debarment
Official.
As I have mentioned before, we are watching for votes, we
are tracking through those. We should have enough time to be
able to get everyone's opening statement into that.
So pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn
in before they testify. Would you please rise and raise your
right hands?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Lankford. Let the record reflect all the witnesses
answered in the affirmative. Please be seated. Thank you.
In order to allow time for discussion, I am going to ask
that you do limit your testimony to 5 minutes. Your entire
written statement of course will be made part of the written
record, and any other written documents that you would like to
submit to this committee, we will include.
I now would like to recognize Mr. Shaw for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF STEVEN A. SHAW, DEPUTY GENERAL COUNSEL FOR
CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY, DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE; RICHARD
A. PELLETIER, SUSPENSION AND DEBARMENT OFFICIAL, U.S.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY; NICK NAYAK, PH.D., CHIEF
PROCUREMENT OFFICER, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY; AND
NANCY J. GUNDERSON, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE OF
GRANTS AND ACQUISITION POLICY AND ACCOUNTABILITY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

STATEMENT OF STEVEN A. SHAW

Mr. Shaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Connolly,
members of the committee. Thank you for inviting me here today.
This is a very important subject that is dear to my heart. I
have been doing it for 15 years and find it to be extremely
important.
I also want to thank GAO for an outstanding report in this
area, even though they didn't address the Air Force, they
addressed some important issues. Their recommendations are
recommendations that we agree with. We have the three elements
of active programs that they talk about. We have a dedicated
staff. We have written processes and procedures. And we have
practices that encourage referrals.
I am hesitating on the referrals a little bit, because one
of the features of the Air Force is not to rely upon referrals.
Referrals are important, procedures to increase referrals are
important. But we do a lot more than deal with our in-box and
respond to referrals from other agencies. I will get to that in
a second.
The areas that are somewhat unique perhaps to the Air Force
are at least why we think we are strong in this area, we think,
are both structural and policy related. The structural areas
are the full-time dedicated staff. We have through the entire
15 years of my tenure in this position and before that had a
full-time staff, and more recently we have expanded that to a
full-time field staff in the AFMC, the Air Force Materiel
Command, and in headquarters for the non-MAJCOMS. So we have
additional attorneys, so there are somewhat upwards of 10 or 15
attorneys that we have in the Air Force, even though there are
only three in my office in headquarters Air Force.
Another unique part is that I am a full time debarring
official. That is very unusual in the Federal Government. I
personally think that is extremely important and I praise the
Air Force for doing that. It was before my time, it has nothing
to do with me, but I think that is an important feature. There
are only three or four agencies in the whole Federal Government
that have the full-time debarring official. I think that is an
important feature for some of the reasons that I will talk
about.
Also, separation from the acquisition chain I think is
critical in this area. The Air Force, and the whole DOD,
started doing this in the early 1990's as a result of an IG
report, DOD IG report, recommending that it be structured that
way. I agree with them, and I think the Defense Department is
doing that correctly that way. We are independent of the
acquisition chain. We certainly coordinate with them and they
are partners with us. But I don't wait or expect the
acquisition people to approve of what I am doing. I am
empowered to do what is right.
And that is the third important feature of the Air Force,
and that is the empowerment. The senior leaders of the Air
Force and of DOD have supported what I have done throughout my
tenure, recognize this as an independent area. I coordinate
everything, but I am empowered to do what is right. And the
example that I used in the written testimony attest to that.
Then another feature is, perhaps it is unusual or unique to
the Defense Department, and that is the fraud remedies program,
I also manage within the Air Force. So I am overseeing two
missions. One is coordinating and making sure the Air Force
gets all the remedies, criminal, civil, contract and
administrative, done. We are the inside lawyers, really, for
the Justice Department in making those kinds of decisions.
Because of that, we have real visibility into cases, and we
can reach out and do suspensions and debarments, even when
nobody refers them to us. That is where the outreach and the
proactiveness that I was talking about comes in, where we don't
wait for referrals. We monitor cases from the investigators,
their case status reports. If there is some case that looks
like it is necessary to do a suspension or debarment to protect
the interests of the Government, we will reach out to that
investigator, ask for the report and will do a debarment, even
though nobody is asking us to do that debarment. And even if
people are objecting to it, we are going to do it, if that is
the right thing to do.
On the policy side of this, the fact-based cases is an
important part of what we do. I think there are a lot of
agencies that only do debarments or suspensions where there is
an indictment or a conviction. And I think that is ill-advised.
That is just delegating all of your power to the Justice
Department. If they don't have the resources to do a case, they
won't do it. But we in the Air Force are still worried about
that, so we will reach out and do a debarment anyway, based
upon facts.
Also, it is not necessary to do contract actions. The power
of a debarment under the FAR is not limited to fraud in a
government contract. If an Air Force contractor, for example,
is committing fraud on a commercial case or a personal income
tax evasion, or anything more than jaywalking, probably, we are
going to be concerned about it. Because if they are defrauding
a commercial customer, they are going to defraud us.
Finally, the carrot and the stick we use, I talk about this
a lot, because of the stick of debarment, we are able to
influence proactively the defense industry, I think. We go out
and talk to the defense industry and we give them incentives to
improve their programs and processes, to avoid the fraud at the
front end. So we are trying to limit fraud and do risk
management, rather than solely doing the stick of debarment.
With that, I thank you and I will take any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shaw follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Shaw.
Mr. Pelletier.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD A. PELLETIER

Mr. Pelletier. Thank you, Chairman Lankford and Ranking
Member Connolly and members of the subcommittee, for this
opportunity to speak about the EPA suspension and debarment
program. I am the suspension and debarment official [SDO], for
the agency.
Since 1981, EPA has had a robust program. Historically it
has been the leader in this area. For example, my predecessor
was a chairman of the ISDC, which you have heard some testimony
about, for 20 years. Also, in 2003, with members of the Air
Force, DLA and GSA, we formulated, the EPA actually led the
formation of the National Suspension and Debarment Training
Program, which is offered through the FLETC, the Federal Law
Enforcement Training Center down in Glencoe, Georgia.
Currently, I am still the coordinator for that program.
Also, EPA provides three of the six instructors for the three
or four courses that we offer each year.
Now, the EPA program has really two elements to it. It has
a statutory debarment and it also has the discretionary. The
statutory are the Clean Air and the Clean Water Act. And the
discretionaries can be taken under either the non-procurement
rule, which you have heard some testimony about, as well as the
FAR Part 9.4. At EPA, we almost exclusively use the non-
procurement common rule.
At our office, we have, in the EPA, we have two separate
offices that deal with suspension and debarment programs. There
is my office, as the Suspension and Debarment Official. I have
a hearing officer and a program analyst. We also have a
Suspension and Debarment Division, which has a director, it has
seven attorneys, has a paralegal, two investigators, an auditor
and some administrative support personnel. All of us are full-
time, and this is all we do, is the suspension and debarment.
The way the cases work at EPA, the Suspension and Debarment
Division attorneys develop the case in close coordination with
the OIG, for example, or the Office of Enforcement that we
have, or any other State or Federal investigative body, or any
public or private source that may provide us with information.
Like Mr. Shaw said, we do fact-based cases as well.
We coordinate, or the division attorneys coordinate through
the ISDC for lead agency. And then it is referred to my office
for an action. Then on proper notice, we provide the
respondents the opportunity to be heard, to present information
and arguments in opposition to the proposed debarment. When I
make a final decision, it is on behalf of not only the EPA but
all Federal agencies.
Now, under the EPA non-procurement rule, as we have
implemented it at EPA, there is an additional safeguard, in
that the respondent can appeal my decision to the Director of
the Office of Grants and Debarment prior to taking any court
action under the Administrative Procedures Act. Just as a frame
of reference, and the numbers are not magical, but just as a
frame of reference, in the last fiscal year our initial numbers
indicated we took 98 proposed debarments and 111 suspensions,
115 discretionary debarments and approximately 42 statutory
debarments. Also, we entered into three administrative
agreements.
Now, the rate of EPA dollars spent, procurement to non-
procurement, is approximately four to one. And that is why we
use the non-procurement rule rather than the FAR. Both rules
are reciprocal. So you can, of course, any action under one is
binding on the other. Also, you can use the non-procurement
rule for acquisition, as well as non-acquisition matters. So it
is available if you want to do it for a contract direct
acquisition process.
The written guidance that EPA has, we have implemented for
example, the non-procurement rule as implemented by the
agencies. We did that through our 2 C.F.R. 1532. But also over
the years, we have supplemented with written guidance, SOPs,
best practices that have been learned since 1981, and put those
into a written form so it can be continued and consistently
updated as we go through the process.
Another factor that is important is, my superiors actively
encourage our involvement, not only with the ISDC, but also
with other agencies, other organizations that are involved in
this, such as the ABA Subcommittee on Suspension and Debarment.
We are very proud of our rich history of protecting the
taxpayers' dollars. We continue with this effort, and even in
these hard times, we have been able to continue to have the
personnel necessary. I am pleased to be able to talk about it
today and I look forward to your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pelletier follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you.
As you have just heard, the votes have been called. I would
like to receive both of your opening statement, then we will
scoot out for a recess from there.
Mr. Nayak.

STATEMENT OF NICK NAYAK

Mr. Nayak. Thank you very much, chairman, ranking member.
I will abbreviate my statement and hope that it helps you
guys.
I am the Chief Procurement Officer for DHS, overall
contracting at DHS. Sort of in a nutshell, we get this and we
are going to get it right. We are going to be a best practice
agency.
Prior to my arrival, and I have been here for a little bit
less than a year, there was an IG review of DHS suspension and
debarment. We took that to heart. The Under Secretary for
Management, who is my boss, put together a task force. We
studied all the best practice organizations, the Immigration
and Customs Enforcement is one of those best practices within
DHS that we studied.
We came out with a model. And since I have been on board,
so a little bit less than a year, the Secretary approved the
new program for suspension and debarment. It follows all the
best practice that GAO outlined. We are committed to getting
this right. We are going to have dedicated staff. We are going
to have detailed policies and procedures. We are going to have
an active referral process. And we are going to have a system
for tracking referrals, suspensions and debarments. This is
going to happen in short order, so we look forward to following
up with the committee over time.
I thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nayak follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Dr. Nayak. And you are right, you
definitely abbreviated it. I appreciate it.
Ms. Gunderson.

STATEMENT OF NANCY J. GUNDERSON

Ms. Gunderson. Thank you, Chairman Lankford, Ranking Member
Connolly and members of the subcommittee, thank you for this
opportunity to appear before you to discuss the Department of
Health and Human Services' grants and acquisitions policies and
practices, and in particular, our use of suspension and
debarment and our oversight practices.
As the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Grants and
Acquisition Policy and Accountability, I serve as the
Department's suspension and debarment official and am
responsible for providing department-wide leadership in the
areas of grants and acquisition management. My office oversees
and supports the Department's 13 grants management offices and
10 procurement activities as they award and administer grants
and contracts in fulfilling HHS' mission to enhance the health
and well-being of Americans.
Fighting fraud and ensuring program integrity are central
to fulfilling the Department's mission. We appreciate the work
of this subcommittee and the GAO in highlighting the policies
and practices from which HHS may learn.
The Department is committed to the effective use of
suspension and debarment as a tool to support successful grant
and acquisition management. HHS also believes that
comprehensive pre-award source selection and post-award
administration practices help ensure satisfactory performance
and reduce our need to resort to suspension and debarment as we
focus our resources on these practices.
As reported by the GAO, HHS debarred 29 grant recipients
between 2006 and 2010. In fiscal year 2011, we also debarred
six grant recipients, and these debarment cases were based on
financial misconduct as investigated by our Office of the
Inspector General, and scientific misconduct, as investigated
by our Office of Research Integrity, in cooperation with the
affected universities and research institutions.
Through our contract administration processes from fiscal
year 2009 through 2011, HHS terminated approximately 12
contracts for default. In these cases, the associated
performance issues were not so serious in nature to impose
either suspension or debarment. In light of the GAO's
recommendations and in an effort to strengthen our suspension
and debarment processes, we are in discussions on how best to
dedicate staff and resources to this function and related
oversight activities, and in particular, to create a contractor
integrity team.
We are currently assessing the policies and practices of
other agencies for contract-related suspension and debarment in
order to tailor best practices to our organization and issue
detailed policies and procedures.
We also intend to create an electronic desk reference to
implement the new policy and provide our contracting officers
with associated reference materials and uniform decisionmaking
tools regarding referrals for suspension and debarment,
financial responsibility determinations and other performance
remedies. Additionally, we also plan to establish an electronic
case referral and tracking process for both grant and contract-
related concerns, which will enable HHS to monitor and follow
through on each case and identify consistent themes and
vulnerabilities.
Finally, these policies and practices will be reinforced
through communication and training to ensure HHS' grant and
acquisition communities understand their responsibilities and
are able to identify and refer cases of fraud, misconduct and
the abuse of the public's trust in the Department's grants and
acquisition programs.
HHS strongly agrees with the need to protect taxpayer
dollars, and is committed to using its grants and acquisition
management practices to serve as careful stewards of these
funds.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before the
subcommittee and about HHS' use of suspension and debarment in
dealing with its grantees and contractors. I am glad to answer
any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gunderson follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Ms. Gunderson.
With that, I would like to take a short recess. Let me give
you an update on what we have. We have several votes and then a
motion to recommit. Unless you want to talk everybody out of
doing a motion to recommit, down there? No.
So it will take about probably 40 minutes or so, I would
say, on our votes and our time to be able to come back. We will
get restarted here as soon as we can with our questions, and we
will re-engage again. I apologize for the delay, but we stand
in recess until we have finished up voting. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Lankford. We will come back into session.
Thank you again for giving us some grace, a chance to get
away and to be able to do the votes and come back in.
We have heard your testimony, received that, obviously have
your written testimony as well. We are going to get a chance to
discuss some things and ask questions, feel free to just be
able to interact with us. Let us start running through those
things as we can at that point.
Mr. Shaw, let me start with you on something. You had made
a comment that I thought was very interesting about fact-based
cases, that you are not waiting for an indictment somewhere
through DOJ, you are doing your own fact-base cases. Two
questions for that. One, if you could elaborate more on the
process that you do with that. And the second one is, what kind
of due process protections do you have in place to protect your
contractors to make sure that as you are doing your own fact-
based research here, that you don't also have a contractor out
there that is getting stung inappropriately? How do you balance
the two of those?
Mr. Shaw. Thank you.
First, it is a matter of looking at the evidence and not
just relying entirely upon the fact of an indictment or a
conviction. In the FAR, it says an indictment or conviction is
sufficient as a matter of law. So a lot of agencies then use
that as a security blanket.
Mr. Lankford. They are just exclusive to that? You are
going into the details?
Mr. Shaw. Right. So we look at the evidence, and if the
evidence meets the preponderance of the evidence standard of a
debarment or adequate evidence standard of a suspension, then
we will do the action. And probably half of our cases are that
way, maybe more than half. I think that is a significant
difference in why we have so many more numbers, or higher
numbers.
Mr. Lankford. Do you feel like the contractors are still
protected in the process as well?
Mr. Shaw. Yes. There is actually a lot of procedures, they
have the right to come in within 30 days and meet with us
personally. Or if there is a genuine dispute of material fact,
then they have aright to a mini-trial, a fact-finding
proceeding where under oath, cross-examination of witnesses,
that type of proceeding.
Mr. Lankford. So, Mr. Pelletier, that is what you were
talking about, basically this mini-trial that you all do with
EPA as well?
Mr. Pelletier. Yes, sir. If there is a dispute of a genuine
material fact, then we likewise will have what we call a mini-
trial, we actually just call it a fact-finding hearing.
Mr. Lankford. Okay. Mr. Shaw, you had mentioned as well
that you were outside the procurement chain, and you felt like
that was better on that. Is anyone else in that same situation
for your agency, where you are outside the chain? Mr.
Pelletier.
Mr. Pelletier. Yes, sir, we are not in the acquisition
chain. We are within the grants office. But it is a grants and
debarment, so it is geared toward both. And it is not strictly
within the purview of those that award the money. That is what
really the thing we are aiming at.
Mr. Lankford. Dr. Nayak. Ms. Gunderson.
Mr. Nayak. Yes, in our new program, the suspension and
debarment official unfortunately couldn't be here today,
because a family member is gravely ill, we will be outside the
procurement chain.
Mr. Lankford. Ms. Gunderson.
Ms. Gunderson. I provide oversight over our procurement
function, but I am not directly responsible for the operations,
the actual awarding of contracts.
Mr. Lankford. It is in the same office, same group at that
point?
Ms. Gunderson. Right.
Mr. Lankford. But say it to me again, the first thing you
said?
Ms. Gunderson. I provide functional oversight over
acquisition function, but my office is not directly responsible
for the award or the administration of grants and contracts. So
we are independent from that function.
Mr. Lankford. Okay, great.
Mr. Pelletier, tell me a little bit about on the EPA
section of it, there is a list of Clean Water Act, Clean Air
Act, obviously those exclusions that are there. You had
mentioned a four to one ratio of non-procurement and
procurement. Explain that to me again.
Mr. Pelletier. The amount of money that the EPA awards, and
the procurement side, it is not as much, or it is nearly four
times as much in the non-procurement and the grants and
interagency agreements and things of that nature.
The way it works of course is that we simply will make a
grant to a State that then awards contracts. We keep a watch on
those situations. If there is still some reason to debar
somebody that has been receiving our money, whether it is by
grant, through a contract with a State, we still will take
action against them.
Mr. Lankford. But if you have somebody that has violated
Clean Water Act, Clean Air Act, they are going on the list at
that point?
Mr. Pelletier. That is correct.
Mr. Lankford. Regardless of contract, is that just
automatic, it is discovered this person has violated the Clean
Water Act, you don't even know if they do Federal contracts,
they just automatically go onto the exclusions list as well?
Mr. Pelletier. Yes, sir. That is the mandate of the
statute. And the way it goes is that we are notified of a
conviction under certain provisions with the Clean Water or
Clean Air Act. Then we must put them on the list if they meet
the three criteria, which is a fact, were convicted. And the
limitation, because the statutories under the Clean Air and
Clean Water Act are limited debarments. It is only if they are
going to perform a contract at the violating facility and they
own, lease or control that facility.
To get off the list, they must submit information to the
EPA which we call a reinstatement request. And then it is
somewhat like a reverse debarment. At that point then we hear
the evidence and determine if they have, they must, I have to
certify that they have in fact cured all the violations that
put them on the list in the first place.
Mr. Lankford. Okay. So there is a process to be able to get
out, but the company has to initiate it. You all just leave
them on the list until the company or entity initiates a
request to get off the list?
Mr. Pelletier. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Lankford. Okay. Let me talk a little bit about HHS. It
is obvious, it has come up multiple times, there have been some
issues there in the process on it. I am glad you are here, glad
to be able to go through the process. The challenge of it is,
from your testimony, two different times you said the words,
``we intend to accomplish'' this, and one other time you
mentioned, ``we are in discussion'' about this. My only concern
about that is, I need to know when. Because obviously this has
come up for a while. This is a serious issue. You all have been
very active in pursuing fraud in other areas to be able to get
this into place.
So what I would like to request of HHS is that you get back
to this committee when those things are going to be resolved,
when the final process is complete, so we can have who the
individuals are that have been reassigned to oversee that, and
what their basic process is. These three factors that GAO
discussed earlier. And the actual person that is overseeing
that, whether that is you or someone else, so we will know who
is the responsible party for that. That would be very helpful,
it you would be able to get back to us.
So basically, when this is going to get accomplished and
who the person is that is going to be responsible for
overseeing it. We have to find a way to move from we intend to
get this done to this is actually done.
Do you want to respond to that?
Ms. Gunderson. No, thank you for that opportunity. We would
be happy to get back to you on our time lines and our specific
plans.
Mr. Lankford. Obviously, you know there is an issue, it
came up. You, I am sure, interacted in the process. Did you
receive a draft of the GAO report before it was all complete?
Ms. Gunderson. Yes, we had received a draft report.
Mr. Lankford. So you had time to be able to interact, so
obviously you had time to prepare on this .
Our staff did a quick search, just a Google search, looking
for fraud, for instance, in NIH. There are a couple hits that
came up immediately, Department of Justice press releases,
Temple Hills, Maryland, man sentenced for bribing in
purchasing, offer to do business for his computer company. Then
another one, Hyattsville project manager pleads guilty to
fraudulently obtaining money under oath with an NIH contract.
We then went to EPLS, and they were not listed.
So we still have some of the same issues, obviously. I am
not asking you to be aware of every single contract, every
single case. But just in the quick search of possible contracts
that may be out there, are they getting on EPLS yet, obviously
they are still not. So we have to move from intends to get it,
I would just ask you to be able to get that report to us as
quick as you can, so we can know this is covered.
You are very aware, as everyone else is, as well as FEMA
and every other agency looking at it, it helps the entire
Federal Government avoid getting into a bad contracting
situation when we know one entity has done a bad contract, they
have been debarred. Every other contracting officer can then
look at that as well.
So with that, I appreciate that, and I yield my time to Mr.
Kelly for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Nayak, my concern is DHS, and it has to do with
Katrina. GAO found that DHS had 116 suspensions or debarments
related to Federal procurement from 2006 to 2010. Yet there
were no FEMA actions. As you know, DOJ has an entire task force
dedicated to Hurricane Katrina fraud. They have convicted
numerous individuals of false statements and fraud in
connection with FEMA disaster relief assistance.
According to the fifth anniversary report of the Attorney
General, one of the principal types of fraud on which the task
force concentrated is government contract and procurement
fraud. Can you explain why FEMA has not taken action against
any party indicted, convicted or found to have engaged in
Katrina-related fraud?
Mr. Nayak. Thank you for the question. Yes, I have been at
DHS for a little bit less than a year, so I don't know how
effective I will be at sharing what I know about Katrina. But I
can share some things that FEMA is doing and some positive
momentum that they are gaining, as well as share with you what
we are doing at the departmental level that will affect
everybody in DHS, including FEMA.
So the information that is probably most relevant is just,
there is some positive momentum in FEMA around suspension and
debarment. They actually have five individuals dedicated to
doing this now. In this fiscal year itself, there were 19
investigations, 15 referrals, 5 suspensions, 5 debarments of
either grantees or contractors. So there is some positive
momentum. Then again, coming back to what we are doing at a
departmental level, which is essentially following all the best
practices, as has been shared here.
And then to add on to what Chairman Lankford just
mentioned, we should be done and have this up and running in
the next 3 months or so.
Going back to the Katrina days, one of the nice things
about putting this program in place at the departmental level
is it will be able to end the suspension and debarment official
will be able to go back and look at any actions that occurred
during that timeframe.
So we have a program that will follow best practice and we
will report out on that over time.
Mr. Kelly. Okay, thank you. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lankford. I am going to follow up on that as well. Dr.
Nayak, is it possible, when that is complete, your process, you
say it will be in the next 3 months, getting everything, that
you would submit that back to this committee, just so we could
have that as a record as well?
Mr. Nayak. Very pleased to do it.
Mr. Lankford. That would be terrific.
Let me start a second round. If you want to be able to jump
in on a second round of questions, you can. I am going to give
a moment for Mr. Connolly to be able to come and ask questions
in a moment as well.
Mr. Shaw, we talked a little bit about legislative fixes.
And GAO mentioned earlier it really feels like the legislation
that is needed is already in place, there is no additional
legislation needed. I would like to ask your opinion on that
statement. Is there additional legislation that you would see?
Or any of you, and you can also think about this as well, that
you would see, this would provide greater assistance to the
agencies, and clarification?
Mr. Shaw. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't see any
legislation directly narrowly dealing with the suspension and
debarment. But I do have thoughts in two areas, unrelated
areas, that could help. One is the Program Fraud Civil Remedies
Act, which I know your committee is familiar with, which was
passed in 1986 but has not been used because it is so
cumbersome, frankly.
Mr. Lankford. Now that is a shock, that there is a Federal
instance that is cumbersome.
Mr. Shaw. So we are working on it, we expect that the
Defense Department will be having a proposal for a fix for
that, that would also have the suspending and debarring
officials being the people that would enter the penalties under
that. So that relates to debarment, it gives greater visibility
into other cases for debarment officials. It is sort of an
automatic referral process.
The second area that would stir up referrals from the
contracting community particularly would be the use of proceeds
from litigation that relates to procurement fraud. If the
proceeds or some portion of the proceeds could go to the
program that is victimized by the fraud, and not just to the
U.S. Treasury, then the agencies would be able to fix the
widget that was broken by the fraudulent contractor without
taking it out of O&M funds. And that would encourage the
contracting community to be more interested and proactive in
this area.
Mr. Lankford. So run that by me again, where you see the
process. You are saying when they are found to be fraudulent,
the recovery of that money from fraud is currently not going
back into the agency?
Mr. Shaw. That is right. If there is, if Smith Co. is
convicted or there is a civil judgment for false claims act
against a hypothetical Smith Co., and for having damaged a
program, that KC-10 Air Force program, that money, millions of
dollars often, cases in that situation, if the procurement
money is closed, which is always the case in these situations,
because it takes a long time to investigate these things. So
the bad guy is being ordered to refund the money, but the money
does not go to the program that is being victimized. It doesn't
go to Tinker, it doesn't go to Oklahoma City Air Logistics
Center.
Mr. Lankford. I would think all of it needs to go to Tinker
or Oklahoma City on that. [Laughter.]
Mr. Shaw. So that would be helpful.
Mr. Lankford. Okay, that is very helpful to know.
Mr. Connolly brought up an issue on the contingency
contracting. In a wartime situation, obviously, contracts are
going very rapidly. A lot of new contractors going in. If you
are dealing with Afghanistan and Iraq, a lot of foreign
contracts are also getting engaged on the ground. How are we
handling the issues of debarments and suspensions in a
contingency operation?
Mr. Shaw. There is a memorandum of understanding within the
Defense Department, where the Army is the lead agency, the
administrative agency for debarments and suspensions and for
contracting, actually, contracting as a whole. So I hate to
duck that question.
Mr. Lankford. It is an Army question.
Mr. Shaw. Yes. The Air Force has done a lot of, a number of
debarments and suspensions from the theater. But the great
majority of them are Army ones.
Mr. Lankford. Okay. We will try to follow up with that as
well. Because that obviously is important to us in a lot that
is happening.
Just a moment.
Mr. Pelletier, tell me a little bit about the appeal
process that you have going. You discussed this in your
testimony earlier, about your appeal. When someone has a
protest, they have been debarred, you talked about the mini-
trial type of situation, coming in on appeal. Has that been
effective? Or is that so cumbersome, let me say it this way. We
don't want anything to stand in the way of saying, if there is
a good process for suspension and debarment, we don't want
someone to say, I don't want to go through that because it is
so cumbersome and it is so bulky, I would rather not even go
through it, than to actually do it. So I am looking for, how
does that work for you?
Mr. Pelletier. Yes, sir, it is actually easy in this
respect. The appeal process that we have built in at the EPA is
that I make a final decision to debar somebody or a decision to
maintain a suspension. They have the right to appeal to the
director of the division. It is a very easy process. They
simply present whatever evidence they think why it should not
be in place. And then the director has the opportunity to
remand the case to me or uphold it. If it is remanded to me,
then I can review what was, why it was remanded and have a
second opinion or dismiss it, depending on what the
circumstances are.
And then subsequently, of course, they have the right under
the Administrative Procedures Act to go to a district court.
But it does give, actually, what is easy about it, it gives the
respondent, rather than the choice of immediately incurring
court costs and going and hiring attorneys and doing anything
that is involved, they can make an appeal within the system.
And they do get a second look.
Mr. Lankford. How long does that take? Before you get into
the Administrative Procedures Act and actually go into an
outside court, total process on that, give me an average.
Mr. Pelletier. The internal one?
Mr. Lankford. Yes, internal.
Mr. Pelletier. Internal, it is usually within 3 months it
has been up and back and a final decision again.
Mr. Lankford. So the whole process, 3 months, done?
Mr. Pelletier. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lankford. That is fairly rapid for us.
Mr. Pelletier. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lankford. You also mentioned you have 42 cases, and I
want to see if I got this number correct, that you felt were
statutory exclusions. Was that from last year, you are saying?
Mr. Pelletier. Sir, that is the preliminary number we have
for fiscal year 2011. It is a preliminary number.
Mr. Lankford. Those are individuals that have been included
because of Clean Water Act violations, Clean Air Act
violations, a total of 42. Is that nationwide?
Mr. Pelletier. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lankford. Okay. That number is actually lower than I
anticipated, is the reason I came back to it as well. That is
not necessarily contractors, they are just individuals that
have been found in violation of Clean Water, Clean Air Acts and
have been listed out as saying, if they ever apply for a
contract, there is an exclusion in this area, this plant, this
location?
Mr. Pelletier. That is correct.
Mr. Lankford. Okay. Terrific.
With that, I yield to Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sorry to be a little
late getting back. I had a meeting.
Ms. Gunderson, you heard the testimony of the GAO
representative, Mr. Woods, who noted that when it came to
procurement, there has not been a single suspension or
debarment by HHS in 5 years. What is the value of the total
procurement in that time period?
Ms. Gunderson. The total value in that timeframe was about
$81 billion. In the last 2 years we have done around $19
billion annually.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. Can you help enlighten us on why there
would not be a single suspension or debarment? All the
contracts are just that good?
Ms. Gunderson. We do take contractor oversight very
seriously, including the way in which we select and evaluate
our contractors prior to award and the way we administer those
contracts during performance. We have had contractor
performance issues that we have used other tools and
flexibilities on, such as terminations for default. And we do
see suspension and debarment as a tool in our tool box, per se,
to manage concerns. But none of the issues we have had have
risen to that level.
Mr. Connolly. Right. And presumably, you shared that view
with the GAO when they were looking at this issue in your
agency?
Ms. Gunderson. Yes, we did, in our meeting.
Mr. Connolly. What was their response to that?
Ms. Gunderson. Their response was very, it was generally
acknowledging our premise, and we were delighted to see the
recommendations around the three characteristics of the more
active agencies and are taking those into consideration for
developing our plans around improving policies and our referral
practices and dedicating staff to the effort.
Mr. Connolly. Would it be fair for a layman to conclude
that the priority within HHS is Medicare?
Ms. Gunderson. It would be fair to conclude that. The
Secretary has come strongly on on all areas of program
integrity, though. Program integrity is one of her key
strategic initiatives, as well as encompassing our strategic
plan.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Shaw pointed out that there are only
three Federal agencies, I believe, that have like the Air Force
a full-time dedicated debarment officer. Can we expect that
HHS, given the huge volume you are talking about, even though
apparently in the $81 billion of the last 5 years, nothing rose
to this level, would it make sense from your point of view,
from the agency's point of view, to emulate the Air Force and
have a full-time officer with respect to this set of issues?
Ms. Gunderson. That is one of the models we are looking at,
among all the others that are out across the Federal agencies.
I do serve as the suspension and debarment official because I
have oversight over the acquisition and grants policies and the
operations of those functions. So currently, as it stands, it
makes the most sense to fit it within my organization.
And as I said, we are looking at other models that other
agencies have had.
Mr. Connolly. When might this committee know when you have
finished looking at and have decided upon a plan of action?
Ms. Gunderson. The chairman has asked us to get back to the
committee on that, and we will be doing that.
Mr. Connolly. Do you have a time line, however?
Ms. Gunderson. Generally speaking, we are looking within
the next 3 months at implementing these policies and a new
plan.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
And Mr. Nayak, you also outlined basically, if I heard you
correctly, in your very concise and succinct testimony, thank
you, that you were going to essentially, enshrine pretty much,
the recommendations of the GAO and get on with it. What is your
time line for doing that?
Mr. Nayak. I also mentioned to the chairman, 3 months. By
the end of the calendar year.
Mr. Connolly. Three months. It was such a good answer, I
just wanted to get it into the record a second time.
[Laughter.]
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lankford. It will be a terrific Christmas present to
us, we will be able to read it over New Year's. I appreciate
that.
I recognize Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
From all of you, just your opinion on the mandatory
debarments. Mr. Shaw, if you would start, just kind of walk me
through on what you all think.
Mr. Shaw. Thank you, Congressman. I think that mandatory
debarments are a bad idea in the procurement area. I am not
familiar enough with the Clean Water Act and all those. That
may work with regard to facilities. But in the procurement
area, it takes away an important tool that we have to fight
fraud. And that tool is the leverage that we can use with this
carrot and stick that I mentioned before, about working with
contractors that are trying to do it right and to changing
their conduct and improving their processes, so that they have
risk management programs in place where fraud won't happen in
the first place.
If there is a mandatory debarment, companies are going to
tend to think, well, why bother, and they are just going to
obfuscate and fight the investigations, rather than work
proactively to avoid the fraud in the first place.
And there is a lot of good, I think, we do in that area,
both when there is misconduct with such things as
administrative agreements, but also where there is no
misconduct at all. We meet regularly with all the major defense
contractors to talk about their ethics programs, even when they
are not in trouble. So I oppose it.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. Pelletier.
Mr. Pelletier. Sir, thank you . I agree in the sense that
the mandatory statutory debarments take away the key element of
discretion. Like the Air Force, I am a full-time suspension
debarment official. Each agency has its own particular interest
and information, or situation, that it has to deal with.
Allowing the suspension and debarment official to have that
discretion as it deals with a contractor that may be, versus
someone that is bad, someone that has defrauded the government,
somebody that has made a mistake, somebody that doesn't realize
how the Federal process works, but is quite willing to change
and adjust, we may have potentially a very good contractor or
very good grants person available to us. We don't want to throw
them out the window without a chance at getting back in the
game.
So with the discretion that the suspension and debarment
official has, we can do things like enter administrative
agreements, which are basically commercial probation, if you
will. We have a very strict set of requirements that they have
to meet. We monitor that. They report back and a violation of
an administrative agreement, for example, is another grounds
for debarment.
And at the end of the process, and it is usually 3 years,
we far more often than not end up with a better contractor or a
better grant, what we call a participant than we started off
with. And I think the best interest of the government has been
protected.
Mr. Kelly. Dr. Nayak.
Mr. Nayak. And so I am not as much of an expert as these
gentlemen, but I would agree with them 100 percent where it
comes to contractors, and then statutorily, I am just not that
much of an expert to sort of give you a read on that. But happy
to look into it with the committee.
Mr. Kelly. That would be great, thank you.
Ms. Gunderson.
Ms. Gunderson. HHS does use the mandatory exclusions on the
health care side. That is not handled specifically by my
office. It is an authority under our Office of the Inspector
General. But it is a valuable tool that the Department uses to
combat health care fraud, patient neglect and those sorts of
issues that arise to mandatory exclusion.
Mr. Kelly. Good. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lankford. I would like to yield a couple minutes to Mr.
Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Just a follow-up, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Pelletier, it strikes me, based on our analysis in
terms of per billion dollars of contract dollars, you have a
much higher debarment and suspension rate than does DOD. You
would agree?
Mr. Pelletier. Notwithstanding Mr. Shaw's opinion to the
contrary, yes. [Laughter.]
Mr. Connolly. Yes. Well, so my question is this. To what do
you attribute that? We have a situation where DOD, per billion
dollars of contract, has a much lower rate than you do. HHS and
procurement has zero rate, because according to Ms. Gunderson,
they have used other mechanisms.
If you are a Member of Congress listening to this, you are
thinking, there seems to be a wide variety of judgment being
exercised, and that may be a good thing. But it is hard to get
our arms around in terms of predictability and accountability
for the taxpayers we represent. I just want to give you the
opportunity to comment on your own observation of why this
variability among agencies and why does EPA apparently use this
tool more frequently than some other agencies?
Mr. Pelletier. First of all, sir, I couldn't obviously
comment on to the why other agencies are or are not doing
something or how their programs work. Each one is unique.
But as I said in my statement, EPA is really the pioneer in
this area. We started in 1981, developing a program. And over
the years, as anything else, we developed an expertise in the
area. And perhaps, and one of the things in teaching, which we
are very active in the national suspension and debarment
training program, one of the feedbacks we get from people that
are in the class is, we didn't realize it was that easy to do.
So it may be that we have developed an expertise because of
longevity that affords us a greased rail where we know how to
do it, because we have done it so many times.
Mr. Connolly. And do you have dedicated, full-time, as Mr.
Shaw is for the Air Force?
Mr. Pelletier. Yes, sir, I am the full-time.
Mr. Connolly. You are it?
Mr. Pelletier. I am it. And our staff at the division, that
is their job. We have seven attorneys on that, two
investigators, an auditor, and support personnel and a division
director. That is all we do, is suspension and debarment.
Mr. Connolly. And just a final question. I assume, and Mr.
Shaw, you are free to answer as well, I think you already
testified to this, Mr. Shaw pretty much said, having that full-
time dedicated person makes sort of all the difference in
making sure you have an active program. Would you concur?
Mr. Pelletier. It has worked well for our agency. We have a
senior person. And we have a dedicated person and it has proven
to be very, very effective.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lankford. Let's close out the hearing, but I want to
give an opportunity for any of the four witnesses to make any
final comments that you would like be able to get in on the
record as well, or a response to anything.
Mr. Shaw.
Mr. Shaw. I guess just a couple of observations. I have
never done an analysis, it is interesting, your mathematics is
correct per dollar. But I am wondering, well, first of all, let
me say I think that the number of debarments is a bad metric
anyway for this whole program, for this whole process. But it
is an easy one, because the numbers are what the numbers are.
So it is important, and everybody at the end of the year always
compares numbers.
What you are doing proactively to prevent fraud, and to
encourage improvement in the culture of companies I think is
much more important. But having said that, even looking at the
numbers metrics, I think the better way of looking at it would
be not the number of debarments and suspensions per contract
dollar, but maybe the number per contract. And I don't know how
you would get at that number. But a big difference in DOD from
EPA and ICE and other agencies, as we deal with big dollar
contracts.
So for example, when I suspended Boeing several years ago
on a $15 billion space launch program, that counted, I guess,
three. So I had three suspensions. But it was a $15 billion
contract. And all of the Air Force and defense contracts are
big dollar amounts. I think that maybe skews a little bit that
0.09 thing.
Mr. Lankford. Any other comments from any of the other
witnesses?
We do appreciate your attendance, the work to be able to
come and to be able to be here. Your written statements
obviously, probably the least favorite part of your week was to
come and do a congressional hearing. So we do appreciate the
time for you to be able to be here.
With that, this committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:20 p.m, the subcommittee was adjourned.]


