- ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF GREENHOUSE GAS REGULATIONS ON SMALL BUSINESS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF GREENHOUSE GAS REGULATIONS ON SMALL BUSINESS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON REGULATORY AFFAIRS,
STIMULUS OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT SPENDING

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 6, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-24

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-721                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs, Stimulus Oversight and Government
Spending

JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chairman
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York, Vice    DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio, Ranking
Chairwoman                           Minority Member
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JIM COOPER, Tennessee
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              JACKIE SPEIER, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on April 6, 2011....................................     1
Statement of:
Rajkovacz, Joe, director of regulatory affairs, owner-
operator, Independent Drivers Association; David Kreutzer,
Ph.D., research fellow in energy economics and climate
change, the Heritage Foundation; David D. Doniger, policy
director, Climate Center, Natural Resources Defense
Council; and Keith Holman, deputy executive director,
National Lime Association..................................     8
Doniger, David D.........................................    24
Holman, Keith............................................    40
Kreutzer, David, Ph.D....................................    16
Rajkovacz, Joe...........................................     8
Rodgers, Claudia, Deputy Chief Counsel, Office of Advocacy,
U.S. Small Business Administration; and Gina McCarthy,
Assistant Administrator for the Office of Air and
Radiation, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency............    75
McCarthy, Gina...........................................   129
Rodgers, Claudia.........................................    75
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Doniger, David D., policy director, Climate Center, Natural
Resources Defense Council, prepared statement of...........    26
Holman, Keith, deputy executive director, National Lime
Association, prepared statement of.........................    42
Jordan, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio, prepared statement of.............................     4
Kreutzer, David, Ph.D., research fellow in energy economics
and climate change, the Heritage Foundation, prepared
statement of...............................................    18
McCarthy, Gina, Assistant Administrator for the Office of Air
and Radiation, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
prepared statement of......................................   130
Rajkovacz, Joe, director of regulatory affairs, owner-
operator, Independent Drivers Association, prepared
statement of...............................................    11
Rodgers, Claudia, Deputy Chief Counsel, Office of Advocacy,
U.S. Small Business Administration, prepared statement of..    77
Speier, Hon. Jackie, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California, letter dated April 6, 2011............    58

ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF GREENHOUSE GAS REGULATIONS ON SMALL BUSINESS

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 6, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs, Stimulus
Oversight and Government Spending,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:39 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jim Jordan
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Jordan, Buerkle, DesJarlais,
Kucinich, and Speier.
Also present: Representative Issa.
Staff present: Ali Ahmad, deputy press secretary; Michael
R. Bebeau, assistant clerk; Molly Boyl, parliamentarian;
Lawrence J. Brady, staff director; Benjamin Stroud Cole, policy
advisor and investigative analyst; Adam P. Fromm, director of
Member liaison and floor operations; Ryan M. Hambleton and
Kristin L. Nelson, professional staff members; Justin LoFranco,
press assistant; Mark D. Marin, senior professional staff
member; Kristina M. Moore, senior counsel; Laura L. Rush,
deputy chief clerk; Walker Hanson, legal intern; Noelle
Turbitt, intern; Kevin Corbin, minority staff assistant; Ashley
Etienne, minority director of communications; Carla Hultberg,
minority chief clerk; Mark Stephenson, minority senior policy
advisor/legislative director; and Alex Wolf, minority
professional staff member.
Mr. Jordan. The hearing on Assessing the Impact of EPA
Greenhouse Gas Regulations on Small Business will come to
order. And I apologize to our witnesses; I was in the Capitol
in an important meeting. There are lots of important meetings
going on this week. We want to get started because we are going
to have to recess for a Republican conference, so let's get
rolling.
Today's hearing marks the third occasion for this committee
to consider the regulatory burdens facing America's job
creators. Thus far we have learned a great deal from the
private sector employers in the manufacturing and construction
industries about the harm that two Federal regulatory agencies
in particular are doing to their businesses. Together, the EPA
and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, with
their joint army of more than 20,000 regulators, receive a
combined $11 billion in taxpayer dollars to fulfill their
statutory responsibility, but it has never been the goal of
Federal regulation to stifle economic growth. At least it is
not supposed to be.
As was detailed in a report to released by Chairman Issa in
February, hundreds of job creators have identified scores of
regulations from these two agencies that hinder their ability
to expand and offer good paying jobs to millions of out-of-work
Americans. Today we will focus our oversight on the
Environmental Protection Agency and specifically development,
implementation, and the effect of EPA's greenhouse gas
regulations on small businesses.
Under the current regime, the EPA has emerged as the chief
enforcer of the Administration's agenda for environmental law.
On both sides of the aisle, Republicans and Democrats recognize
the ``glorious mess'' of EPA's rulemaking. Whether by
hamstringing recovery efforts in the wake of the Gulf oil spill
or unilaterally redefining the Agency's authority under the
Clean Air Act, the EPA has nurtured the distinct impression
among American job creators that this Administration is out of
touch with the real world harm that the agenda causes.
Even worse, the committee has reason to believe that in
addition to its bureaucratic disregard for struggling
industries that were hardest hit by economic downturn, the EPA
appears to have broken the law in a rush to issue sweeping new
rules for greenhouse gas emissions. Regulated industries,
understandably, feel left out of the process and confined to an
environment of job killing uncertainty while EPA crafts a whole
new regulatory superstructure that touches every area of our
national life, all of this despite the presence of numerous
promises before and after his election that regulations in this
Administration would be crafted with careful consideration of
their cumulative effect on small business.
The growth and sustainability of small business are
critical to the success of the American economy, which is why
this committee will continue to be in place, a place where men
and women, entrepreneurs and investors can come for a fair
hearing about their concerns. The American people deserve a
responsive government that listens to them and works for them.
Small business specifically warrant out attentive ear, as they
employ more than half of all private sector workers and
represent more than 99 percent of all employer firms in the
United States.
Yet, these businesses carry an increasingly
disproportionate share of the American regulatory burden. One
recent study revealed that the annual regulatory cost to small
business is nearly $3,000 more per employee than the cost to
larger firms. The same study found that compliance with
environmental regulations in particular cost small business and
small business owners four times more than firms with more than
500 employees.
It is disconcerting, therefore, to learn how far the EPA
has fallen short of the present stated goals. By adding to this
already intense regulatory burden, the Administration has
executed a strategy that destroys jobs, rather than creates
them. With prolonged unemployment that we have not seen in
decades, the folly of this agenda is not difficult to see.
Today we will hear from those affected by EPA's regulation
of greenhouse gases and we will hear from the EPA and Small
Business Administration. I want to thank these witnesses for
their presence today.
I now turn to my friend and the ranking member, the
distinguished gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Kucinich.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Jim Jordan follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.002

Mr. Kucinich. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I just
wanted you and the witnesses to know I just have to step
outside briefly at 2 for a meeting that I had scheduled before
this committee hearing was scheduled, but I am pleased to be
here with you and with our chairman and the other members of
the committee. Thank you for holding this important hearing.
Today we are here to discuss the impact of greenhouse gas
regulations on small businesses. America's small businesses are
the lifeblood of this country's economy. Competition,
innovation, and the entrepreneurial spirit have driven
Americans to prosperity, and it is our job in Congress to
ensure that we facilitate and promote an environment of
economic opportunity. It is also our job to protect the well
being of American citizens, with the bottom line of providing
the highest quality of life reach in every person.
Based on actual results and future projections, it is clear
that the Clean Air Act strikes a balance between economic
growth and keeping each and every one of us healthy. By 2020,
for every taxpayer dollar invested in the Clean Air Act, there
will be an estimated $30 in return in benefits. In the year
2010 alone, the Clean Air Act prevented over 160,000 deaths,
over 3 million lost school days, and 13 million days of lost
work. These numbers are illustrative of the benefits to both
businesses and public health facilitated by the Clean Air Act.
The regulation of greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act
is imperative to protecting public health and welfare. The
threat posed by climate change is based on peer-reviewed,
accurate, and concrete science. The threat is real, and
preventative steps are necessary. The EPA's regulation of
greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act is a measured common
sense approach to mitigating climate change that protects not
only public health and welfare, but protects businesses as
well.
Opponents of greenhouse gas regulation claim that small
entities will be overly burdened by costly and unattainable
emission standards. However, the EPA's implementation of the
tailoring rule is a small business conscious method of
protecting public health and this country's employers and
employees. The tailoring rule, by setting a greenhouse gas
emission threshold, exempts 95 percent of all stationary source
of greenhouse gas emissions. Essentially, the tailoring rule
lifts a regulatory burden off of small businesses.
In written testimony provided for today's hearing, the
Small Business Majority, a representative of U.S. businesses,
states that, ``Some will claim that a variety of small
businesses, everything from bookstores to diners and plumbers,
would be impacted by greenhouse gas standards. This simply
isn't the case.''
Further, as described in the Small Business Majority's
testimony, a significant number of small business owners
welcome measures to reduce environmental pollution. Now, this
sentiment simply cannot be ignored. As I have said at this
subcommittee's past two meetings, we can't have a productive
discussion about the impact of regulations without considering
both cost and benefits. For example, when we talk about the new
tailpipe emission standards, we cannot simply discuss a
potential increase in the sticker price of a vehicle. The
proposed standards for heavy- and medium-duty trucks, despite a
marginal increase in sticker price, are projected to save over
$74,000 over the life of the truck and save over 500 million
barrels of oil.
You want to talk economic impact? Multiply that roughly
with the price of oil bouncing back and forth over $100, and
you could have savings that you could measure, do the math, $50
billion. Multiply this times all the trucks on the road and the
reduced fuel consumption, and greenhouse gas pollutant
emissions can help achieve energy independence while improving
our public health.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to having a well rounded
discussion about greenhouse gas emission standards, their costs
and their benefits, with today's witnesses. I yield back.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
Members have 7 days to submit opening statements. Oh, no,
no, no, we have an opening statement. I forgot we have the
chairman here. The chairman of the full committee the gentleman
from California is recognized.
Mr. Issa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I will be
brief.
The ranking member wisely said that cost and benefit need
to be evaluated, but as we will hear today, and this committee
has found in its studies, cost and benefit are not part of the
EPA's mandate or consideration. If they were, many of the
regulations that they have created would not have been created.
Ultimately, they simply say we are only looking at the
environment, we are not looking at the cost. If cost
effectiveness, least cost to the system, greatest pollution
reduction at the least price were part of the mandate, we would
all applaud it.
In addition, the EPA has no limits. This committee has
discovered that in fact a natural occurring gas that will
continue to be produced in huge amounts in other countries is
in fact being regulated. Any coal not consumed in this country
will be shipped to another country. The most high-polluting
coal in the world is burned in China. These and other realities
cause us to, A, have more of this gas than we would otherwise
have if our goal really was to reduce the gas on a global
basis, but, B, and most importantly, when you look at farmers
in Iowa who find themselves being fined because dust from corn
husks get in the air on their farm, and other kinds of
nonsensical things not intended in the EPA's original mandate
regulations continue to be produced, you have to wonder why
didn't Congress set limits.
Last, but not least, this committee has repeatedly seen and
now becomes convinced that the EPA and other environmental
organizations are in fact inviting litigation, settling, and
using that litigation in order to justify new regulations. This
practice of being sued, settling, and then in fact producing
new rules is an area that clearly has to stop. Congress exempts
itself from civil lawsuits over its policies for a reason. The
EPA, on the other hand, and other organizations seem to welcome
those because they lead to the same end that they want, but
make it faster.
Last, Mr. Chairman, this committee is more and more,
through that AmericanJobCreators.com awareness program, we are
finding that rules that have not been made, but used under the
form of guidance and guidelines and so on, are basically
threatened as rules, so eventually they become rules after, in
fact, compliance is reached by a long threat. These and other
impediments to job creation are something this committee is
dedicated to. Of course, on both sides of the aisle, we want
clean air and clean water, but we also want the funds created
by a successful economy that pay for that clean air and clean
water.
Last weekend I was on a bipartisan CODEL to Egypt. The Nile
is very pretty, but there is not enough money to deliver the
kind of health standards in Egypt that we have here today. That
is a goal that America has to be cognizant of. If we do not
have a successful economy, there will not be money for the
regulators to have the dream they now mandate without a clear
course toward it.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for this important
hearing and yield back.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentleman.
We want to welcome our first panel of witnesses. We have,
first, Dr. David Kreutzer, a research fellow in energy
economics and climate change at the Heritage Foundation. In his
position, he researches how energy and climate change
legislation will affect economic activity in the national,
local, and at the industry level.
We have Mr. Joe Rajkovacz, the director of regulatory
affairs at the Owner-Operator Independent Drivers Association,
and has been involved in the trucking industry over 30 years as
both an employee driver and owner and operator.
We have Mr. David Doniger. He is the policy director of the
Climate Center at the Natural Resources Defense Council. We
welcome you to the committee.
And Mr. Keith Holman is deputy executive director at the
National Lime Association and represented small businesses on
environmental regulatory issues for many years.
It's pursuant to the rules of the committee, all witnesses
are sworn in, so if you would just stand and raise your right
hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Jordan. Let the record show that each of the four
witnesses answered in the affirmative.
We are going to try to limit everyone's testimony to 5
minutes. We do have a Republican conference that starts in 9
minutes, but they never start on time, so we are going to try
to get through all five of you, and then we will probably
recess and then try to come back for questions. And I
apologize, but we want to at least get your testimony. So let's
get started, and we are going to go right down the line. Mr.
Rajkovacz.

STATEMENTS OF JOE RAJKOVACZ, DIRECTOR OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS,
OWNER-OPERATOR INDEPENDENT DRIVERS ASSOCIATION; DAVID KREUTZER,
PH.D., RESEARCH FELLOW IN ENERGY ECONOMICS AND CLIMATE CHANGE,
THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION; DAVID D. DONIGER, POLICY DIRECTOR,
CLIMATE CENTER, NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCIL; AND KEITH
HOLMAN, DEPUTY EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL LIME ASSOCIATION

STATEMENT OF JOE RAJKOVACZ

Mr. Rajkovacz. Chairman Jordan, Ranking Member Kucinich,
good afternoon and thank you for allowing me to testify on
behalf of small-business truckers concerning EPA's efforts to
regulate greenhouse gas emissions.
OOIDA represents the interest of small business trucking
professionals and professional drivers. We currently have more
than 153,000 members collectively who own and operate
approximately 200,000 heavy-duty trucks nationwide. Any
regulation adopted affecting the trucking industry has a
dramatic effect on small-business truckers.
The main issue as we see it is all about process: how
regulations are adopted; whether the process is open,
transparent, includes all of the stakeholders; and if the
justifications have properly taken into account all the
variables necessary to avoid a one-size-fits-all regulatory
system that may disproportionately benefit some stakeholders at
the expense of others. In this context, EPA's proposed GHG
regulations for new heavy-duty trucks can be viewed as having
thrown small business concerns under the bus.
Small-business truckers cannot be portrayed as unconcerned
about air quality and fuel mileage improvement. Between EPA's
stepped up emission standards on diesel engines beginning in
2004 and continuing through 2007 and 2010 model years, today's
diesel engines are more than 90 percent cleaner than just a
decade ago. On top of that, EPA mandates truckers must use
ultra-low sulfur diesel, and in California specialty diesel
blends. All of this has come with a significant price increase
on new trucks and at the fuel pump.
Additionally, since small-business truckers operate in a
hyper-competitive marketplace, managing their No. 1 expense,
fuel, is imperative for their survival. Those who don't are
quickly culled from the market, as evident by the recent record
bankruptcies in the trucking industry.
In spite of all the success in reducing emissions,
government agencies still want to regulate further, at a time
when small-business truckers are still trying to collect their
breath after the worst economic contraction since the Great
Depression.
When EPA embarked on this regulatory process, the White
House instructed the Agency to work with all stakeholders, with
specific direction to partner with the California Air Resources
Board in crafting GHG rules. I suppose this was because many
think CARB is an environmental trailblazer. However, many of us
in the small business community recognize CARB's record as one
that does not account for the concerns of small businesses.
Indeed, CARB's history of engagement with small business
can be viewed as nothing more than checking off the box. Their
supposed leadership on regulating trucking GHG emissions has
not been without significant controversy within the trucking
community because they have resulted in high cost limited
benefits to all but the largest trucking fleets. Yet, they are
driving EPA's regulatory process on GHG emissions regulation of
trucks.
From the Hien Tran affair to Dr. Enstrom's dismissal at
UCLA for questioning CARB's PM mortality studies, CARB cutting
by half the original diesel emissions mortality estimates, to
the admission I recently received from CARB which shows air
regulating transportation refrigeration units on trailers
without any studies or scientific foundation, their actions are
leaving the small business community breathlessly questioning
the agency's commitment to accuracy and wondering about their
disproportionate influence on EPA's rulemaking, especially when
EPA is ignoring our small business concerns.
Based on the attention small businesses have received as
job creators, the small-business trucking community had hoped
for more from EPA. However, we have only seen more of the same:
shut out, ignored, and likely forced to live with bad public
policy. Owner-operators and small-business truckers operate
widely diverse trucking operations. Categorizing all trucking
into a one-size-fits-all regulatory regimen will likely lead to
those same entities keeping their older equipment longer,
reduce new truck sales, and fail to fully realize the stated
goals of regulating GHG.
Owner-operators and small-business truckers should not have
rules crafted that needlessly drive up their operational costs
simply because their business model has been ignored by
regulatory agencies when promulgating rules.
I thank you again for this opportunity and I look forward
to answering any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rajkovacz follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.007

Mr. Jordan. We thank you.
Doctor.

STATEMENT OF DAVID KREUTZER, PH.D.

Mr. Kreutzer. My name is David Kreutzer. I am research
fellow in energy economics and climate change at the Heritage
Foundation. The views I express in this testimony are my own
and should not be construed as representing any official
position of The Heritage Foundation.
Chairman Jordan and Ranking Member Kucinich and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for giving
me this opportunity to address the question of the economic
impact of carbon dioxide regulation. I would like to make
several points regarding this impact. First, forcing cuts in
CO
2
emissions reduces access to affordable energy.
The United States gets 85 percent of its energy from fossil
fuels, and CO
2
is an unavoidable byproduct of using
fossil fuels. Though substitutes exist, they are more expensive
and cannot be turned on and off as needed.
In my written testimony there is a chart that compares that
cost of coal-fired electricity to wind and solar power after
these renewable costs have been adjusted for necessary backup
power and for the long transmission distances. We see that wind
and solar power are 80 percent to 280 percent more costly than
coal. These higher costs will not help consumers and they will
not help businesses of any size.
It should be noted that if recent low prices of natural gas
continue, gas-fired electricity should have costs comparable to
that of coal.
The second point is CO
2
restrictions will have a
costly impact on the economy, regardless of the mechanism used
to force the cuts. There are no free lunches.
Imagine a misguided policy to dramatically restrict the
consumption of dairy products by way of a $3 million per gallon
tax on milk. Perhaps one very rich milk lover will buy one
gallon of dairy products per year. This will raise $3 million,
a minor amount by Washington standards. However, it will
devastate the dairy industry, imposing much higher costs than
the tax revenue, and it is that higher cost that is the focus
of the economic impact. The loss of jobs and income at the
farm, at the processing plants, and at the retailers, that is
the economic impact of such a policy.
A cap-and-trade program that issues an allowance for a
single gallon of milk per year would have the same devastating
impacts on the economy and the dairy industry as the $3 million
per gallon tax, so they are two equivalent ways of doing the
same damage.
In a similar vein, regulations that cut milk consumption to
a single gallon, however they are devised, would also have the
same devastating impact on the dairy industry and the overall
economy.
So it is with CO
2
. Whatever policy is used to
cut CO
2
also cuts access to affordable fossil fuels
and imposes similar economic losses.
At The Heritage Foundation, our analysis of the Waxman-
Markey cap-and-trade bill concluded that it would have cut
national income by over $9 trillion and cut employment by
nearly 2\1/2\ million jobs by 2035. A regulatory regime that
targets similar CO
2
cuts will have a similarly large
economic impact.
My third point is that regulatory mandates do not create
free efficiency. Markets provide efficiency when and where it
makes sense. Car advertisements tout their miles per gallon
because consumers care about saving money. Appliance
manufacturers pay to meet Energy Star standards because
consumers care about saving money. But forcing consumers to buy
products they wouldn't choose under the guise of saving them
money either will not save them money overall or will force
them to make costly and inconvenient lifestyle changes. Let me
give a personal example to illustrate how mandated energy
efficiency standards may not only be counterproductive, but
also very annoying.
My old 1993 Maytag dishwasher used to use 9 gallons of hot
water and take about an hour and 15 minutes to clean the
dishes. Since then, efficiency mandates forced a reduction in
hot water use, so the newer model uses 7 gallons of hot water,
but takes at least an hour and 50 minutes to clean the dishes.
The combined cost of the 2 gallons of water saved in both the
purchase, water and sewer rate, plus the heating it up, is less
than a dime; and that is in Arlington, where we have pretty
high water rates.
Perhaps for some the tradeoff of 35 minutes for 10 cents is
worth it. If so, they can buy the dishwasher that takes 2
hours. Or they could have used the 7 gallon cycle that was
already available on my 1993 model dishwasher. For my wife and
me, the 10 cents isn't worth it, but it is no longer a choice
we get to make.
Businesses large and small are constantly making choices
over the products and processes that give them the best results
for the money they spend. These firms were hoveled when
regulations, however well intentioned, forced unwanted choices
on them. When these engines of economic growth are hoveled,
income and employment suffer as well.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kreutzer follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.013

Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Doctor.
Mr. Doniger.

STATEMENT OF DAVID D. DONIGER

Mr. Doniger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The other witnesses
that you are hearing today are pursuing, I think, a false story
line that demonizes the Environmental Protection Agency and the
amount of steps it is taking to reduce carbon pollution.
The EPA is doing just what Congress told the Agency to do
when it wrote the Clean Air Act. Congress gave EPA the duty to
keep abreast of science and to act when that science shows
pollution is endangering our health and welfare. The
endangerment finding is backed by solid authority. America's
own most authoritative scientific body, the National Academy of
Sciences, said this in 2010: Some scientific conclusions or
theories have been so thoroughly examined and tested and
supported by so many independent observations and results that
their likelihood of being subsequently found wrong is
vanishingly small. Such conclusions and theories are then
regarded as settled facts. This is the case for the conclusion
that the earth system is warming and that much of the warming
is likely due to human activities.
Congress has never done what you are about to do on the
floor today, which is to repeal an expert agency's formal
scientific finding of the threat to health and welfare, and
politicians don't prosper long when they put themselves in the
position of denying modern science. Repealing the scientific
endangerment finding would be like repealing the Surgeon
General's finding that tobacco smoke causes cancer.
H.R. 910 will harm the health and the pocketbook of
millions of Americans. It is bad policy and it is deeply
unpopular.
The Clean Air Act's critics get the economics of
environmental safeguards completely backward. Over the past 40
years, the American economy has tripled in size, while we have
cut some forms of pollution by more than 60 percent. The Clean
Air Act doesn't demand the impossible; it requires only
pollution controls that are achievable and affordable.
EPA has taken great care to protect American families and
American small businesses. In fact, EPA set carbon pollution
standards for new cars, SUVs and over-the-road trucks, the
kinds of cars that small businesses buy, and diesel and saved
billions of dollars for American families and small businesses
by cutting their gasoline and diesel fuel bills $3,000 a
vehicle, $7,400 a vehicle for the second round of standards if
EPA is allowed to set those, and that is with gas prices at
$2.61. I would like to have that back again. The figures will
be somewhat bigger with today's gas prices.
Lobbyists for some of America's biggest polluters are
falsely claiming that the Clean Air Act's carbon requirements
will fall on millions of apartments, office buildings, farms,
churches. The truth is otherwise. EPA has exempted all small
sources of carbon pollution from permit requirements. Instead,
directly in line with congressional intent, EPA has focused the
permit requirements on the largest, new and expanded sources of
carbon pollution, such as power plants, oil refineries, and
other big polluters.
EPA has been sued by dozens of trade associations,
companies, and right-leaning advocacy groups. But when put to
the test of proving their claims, they fail; the courts have
found no merit in their claims of harm. This is no surprise
because the court challenges, like lobbyists who come up here
on the Hill, are seeking not relief for the small-fries, but
special favors for big polluters; power plants, oil refineries,
and the like. These pollution giants can't complain to the
courts about being harmed by EPA's exemption of all the smaller
sources. Their attempt to hide behind the skirts of small
businesses should fare no better here on the Hill.
Congressmen deny science at their peril. Likewise, they buy
into phony story lines about burdens on small businesses at
their peril. As I have mentioned, large majorities of the
American people support the Clean Air Act and want EPA to do
its job to control air pollution. They specifically want EPA to
do its job to control carbon air pollution. I have appended the
polling data to my testimony. It is food for thought and I
welcome questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Doniger follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.027

Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Doniger.
Unfortunately, Mr. Holman, we are going to have to have you
wait, and it is going to be a while, and I do apologize. They
just called votes 9 minutes ago. We have 6 minutes left in this
vote, so we have to go vote, so we are going to recess. But it
may be a while. I am guessing in the 3:15, 3:30, 3:40 range. So
with this series of votes going to take a while, I need to stop
by the Republican conference, and either myself or--I have not
talked to the gentlelady from New York yet--Ms. Buerkle will be
back to get things rolling around 3:30. So we are going to
stand in recess.
[Recess.]
Ms. Buerkle [presiding]. Good afternoon. We will resume our
hearing. I apologize for the delay for all of you.
Mr. Holman, you are now recognized for your opening speech.

STATEMENT OF KEITH HOLMAN

Mr. Holman. Thank you. Ms. Buerkle, sitting in for Chairman
Jordan and members of the subcommittee, good afternoon and
thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify today. My
name is Keith Holman and I am the deputy director of the
National Lime Association.
NLA is the trade association for manufacturers of calcium
oxide and calcium hydroxide, commonly known as lime. So just to
clear up any misconceptions, we are not the green little citrus
fruit and we are not associated with Lyme Disease.
For the lime industry, particularly our smaller companies,
EPA's greenhouse gas rules are having a big impact. Lime plants
generate CO
2
emissions both from the fuel that they
use and from what you could call the roasting process that
converts limestone into lime. All lime plants are now subject
to greenhouse gas permitting requirements when they are
modified. So even though the GHG rules took effect only 3
months ago, we are already seeing a chilling effect on plants
to modernize or expand lime plants because of great uncertainty
surrounding GHG permitting.
The U.S. lime industry is comprised of some 20 companies
operating about 50 commercial lime plants. Nearly half of NLA's
members are small businesses. These small lime companies face
intense competition and they are particularly sensitive to
increases in regulatory costs. For this reason, when EPA
planned a Clean Air Act rulemaking back in 2002 that would
impose stringent new requirements on lime plants, NLA was able
to persuade EPA to convene what is known as a small business
advocacy review panel under the Regulatory Flexibility Act. NLA
wanted EPA to have the opportunity to meet with small lime
companies, understand their needs, and design the rule with
those needs in mind.
EPA convened the lime panel in January 2002. Seven of the
nine lime companies potentially affected by the rule
participated in the panel process. These small lime companies
met with EPA twice, including a face-to-face meeting in
Washington, DC. The companies were able to talk directly to
EPA, as well as with representatives of the Office of Advocacy
and with the White House Office of Management and Budget.
Because of the panel process, the final rule was tough, but
something that our small lime plants could live with. Several
improvements to the rule were only made possible because small
lime companies were able to meet face-to-face with EPA and
provide critical information. Not surprisingly, when EPA
announced in 2008 that it planned to regulate GHGs under the
Clean Air Act, many industries, including the lime industry,
wanted EPA to convene a panel. However, instead of convening a
panel, EPA simply chose to have a public outreach meeting, and
only after it had proposed three rules under GHG program: the
first the endangerment finding, the vehicle tailpipe rule, and
the so-called tailoring rule. EPA argued that it was not
required to conduct a panel for these rulemakings.
Whether or not EPA could legally choose not to convene a
panel, it was clearly wrong not to do so. EPA held the panel
meeting in November 2009, well after the three GHG rules had
been proposed. The meeting was, in reality, little more than
EPA giving attendees a broad brush overview of the proposed
rules. NLA and the other trade associations that were present
had virtually no opportunity to have a dialog with the Agency
about the actual design of the rules.
NLA followed up the meeting with written comments to EPA
about the design of the tailoring rule. The tailoring rule
proposed to defer GHG permitting requirements for plants that
had GHG emissions below a certain threshold. Because there is
no known way to avoid generating CO
2
when limestone
is heated and converted into lime, NLA asked that EPA consider
excluding these process-related GHG emissions from counting
against the tailoring rules applicability thresholds. EPA's
single paragraph response failed to meaningfully respond to
EPA's request.
EPA's reliance on the public outreach approach as a
substitute for the panel process is wrong for several reasons.
In bypassing the panel process, EPA lost its best chance to
meet with actual small businesses face-to-face and exchange
information with them. The panel process also establishes a
context for EPA advocacy and OMB to meet, discuss the issues,
and reach consensus on flexible solutions. The public outreach
approach taken by EPA does not and cannot take the place of a
panel.
Many of the implementation difficulties now facing EPA, the
States, and industry might have been avoided if EPA had taken
the time to listen to small business before writing its GHG
rules. Now the lime industry as a whole is reluctant to expand
or modernize its plants until the permitting uncertainties
caused by these GHG rules have been resolved.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I would be
happy to answer any questions you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holman follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.034

Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Holman.
At this time, without objection, I would like to enter into
the record testimony from the National Association of
Homebuilders, the Farm Bureau Federation, and the Small
Business and Entrepreneurship Council. Without objection, so
ordered.
At this point, I am going to yield myself 5 minutes and see
if some of the other subcommittee members join us.
Mr. Rajkovacz, in your testimony, you mentioned the EPA
taking a one-size-fits-all approach, and I wonder if you could
expand upon that a little bit.
Mr. Rajkovacz. Yes. We fundamentally believe without having
included small-business motor carriers, owner-operators in the
discussion--and when I say they didn't include it, within their
regulatory impact analysis, they specifically stated that the
rulemaking would not have a significant economic impact on a
substantial number of small entities.
And as we started looking at that, we were aware that they
were talking with large motor carrier interest, and this gets
to the heart of the problem in terms of looking at the trucking
industry. The industry is predominantly dominated by small-
business motor carriers. Nearly 96 percent of motor carriers
operate registered motor carriers in this country have 20 or
fewer trucks that they operate.
And yet, when you go and talk to the largest of the large,
who have very homogenous streamlined operational models, they
run one truck, one type of trailer, it fails to take into
account the multiple dual purpose uses that small businesses
actually engage in. We have many members that operate a couple
of trailers. They may one day pull a drive-in trailer, for
instance, where aerodynamic technologies would be appropriate
and work. We don't deny that these technologies will work where
appropriate, but the next day they are pulling a flatbed or
drop-deck, and in that now that technology is working against
them.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
Mr. Doniger, in your comments earlier, before we adjourned,
you made the statement that you hoped that Members of Congress
wouldn't fall prey to the phony story lines of small businesses
when it comes to EPA burdens placed on them. Could you expand?
What were you referring to?
Mr. Doniger. If I may, I was referring to a phony story
line about small businesses that is generally told by others,
by lobbyists for larger entities, and the common story line is
that EPA's regulations affect apartment houses, hotdog stands,
donut shops, small entities; and they don't. There is a
specific exemption, as I am explained and I am sure you will
hear from EPA, and as Mr. Kucinich explained, that the permit
requirements don't apply to 95 percent of the sources in the
country, don't apply to the kinds of sources that emit less
than 75,000 tons a year of carbon pollution; and, as a result,
this story line that millions of tiny sources are being roped
into a government bureaucracy is the very opposite of what is
true.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you. I have about a minute and a half
left, and I would like to give each of the other three members
of the panel the opportunity to respond to that.
Mr. Kreutzer. Well, if the tailoring rule is followed and
allowed, it would provide an exemption for some small emitters
of CO
2
for a few years. Even the EPA says that
eventually it is going to cover entities requiring, just for
Title 5 permits, 6 million new entities will have to be
permitted. So the tailoring rule is just putting it off for a
few years.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
Go ahead.
Mr. Rajkovacz. As far as affecting small businesses, if
EPA's rulemaking goes through in its current form, there are
millions, literally millions of trucks that operate interstate
commerce in this country. As I stated, most of them are small
businesses. That means eventually this rule affects millions of
small businesses.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
Mr. Holman.
Mr. Holman. Yes, I would agree that the tailoring rule is
only a partial temporary solution for small businesses, and we
don't know what EPA is going to do at the end of the period of
deferral, which will end in a few years. We also don't know if
EPA is interested in writing other programs that are going to
apply to small businesses, so we are in a very comprehensive
and wide-reaching regulatory program in the climate arena, and
certainly from the standpoint of looking at what the impacts
are of that program, EPA has done not a particularly good job.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
At this time I am pleased to recognize our chairman from
Ohio, I yield you 5 minutes.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentlelady. I didn't know if the
ranking member was in the room. Well, I will ask a few
questions; I think Dennis will be fine, and we will give him,
if he wants, a little longer time. We will be happy to do that.
Let me again thank you all for being here, and I apologize,
all my notes are at Ann Marie's desk, but let me just do a
couple things.
Dr. Kreutzer, talk to me a little bit more about the cap-
and-trade bill and what EPA may be doing and how that relates.
You mentioned it some in your testimony, but if you can
elaborate on that, I would appreciate that. Then I do have a
question for Mr. Holman and then a general question, I think.
Mr. Kreutzer. If you cut CO
2
emissions, if you
force them to be reduced, you are going to cut fossil fuel use.
Fossil fuel is the affordable energy right now. Fifty percent
of our electricity comes from coal, 20 percent from natural
gas, and in my written testimony I did a cost comparison
showing that the renewables are 80 to 280 percent more
expensive. That restricts economic activity. It means consumers
have less money to spend on other things once they have paid
their utility bills; it means producers have higher costs of
production.
So if you have consumers with less money and you have to
have higher cost products, they are going to buy less of it;
you need fewer people to make that, so employment goes down as
well. It doesn't matter if it is a tax; it doesn't matter if it
is a cap; it doesn't matter if you come up with a complex set
of regulations to force the same reduction. You are going to
have those costs. With regulations even more costly, because
you have the compliance of the administrative costs as well,
the 6 million permits that the EPA said they would have to
issue for Title 5 permits.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you.
Mr. Rajkovacz, is that pretty close?
Mr. Rajkovacz. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. Let me ask you this. This came up in a hearing
we had in this room a couple weeks ago. We had a Mr. Michaels
from OSHA and I asked him this question. In the course of the
hearing, I guess I sort of picked up on this and asked him this
general question, and I would like your thoughts as to how you
see the small business folks that you work with, how they might
feel about this.
I asked the gentleman the question, I said, Mr. Michaels,
would you agree with me that, in the vast majority of cases,
employers care pretty deeply about their employees? They invest
time in training them; they are the key to their success,
making a profit; they know them, they may live in the same
community? There are always exceptions, but I asked him
wouldn't you agree that in most situations employers care
deeply about the well-being of their employees; and I was
struck by the gentleman's response. He said I would like to
think so. And it just struck me that sometimes we have this
attitude amongst Federal employees, who are supposed to, I
understand, regulate business, but also probably educate and
help them, and yet they have this attitude that somehow the
employer is the bad guy.
Have you picked up on any of that in your dealings with the
Federal Government, whether it be EPA, OSHA, or any other
agency?
Mr. Rajkovacz. Trucking is actually, I would argue, one of
the most heavily regulated enterprises in the United States.
Others might have a different opinion. I have been dealing with
roughly 15 different Federal rulemakings just in the last 4
months; it is somewhat overwhelming for a lot of us in the
industry to keep up with it.
It depends. A lot of times you do develop relationships
with different people and agencies, and that is a very
important thing, working with these folks and developing
relationships. But when you don't have a lot of contact with an
agency, you are an outsider, and it is really tough to crack
that egg.
Mr. Jordan. Let me ask you another question. This came out
in a hearing a few weeks back. In the full committee we had one
of the freshmen, Congressman Guinta from New Hampshire, he
asked five business owners, he said, if you knew--and most of
these guys started their business 25, 30 years ago; all very
successful. He said if you knew then what you know now, would
you have started, relative to regulation. If you knew back then
all the things you would have to deal with, I think he
mentioned 15 was the number of different regulators you have to
deal with, agencies you have to deal with, if you knew then
what you know now, would you have started your business, and
every single one of them said they wouldn't have done it, would
not have done it. Has that been the experience with some of the
folks that you deal with?
Mr. Rajkovacz. What I hear from our members is they are
basically on regulatory overload. I said 15 rulemakings in the
last 4 months, and they are major rulemakings that will change
the industry's productivity. People are generally fed up with
what they think is an over-regulated environment. It is
oftentimes under the guise of safety, and where that is
appropriate, obviously----
Mr. Jordan. I didn't get to my question, Mr. Holman, but I
will have another round and I will get to that one next time.
Thank you.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Jordan.
I now yield 5 minutes to Mr. Kucinich.
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Dr. Kreutzer, I read your testimony. I was particularly
interested in the chart with the high cost of renewable energy
systems, where you chart the monthly and annual costs, and my
part in this discussion about regulation has always been that
you can assign costs, but if you want to get a clear picture
you have to look at costs and benefits simultaneously;
otherwise, we are not really understanding the societal impact.
And when I look at coal, in particular, I don't think that
anyone could argue that coal, the use of coal and the burning
of coal and the after effects on the environment of coal, does
have adverse environmental impact. In a way, the sulfur dioxide
byproducts can exacerbate pulmonary problems, it is well
recognized; asthma, emphysema. The sulfur dioxide, when it
travels over many miles, as we know this in the Midwest, that
coal burning plants in the Midwest end up with the condensate
polluting rivers and lakes in the Northeast, and we have a
price of beautification there. You could actually monetize the
costs to adverse health and the adverse impact on the
environment.
I just wanted to share that thought with you because I
think it is really important that when we are in a discussion,
the essence of which is what does this cost, and your chart,
taken within its own context, you don't make the argument, but
when you look at the cost of that technology, there is an
expense that is offloaded onto the society. I just wanted to
share that with you.
Mr. Kreutzer. I agree. And I don't think anybody here is
talking about undoing the Clean Air Act back to 1966. What I am
addressing is carbon dioxide regulation. We already have an
extraordinary amount--maybe we need more; I am not here to
debate that--regulation for sulfur dioxide and other criterion
pollutants. If you want to look at the impact of carbon dioxide
on a cost-benefit, I think some of the estimates have been
exaggerated. But if you take the estimates of the social cost
of carbon, add that to the coal cost, that is about 2 cents per
kilowatt hour, it is still much cheaper than wind or solar. It
changes the number some; it doesn't flip any of them around.
So we want to look at the costs and benefits. What benefit
in terms of global warming mitigation do you get from this?
Even with a full-blown Waxman-Markey cap-and-trade----
Mr. Kucinich. Do you think there is such a thing as global
warming?
Mr. Kreutzer. Do I think? Yes, the world is warmer. Yes.
Mr. Kucinich. I just have a few minutes left and I am going
to have to go on.
Mr. Kreutzer. OK.
Mr. Kucinich. But I thank you.
I would just like to submit for the record, Mr. Chairman, a
study that shows, in terms of benefits and costs, that the
proposed rules that we have been promoting would avoid up to
17,000 premature deaths, 4,500 cases of chronic bronchitis,
1,100 non-fatal heart attacks. These are the benefits of
focusing on protecting clean air. So I would just like to put
this into the record.
In the minute that I have left, I just want to ask Mr.
Doniger, can you explain how the tailoring rule works to
prevent harm to small businesses?
Mr. Doniger. Yes, thank you. As I said in my testimony and
in response to Ms. Buerkle, the purpose of the tailoring rule
is to focus the permit requirement, the requirement that big
new plants and big expanded plants examine whether they have
the opportunity to control pollution at an affordable and
achievable cost, it limits this requirement to very big sources
and it excludes the 95, maybe 97, 99 percent of the so-called 6
million sources that Mr. Kreutzer and others keep saying would
be subject to Clean Air Act requirements. It just will not be
so.
Mr. Kucinich. My time has expired, but the Chair has just
said that he is going to ask one more question and he has been
kind enough to let me ask another question. I have a followup
to ask of you, Mr. Doniger.
So I would go back to the Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jordan. [Remarks made off microphone.]
Mr. Kucinich. That would be great, if I could.
Mr. Doniger, we know that these exemptions are expected to
be reconsidered by the EPA in 2013. Do you think the EPA is
going to keep this exemption for small sources of greenhouse
gas emissions?
Mr. Doniger. Yes, I do. I see no reason why they would take
that exemption away.
Mr. Kucinich. Well, could you clarify just once more, do
any of the current greenhouse gas permitting regulations burden
small sources of greenhouse gas emissions?
Mr. Doniger. No, they don't, and the one thing that is in
place that actually helps small businesses so far are these
standards for vehicles, both light-duty and heavy-duty, that
will save thousands of dollars for small businesses to buy cars
and trucks.
Mr. Kucinich. So, bottom line, what is the impact of the
current greenhouse gas regulations on small businesses?
Mr. Doniger. It is probably helpful to small businesses as
a whole.
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you.
Mr. Jordan [presiding]. Mr. Holman, would you like to maybe
pick up where these guys just left off? Let me start with you
by asking this. You were a former Assistant Chief Counsel of
Energy and Environment at the SBA Office of Advocacy, is that
right?
Mr. Holman. That is correct.
Mr. Jordan. And you authored the comments that SBA
submitted to the EPA in 2009 that expressed concern about the
EPA's endangerment finding and greenhouse gas tailoring rule,
is that right?
Mr. Holman. Yes, the comments in 2008 and 2009.
Mr. Jordan. Both 2008 and 2009. Good. So in your former
capacity can you give us some insight into the discussion that
just took place and the impact that this stuff will have on
small business?
Mr. Holman. Well, I can----
Mr. Jordan. It seems to me you are pretty darned uniquely
positioned to comment on the conversation we just heard.
Mr. Holman. Well, I guess I appreciate that comment. You
know, there was a lot of discussion between the Office of
Advocacy and EPA on the tailoring rule and there is no doubt
that the tailoring rule is a help to many small businesses
because it does delay the permitting requirements that would
otherwise be falling on small businesses the way it has fallen
on the lime industry even now.
And I can first address what are those impacts that are
falling on us and on some other smalls, and that ultimately
will fall on all small businesses, potentially, and that is
uncertainty because of GHG permitting. So imagine that you are
required to comply with GHG permitting and you want to do some
sort of modernization or expansion of your plan. What it is
going to mean is that you have to go to get a permit to do that
expansion, and in that process of getting that permit, it could
be that every aspect of your operations will wind up being
looked at by EPA or a State under what is known as best
available control technology review.
The concern by most of the industrial sources, and even
some of the small ones, is that process could wind up requiring
you to install non-related things, things that have nothing to
do with emissions but have to do with energy efficiency or some
other improvement in your plant that would be very expensive.
And it has a chilling effect because imagine you go to a bank
and you say you want to get financing for a project that I am
going to do at my facility. Well, when do you have to put it
in? I don't know. What is it going to be? I'm not sure because
EPA can't really tell me what it is; we will only know at the
end of the process, and even then we might not know because
that is subject to being challenged in court and potentially
being changed.
So there is a lot of uncertainty just in terms of this
process is not cut and dried. Unlike the BACT process that has
existed for criteria pollutants for 35 years, we are in a
totally new arena here when it comes to greenhouse gases.
Nobody knows exactly what is going to be required. So when you
say what is the magnitude of this impact on smalls, at the
moment we don't really know; it is very open-ended, and that
has uncertainty which, as you know, business people hate.
From the standpoint of the Office of Advocacy, we wanted a
tailoring rule or something that would at least temporarily
soften the blow, which the tailoring rule does that, but not
for everybody; certainly not for the lime industry, bricks,
small utilities, municipal utilities, rural electric
cooperatives, foundries. There are a number of businesses that
are not going to be entirely shielded by the tailoring rule.
Mr. Jordan. So when you put this together and you gave your
comments and recommendations to the EPA, and yet you just
talked about entities who are, you think, impacted in a
negative way, did you think EPA followed your comments? Did
they follow the statutory requirements they were supposed to
follow? Did they listen? Talk about that process.
Mr. Holman. Speaking from my own perspective as an
individual, my sense was that EPA was in a rush to get this
rule completed. We wanted very much to have, as I mentioned in
my testimony, we wanted EPA to stop or to slow down, consider
what the impacts were going to be on smalls, and try to come up
with a way to design the rule so that it would protect them.
EPA was not really interested in alternatives, was not really
interested in listening to what the smalls had to say other
than----
Mr. Jordan. That is what I want to be clear on. My
understanding is the law requires them to give serious
consideration, due diligence to your recommendation. Is that
accurate?
Mr. Holman. That is correct.
Mr. Jordan. And do you think that took place? That is the
question.
Mr. Holman. We were not satisfied that took place, which is
why we wrote four public letters to the EPA saying you must do
a panel before you proceed with these rulemakings.
Mr. Jordan. So in your role as advocate for small business
in front of the EPA, they did not follow, in your mind, what
the law requires them to follow.
Mr. Holman. It was our belief that EPA did not follow the
Regulatory Flexibility Act. They certified the rule and went
with what they considered to be a compromise under Section
609(c) of the Regulatory Flexibility Act.
Mr. Jordan. Had that ever been done before?
Mr. Holman. No, it had never been done before.
Mr. Jordan. So didn't follow normal practice, took an
action never done before on an issue that you told them was
going to impact small business owners in a negative way. Is
that accurate?
Mr. Holman. We told them at least four times.
Mr. Jordan. Four times you told them?
Mr. Holman. In public documents.
Mr. Jordan. OK. Thank you, Mr. Holman, I appreciate that.
We have one more round for Ms. Buerkle.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Kreutzer, you had started to answer a question about
global warming and I have a feeling you didn't finish your
answer, and I wonder if you could just expand on that.
Mr. Kreutzer. I think I was responding to Congressman
Kucinich asking me if I believed in global warming, and I said,
yes, we are warming. The question, though, is more than are we
having warming and is it caused by human-made emissions. We are
looking at a set of regulations, and if we are going to do
cost-benefit, we need to look at what is the cost of the
regulation compared to how much benefit you get from reduced
global warming. That is the problem with CO
2
, if
there is one.
And climatologists looked at the Waxman-Markey bill, which
was more comprehensive than the current EPA regulations. Their
estimates were that by 2050, if you use the largest sensitivity
of temperature to CO
2
, the high end, the maximum
change moderation from Waxman-Markey, that is, how much
difference would Waxman-Markey make, thousands of a degree in
2050, maybe a few tenths of a degree in 2100. This will have
less impact than that. So we can't compare the cost here to
stopping tsunamis; we have to compare the cost here to actually
what impact it will have on moderating world temperatures, and
it is pretty minimal; in 50 years not even measurable.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you. In your testimony you talk about
the cost of cap-and-trade.
Mr. Kreutzer. Yes.
Ms. Buerkle. And the cost to our GDP, as well as a number
of employees. Can you comment in general, not specific to that
legislation, but what regulations are doing? Our country has
had 20-plus months of unemployment hovering at 9 to 10 percent,
so we are concerned about that. We want to get government out
of the way so businesses can succeed. Can you shed some light
on that?
Mr. Kreutzer. We haven't done an estimate on the impact of
the most recent regulations. We are working on ones for the
projected EPA regulations. But one of the things that happens
when you have an environment where you say we might impose
this, we might impose this, it makes it very difficult to make
investment.
Now, some on the other side would say that is why we need
to have the regulations, but that is when you say we know for
certain it is going to be really bad. When there is some
uncertainty that is really bad, you still don't want to invest;
but when it comes to horrible, that is even worse. OK, so, yes,
we have a problem where to make investments in power industry,
to build the power plants we are going to need for firms that
are in energy-intensive industries are reluctant to go forward
if they think the regulations are going to be burdensome.
Ms. Buerkle. And I just want to go back to your previous
answer to the first question I asked you. Is there in your
opinion, what is the connection between the CO
2

emission and global warming?
Mr. Kreutzer. I am not a scientist; I am an economist, so
this is close to a man-on-the-street interview now. There will
be some warming from manmade emissions, probably. There are
some models that show some offsetting. But the CO
2
,
by itself, if it doubles, will lead to a degree and a half of
warming.
The argument is all about are there feedback loops. The
models have lots of them. The data so far, when we look at the
last 15 years, we don't have accelerating warming; the 1999
level has been pretty flat. So we don't know for sure what it
is. But, more importantly, let's say it is the 4\1/2\ degrees C
that they are talking about at the high end of the IPCC model.
What does any of this regulation do? If all it does is impose
costs and make us feel like we are doing something but we are
not, then we are getting the warming anyway, and unemployment
and lower income. So whether you believe IPCC or not, this is
not a solution.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentlelady.
The gentlewoman from California, do you wish to ask this
panel some questions? You are welcome to.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Maybe California really is on another planet, but we did
pass A.B. 32. There was an effort to repeal that; it failed
miserably. And Californians recognize that we all have a
responsibility to be stewards of this planet. Having said that,
small business in California has spoken up very strongly in
favor of A.B. 32, which would limit greenhouse gases.
Mr. Chairman, for the record, I would like to submit a
letter and document from the Small Business Majority that
basically says the following: Our research has continually
shown that the Clean Air Act is good for small business. The
report we released in October of last year found that the
benefits of the law have far outweighed the costs. The Office
of Management and Budget predicts that the total economic
benefits of the Clean Air Act to be more than four to eight
times the cost of the compliance. Our report also found that
the law has spurred important technological innovations such as
the catalytic converter, and exports of these and other
environmental technologies were valued at $30 billion in 2004.
These are encouraging numbers and cannot be ignored.
Furthermore--without objection?
Mr. Jordan. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.049

Ms. Speier. Furthermore, I am amused because when the Clean
Air Act, in 1990, was being considered, Ford Motor Co. claimed
that, ``We just do not have the technology to comply.'' And yet
look where we are today. Ford Motor Co., Chevrolet, every one
of the auto manufacturers are embracing all of the clean air
standards and creating electric cars and hybrid cars, and the
public is embracing them as well.
So I guess my question to you, Mr. Doniger, is there some
level of exaggeration going on here?
Mr. Doniger. Thank you, Congresswoman. It seems as though,
wherever we are in time, the regulations of the past are
embraced and the regulations of the future are treated like
Armageddon; and then we move on a little bit more in time and
those regulations become embraced because, as your examples
show, the benefits are proven, the economic costs turn out to
be much smaller than were forecasted by lobbyists up here, and
life goes on. The economy of the United States has tripled in
size since 1970, while we have been able to cut the emissions
of most pollutants by 60 percent or more. So we can do these
two things at once.
I would just call your attention to a study by three
economists. Roger Bezdek is the first name. I would be happy to
supply this for the record. And if I may recite just one
paragraph of his findings: Contrary to conventional wisdom,
environmental protection, economic growth, and jobs creation
are complimentary and compatible. Investments in environmental
protection create jobs and displace jobs, but the net effect on
employment is positive. Second, environmental protection has
grown rapidly to become a major sales generating, job creating
industry: $300 billion a year and 5 million jobs in 2003.
Most of the 5 million jobs created are standard jobs for
accountants, engineers, computer analysts, clerks, factory
workers, etc., and the classic environmental job, environmental
engineer, ecologist, etc., constitutes only a small portion of
the jobs created. Most of the persons employed in the jobs
created may not even realize that they owe their livelihood to
protecting the environment.
So this is a big business and it is a big contribution to
our economy, and our economy grows because we protect our
environment.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Doniger. One final question, and
this has probably been addressed already earlier in the
hearing, but this is supposed to be focusing in on small
business and the impacts on small business. The EPA tailoring
rule, which has come forward, would suggest that you have to
spew out 75,000 tons a year to be subject to any kind of
regulation by EPA. Are most small businesses spewing out 75,000
tons?
Mr. Doniger. No, they are not. Virtually all of the
buildings, the small businesses that own those buildings are
untouched by this regulation. Now, several of the people here
have suggested, well, that may not be true in the future. Well,
if Congress was going to do something that would be
constructive and help create the regulatory certainty we need,
it would be to lock in the tailoring rule the way it is now and
take away any uncertainty about how it develops in the future.
And that uncertainty exists only because there is a limit
on how long EPA is allowed to make an exemption under the court
doctrines that EPA is using to justify these exemptions; and
Congress, of course, can make those exemptions permanent. If
you lock in the tailoring rule, we will have the certainty, the
focus on the big pollution sources, get the technology on them
and leave the small-fries alone.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Doniger, let me just followup, then, real quick. Which
is it? Earlier you said that more regulation has been good, it
has added to the economy, it has been growth, and now you are
saying they should lock in the tailoring rule to take away any
uncertainty and not expand it. I mean, which way is it?
Mr. Doniger. The way it is, Congressman----
Mr. Jordan. I mean, your premise to the first question of
hers was more regulation is good.
Mr. Doniger. Not all more regulation, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Oh, so it isn't all. So some regulation could
be bad.
Mr. Doniger. Of course.
Mr. Jordan. OK. But that is not what you said. You said
regulation is good, it added to the economy, it was wonderful.
Mr. Doniger. I said the regulation that we--the greenhouse
gas safeguards that EPA is putting in place are a net plus----
Mr. Jordan. I think you said regulations in the past have
been embraced as the good stuff, but all the future ones
everyone always says they are bad, and you said that is not the
case, it is good. So you made this general statement that
regulation was good for business, good for the economy, and now
you are saying, no, we should limit the tailoring rule,
shouldn't expand it, we have to take away any uncertainty out
there. I just want to know which way is it.
Mr. Doniger. I am sure we can work out which of the
positive economic growth promoting, health promoting
regulations and which are not helpful. I am here to present the
case that what is being done now makes perfect common sense,
and what EPA has done is to make sure that the small businesses
are not burdened by the kinds of regulations that don't make
sense.
Mr. Jordan. Any further questions for the first panel?
[No response.]
Mr. Jordan. I want to thank you all for joining us today.
We do need to move on. And I apologize for the schedule. As I
said earlier, it is just one of those weeks around Congress.
We will get ready for our second panel and we will move
through that as quickly as we possibly can.
Thank you all.
As soon as we get you situated here, we will start it here.
OK, we are pleased to welcome our second panel of witnesses.
We have The Honorable Gina McCarthy, who is the Assistant
Administrator at the U.S. Environmental Agency. Welcome, Ms.
McCarthy.
And we also have Ms. Claudia Rodgers, who is the Deputy
Chief Counsel at the Small Business Administration's Office of
Advocacy.
If you were here for the first panel, we have a practice
here. Please rise and raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Jordan. Let the record show both witnesses answered in
the affirmative.
And we will go right down the row here. Ms. Rodgers, you
are up first. Go right ahead.

STATEMENTS OF CLAUDIA RODGERS, DEPUTY CHIEF COUNSEL, OFFICE OF
ADVOCACY, U.S. SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION; AND GINA
MCCARTHY, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR FOR THE OFFICE OF AIR AND
RADIATION, U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

STATEMENT OF CLAUDIA RODGERS

Ms. Rodgers. Mr. Chairman, ranking member, members of the
subcommittee, my name is Claudia Rodgers and I am Deputy Chief
Counsel for the Office of Advocacy at the U.S. Small Business
Administration. I am pleased to have the opportunity to appear
before this committee on behalf of Chief Counsel Dr. Winslow
Sargeant.
In the interest of time, I will summarize my prepared
testimony and ask that my full statement be included in the
record. Because Advocacy is an independent body within SBA, my
testimony does not necessarily reflect the position of the
administration or the SBA.
Congress established the Office of Advocacy to represent
the views of small entities before Federal agencies and
Congress. The Office of Advocacy is charged with oversight of
agency compliance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act. The RFA,
as amended by the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement
Fairness Act, gives small entities a voice in the Federal
rulemaking process. For all rules that are expected to have a
significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities, EPA must conduct SBREFA panels to assess the impact
of the proposed rule on small entities and to consider less
burdensome alternatives.
Advocacy and EPA have a long and productive working
relationship. Since SBREFA was signed into law in 1996, EPA has
conducted nearly 40 SBREFA panels to assess the impact of
proposed rules on small entities and to consider less
burdensome alternatives. These panels allow for small business
to give direct feedback on the potential cost of the proposed
rules and to suggest and develop less burdensome alternatives.
Final panel reports must be signed by the Chief Counsel for
Advocacy, the Administrator of the Office of Information and
Regulatory Affairs, and the Administrator of the EPA. In 15
years of SBREFA panels, Advocacy has found that the panel
process is a useful way for small businesses to provide
valuable input into the rulemaking process. In short, the panel
process works.
SBREFA panels have saved billions of dollars for small
businesses due to changes and improvements that were made to
proposed rules, while still allowing EPA to achieve their
statutory objective. While Advocacy does occasionally have
disagreements with EPA on procedure and policy, we are also
very proud of the work we have done with EPA to improve
regulations and reduce the burdens on small businesses. We
currently have five SBREFA panels underway on EPA rules, and we
will continue to work with EPA in a constructive way to make
sure the RFA and SBREFA are being followed and the impacts of
regulations on small businesses are being taken into account.
With respect to regulation of greenhouse gases, Advocacy
disagrees with EPA on whether the impacts on small businesses
were properly considered. Advocacy has been clear and
consistent in its public comment letters and other
communications with EPA about our positions on these issues. We
believe EPA should have held SBREFA panels and conducted
thorough RFA analysis to explore potential impacts of
greenhouse gas regulations on small entities. In 4 years of
greenhouse gas regulatory activity, EPA has not evaluated the
economic effects that its initial endangerment finding and
mobile source emission standards have had on small businesses.
Advocacy does not challenge EPA's authority to implement
the Clean Air Act; however, we do believe a more thorough
analysis was needed, including SBREFA panels, to fully consider
the impacts greenhouse gas regulation would have on small
businesses. These concerns were noted in Advocacy's four public
comment letters, attached to my testimony.
In 2008, when EPA issued an advanced notice of proposed
rulemaking indicating it might regulate greenhouse gases,
Advocacy filed public comments asking EPA to hold SBREFA panels
on any greenhouse gas regulation to ensure the effects of small
entities could be considered.
When EPA issued its endangerment finding in 2009, Advocacy
again filed public comments advising EPA to conduct SBREFA
panels to explore potential impacts of greenhouse gas
regulations on small entities.
In EPA's subsequent proposed regulation of motor vehicle
greenhouse gas emissions standards and the proposed tailoring
rule, EPA again certified under the RFA that such standards
would have no significant impact on a substantial number of
small entities. EPA did acknowledge some of the potential
burdens on small businesses and established a phased in
compliance program with the tailoring rule. This action led to
significant cost savings for small businesses and EPA deserves
credit for its implementation. However, Advocacy believes EPA
should have done a SBREFA panel, which would have better
reflected the views of small businesses and improved the rule.
In conclusion, while EPA has expressed its desire to reach
out to small entities and has provided temporary relief to
small businesses, Advocacy remains concerned that EPA has not
fully complied with both the spirit and the requirements of the
RFA on the greenhouse gas rules. EPA did conduct public
outreach; however, public outreach is not a substitute for the
concrete feedback agencies get from small businesses during the
panel process.
We look forward to continuing to work with EPA on these and
other important regulations. Thank you for the opportunity to
address such an important issue for small business. I
appreciate your work in the Office of Advocacy and I am happy
to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Rodgers follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.101

Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Ms. Rodgers.
Ms. McCarthy.

STATEMENT OF GINA MCCARTHY

Ms. McCarthy. Chairman Jordan, Ranking Member Kucinich, and
members of the subcommittee, I want to thank you for inviting
me here today, and I am honored to be sitting here with Ms.
Rodgers.
I hear repeatedly from members that small business
constituents are very concerned about EPA updating its Clean
Air Act programs to address greenhouse gases. But when I listen
to the concerns, I am most struck by the fact that what they
think we are doing bears little or no relationship to what we
are actually doing. I appreciate today's opportunity to try to
set that record straight.
The Agency is taking a common sense approach to meet our
Clean Air Act obligations to reduce carbon pollution. Our focus
now is not on small sources at all, but on the largest
polluters. Perhaps the most repeated misinformation about
greenhouse gas regulation and small businesses relates to
greenhouse gas air permits. Contrary to the most commonly heard
claims, small sources are not currently covered by the
permitting program. EPA adopted regulations last year that
exempt small sources for at least the next 5 years, and we
cannot include them absent a future rulemaking with public
comment that would do so.
I know some of your constituents are concerned about what
has been called a cow tax. Well, let me reassure you that the
Agency has no intention or desire to impose taxes on cows,
pigs, chickens, or any other livestock. And while we routinely
hear concerns that our greenhouse gas standards will cause
incredible increases in gas prices and electricity rates, none
of these estimates are actually based on the analysis of our
programs. Instead, they are based on studies, and many of them
are severely flawed, of economy-wide cap-and-trade programs
that bear absolutely no relationship to EPA's actions.
In sharp contrast to these concerns, the only greenhouse
gas standard EPA has issued under its existing Clean Air Act
authority will save small businesses money. The average
American purchasing a new passenger vehicle that meets our
greenhouse gas standards would net savings of $3,000. Our
proposed standards for medium- and heavy-duty vehicles would
net operators of semitrucks savings of up to $74,000 over the
truck's useful life.
Misconceptions about the effects of EPA programs are
unfortunately no surprise. Over the last 40 years, similar
unsupported claims have been made nearly every time EPA has
taken significant steps to protect the American public. In the
1970's we were told that by using the Clean Air Act to phase in
catalytic converters for new cars and trucks, that entire
industries might collapse. Instead, the requirement gave birth
to a global market for catalytic converters and enthroned
American manufacturers at the pinnacle of that market.
In the 1980's, people claimed that the proposed Clean Air
Act amendments would cause a quiet death for businesses across
the country, but instead the U.S. economy actually grew by 64
percent, even as the implementation of Clean Air Act amendments
cut acid rain pollution in half.
In the 1990's, when we took steps to phaseout chemicals
that deplete the ozone layer, a refrigeration industry
representative testified that we would see shutdowns of
refrigeration equipment in supermarkets and air conditioners in
large office buildings, hotels, and hospitals. None of that
happened. Instead, the phase-out happened 5 years faster and
cost 30 percent less.
EPA is using the same Clean Air Act tools that we have been
using for these past 40 years to protect public health to now
address the public health threat that is posed by carbon
pollution. These Clean Air Act tools have proven their worth
over and over in these years to improve public health. In fact,
Clean Air Act programs adopted since 1990 are expected to
provide $2 trillion in benefits in 2020 alone, over $30 in
benefits for every dollar spent. Just last year these programs
are estimated to have reduced premature mortality equivalent to
saving over 160,000 lives and to have enhanced productivity by
preventing 13 million lost work days.
I will close with a statement by the Small Business
Majority and the Main Street Alliance: Any step to delay or
limit EPA's ability to regulate greenhouse gases and other
pollution has negative implications for many businesses,
whether they are large or small. It would hamper the growth of
the clean energy sector of the economy, a sector that a
majority of small business owners view as essential to their
ability to compete.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. McCarthy follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.105

Mr. Jordan. Thank you both for your testimony and your
time.
I am going to let the ranking member go because he has to
run to another meeting, and then we will finish up.
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. McCarthy, in a hearing about the impacts of greenhouse
gas regulations, I think it is important to discuss the reason
why these regulations exist. In his written testimony, Mr.
Doniger cited the National Academy of Sciences, which
concluded, ``Climate change is occurring. It is caused largely
by human activities and poses significant risks for, and in
many cases already affecting, a broad range of human and
natural systems.'' The National Academy of Sciences continued
to explain that the scientific basis for reaching this
conclusion has ``been so thoroughly examined and tested and
supported by so many independent observations and results that
the likelihood of them subsequently being found to be wrong is
vanishingly small. Such conclusions and theories are then
regarded as settled facts.''
Now, Ms. McCarthy, as you know, the National Academy of
Sciences is far from the only organization that has reached
legitimate compelling scientific conclusions that illustrate
the real danger caused by climate change. Entities, including
the World Health Organization, International Monetary Fund, and
the U.S. Global Change Research Program, a program mandated by
Congress to integrate climate change, Federal research, all
definitively identified climate change a real danger.
Ms. McCarthy, do you agree that the science that provides
the impetus for greenhouse gas regulation is indisputable? And
if you do, why?
Ms. McCarthy. I do, Mr. Kucinich, and that is because the
best available peer-reviewed science that we have found
indicates that greenhouse gas emissions threaten the health and
welfare of the American people. That is what the Administrator
said in making her endangerment finding. It is backed not just
by EPA research, but by the full breadth of all of the agencies
in the Federal Government who address these types of issues,
including the National Academy of Sciences, including NASA,
including NOAA. All of the agencies that we rely on to provide
the best science to this country and internationally have told
us that the simple fact is that greenhouse gases are
endangering public health and the environment, and it is time
to take action now to reduce those pollutants.
Mr. Kucinich. Well, did the EPA allow for comments from
private industry, including small businesses on the greenhouse
gas endangerment finding?
Ms. McCarthy. We did. It went through a rulemaking process.
It was one of the most thorough of the agencies. We had more
than 350,000 comments, which we addressed individually. We had
11 volumes of response to comment on this rule. We believe we
did the most thorough job that the Agency could and that the
science is indisputable.
Mr. Kucinich. So what do you say, then, to the small
businesses who are continuing to express concern that EPA is
not paying attention to them and EPA is endangering their
businesses? What do you say to them?
Ms. McCarthy. I would tell them that the EPA understands
that our obligation under the Clean Air Act is to regulate
greenhouse gases and that they pose a substantial public health
problem. I would tell them that we are taking reasonable common
sense steps to address greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act
in the way that Congress intended, in a way that protects the
interest of the small businesses, in a way that will continue
to allow the economy to grow, to continue to allow jobs to
happen. We are doing the same thing to regulate greenhouse
gases as we have successfully done with other pollutants under
the Clean Air Act, and we will look at the economic impacts. We
have done that; we will continue to do that. We will act
deliberately and smart and use a common sense approach.
Mr. Kucinich. You heard the testimony of the witnesses in
the previous panel, did you not?
Ms. McCarthy. I did.
Mr. Kucinich. I think we have to be concerned about small
business communicating their difficulties, and I know Mr.
Doniger's testimony is that most of the small businesses, that
the rules would not necessarily apply to them. But I think for
those to whom they do apply, they are looking for some words
from you that would indicate that you are trying to do
everything you can to make sure people can stay in business, at
the same time trying to protect the environment. Is that a fair
characterization?
Ms. McCarthy. That is correct.
Mr. Kucinich. OK.
I want to thank the chairman for indulging me with this
opportunity to go first. Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Jordan. You bet. I appreciate the gentleman. Thank you.
Ms. Rodgers, the SBREFA Act has been around for about 15
years, is that right?
Ms. Rodgers. Since 1980, 30 years.
Mr. Jordan. Thirty years. OK.
Ms. Rodgers. I'm sorry, the RFA is 30 years; SBREFA has
been 1996.
Mr. Jordan. 1996. About 15 years. That is what I have. And
how many SBREFA panels have you been involved with with the EPA
in that timeframe?
Ms. Rodgers. The Office of Advocacy has been involved with
nearly 40, I think we are up to about 38 now.
Mr. Jordan. And I think in your testimony isn't it true you
said you had like five underway right now?
Ms. Rodgers. Yes, five currently.
Mr. Jordan. OK. And you believe these have been positive?
Ms. Rodgers. Yes. Overall, actually EPA is one of the
better actors in terms of compliance with the RFA in general.
When we were developing a training program back in 2002, we had
to go to agencies to find out those who do it best to help us
develop the program, and we went to EPA.
Mr. Jordan. So you have a good relationship, good track
record with EPA in all these except the one that is at issue
today, is that right?
Ms. Rodgers. Yes, we are concerned about the greenhouse gas
regulations.
Mr. Jordan. So the normal process was not done with the
greenhouse gas issue and its effect on small business. All the
other times have been fine, when you recommended, when you went
through it, except for this one particular one.
Ms. Rodgers. We felt that the Office of Advocacy, yes, felt
that, taken as a whole or separately, the greenhouse gas
regulations clearly had a significant economic impact on the a
substantial number of small entities and, therefore, a SBREFA
panel should have been held.
Mr. Jordan. And is this a notable exception or is this the
only exception to when you suggested you move in this way and
go through the process that the law spells out? Is this a
notable exception, is this one of a few that has been done this
way or is this the only one that has been done this way?
Ms. Rodgers. It is one of a few. However, certainly over
the years, over 15 years and 40 panels, we are bound to have
disagreements over their certifications on some rules. But it
is really one of the very few.
Mr. Jordan. OK, so when Ms. McCarthy answered the ranking
member's questions about there was a process that was
undertaken with small business owners, it wasn't the normal
process.
Ms. Rodgers. Correct.
Mr. Jordan. OK.
Ms. McCarthy, why?
Ms. McCarthy. Mr. Jordan, I would just disagree with the
characterization that it wasn't a normal process. I would
emphasize that EPA certainly follows both the letter and the
spirit of the RFA as it has been amended by SBREFA----
Mr. Jordan. Just hang on 1 second. Ms. Rodgers just
testified that it has been a great relationship, you have
worked things out----
Ms. McCarthy. It has.
Mr. Jordan [continuing]. The process has been followed
almost all the time. And yet here we have a pretty important
rule.
Ms. McCarthy. We do.
Mr. Jordan. Clean Air Act, greenhouse gas, pretty important
stuff that they think is going to have a real impact on small
business. It would seem to me you would want to follow the
standard procedure and go through what has been the custom and
the practice. So why not in this situation?
Ms. McCarthy. We did follow the appropriate procedure. I
thin where we disagree is that the tailoring rule, which seems
to be the issue at hand, is a burden reduction rule.
Mr. Jordan. This is important. You keep saying you followed
the normal procedure, but Ms. Rodgers says out of the ordinary;
the gentleman before, I assume you saw where Mr. Holman talked
and said out of the ordinary, not the normal process.
Ms. McCarthy. There are a variety of ways to comply with
the law. EPA generally goes above and beyond, and we always
meet both the letter and the spirit of the law. In this
instance we made a decision that we did not need to convene a
panel because the tailoring rule was a deregulation rule. In
fact, it reduced the burden for 6 million small businesses to
have to deal with greenhouse gas permitting, and in that
instance we did not convene a panel.
Now, we did get comment from SBA indicating that they
thought we should. I believe the disagreement is one that we
have had in the past before. In particular----
Mr. Jordan. You believe or do you know?
Ms. McCarthy. Oh, I do know, yes.
Mr. Jordan. OK.
Ms. McCarthy. Let me explain when that happened. And that
had to do with the ozone and fine particles standards that we
issued in 1997. At that point in time, SBA also indicated to us
that we should convene a panel. We indicated that rule was not
subject to a panel requirement. That was actually taken to
court. The D.C. Circuit said that SBA's interpretation of the
RFA doesn't carry any more weight than EPA's, and they
disagreed with SBA and found that our interpretation of the RFS
was persuasive. We actually won that case, and we have never
ever lost a case.
Mr. Jordan. OK.
Ms. Rodgers, did you suggest a panel be convened for the
tailoring rule and the endangerment finding and the light duty
truck rule?
Ms. Rodgers. Yes, we did, Congressman.
Mr. Jordan. So all three.
And, Ms. McCarthy, you declined to do it for each of those?
Ms. McCarthy. Well, we explained each of those rules, and I
can go through them if you would like, but we still believe we
took the appropriate action under the law.
Mr. Jordan. Because you talked about the tailoring rule; I
didn't hear you talk about the other two. So three times.
Ms. McCarthy. I can talk about the endangerment finding.
Mr. Jordan. Endangerment finding, OK.
Ms. McCarthy. EPA looks at cost and looks at getting SBREFA
panels----
Mr. Jordan. Well, let's cut to the chase here. Why not on
something this important, something of this magnitude, why not
do the standard practice? Why go through this? To cite this
decision and that and here is why, why not just do what the
advocacy group that is in the law and follow the process that
is designed to be followed?
Ms. McCarthy. We did follow the process that is designed to
be followed. What I would indicate to you is that----
Mr. Jordan. Well, again, we have the advocates for small
business, both of them saying you didn't.
Ms. McCarthy. I would disagree, respectfully.
Mr. Jordan. OK.
I will yield to the Chair of the full committee, the
gentleman from California. Excuse me.
Mr. Issa. You should take Ms. Speier.
Mr. Jordan. I apologize, Mr. Chairman, I am going to insult
you twice in 30 seconds.
Mr. Issa. Ladies first, please.
Mr. Jordan. I didn't see the gentlelady walk in from
California. California is going to get covered nonetheless, one
way or the other.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I would have yielded, but I have constituents who are
waiting in the wings to talk with me, so I would like to take
my opportunity now.
Ms. Rodgers, Chairman Issa circulated a Dear Colleague
letter to House members yesterday, I believe, that cites a
September 2010 report issued by the SBA Office of Advocacy,
authored by Crain and Crain. The report estimated the annual
cost of regulation was more than $1.75 trillion. That is kind
of a staggering figure.
And yet in February of this year Professor Sid Shapiro and
Ruth Ruttenberg released a critique of the Crain and Crain
study, called Setting the Record Straight. The Shapiro-
Ruttenberg report found that the Crain and Crain report had
``severe flaws.'' One of these flaws in the study was that they
looked at costs of regulation without looking at the benefits.
I think you can make the case if you look at the cost of
running Congress, it is staggering. But some would argue that
there is some benefit associated with running Congress. In any
case Ms. Rodgers, unless you all want to retire or resign at
this point in time.
In any case, Ms. Rodgers, did the SBA Office of Advocacy
contract with Nicole Crain and Mark Crain, and they did they
ask the authors to evaluate the benefits of regulation or only
the costs?
Ms. Rodgers. Thank you, Congresswoman. We did not ask them
to evaluate the benefits as well, and the reason is this: This
is the fourth in a series of studies we have done on the same
issue, which is the cost of regulations and the impact of those
regulations on small businesses. The purpose of the study is
not to show regulations are bad and not to show that all
regulations are over-burdensome for small business. The purpose
was to show that small businesses feel the effect of
regulations differently than large businesses.
And the reason that was done for the cost, and not the
benefits, because the costs were what affect small businesses
most and it is what the Regulatory Flexibility Act requires our
office to oversee, which asks agencies to review the cost of
their----
Ms. Speier. All right. How much did that study cost?
Ms. Rodgers. Oh, I don't know that answer. I will have to
get back to you.
Ms. Speier. Would you please provide that to the committee?
Ms. Rodgers. I would be happy to, yes.
Ms. Speier. Another flaw in the study identified by Shapiro
and Ruttenberg was that the SBA's Office of Advocacy never had
access to the underlying data used in the report; a little
astonishing to me. If you can't look at the underlying data,
then garbage in, garbage out is the way I look at things.
Ms. Rodgers, does your office have the data used in the
Crain and Crain study? If so, would you please make that data
available to us?
Ms. Rodgers. I will check and see if our office has the
data and make it available to you. I do know, I am told that it
is available through Crain and Crain on their Web site or
through their Web site, that they have made it available. When
we contract out studies, our office is not required to ask for
that data and make it publicly available----
Ms. Speier. Well, let me suggest to you that from a public
perspective, if you are using taxpayer funds, we deserve to
have the underlying data so we can in fact determine whether or
not it is accurate.
Ms. McCarthy, if EPA funded a study, would the Agency
expect to have access to the underlying data?
Ms. McCarthy. The Agency would not only have access to it,
the public would.
Ms. Speier. All right. I think that makes sense.
In addition, Shapiro and Ruttenberg, one of the peer
reviewers, Richard Williams, from the Mercatus Center, raised
concerns that the report's regulatory quality index may not
measure what the authors say it measures; and even if it does,
it may overstate the cost of regulation when used in
conjunction with other measures.
Ms. Rodgers, what, if anything, was done to address this
concern that was raised during the peer review process?
Ms. Rodgers. We did have the document, the study peer
reviewed, and it came back with actually excellent reviews
during the peer review process. This is, as I mentioned, one in
four studies. Crain has been involved, the author has been
involved in many of our studies previously which have not had--
and used the exact same methodology--have not had complaints
before then. We have done it in 1995, 2001, 2005, and 2010. So
it is basically the same methodology, a new version of the same
study with an updated cost on how these costs are affecting
small businesses.
Ms. Speier. Ms. McCarthy, do you have any concerns with the
peer review process used to evaluate the Crain and Crain study?
Ms. McCarthy. I do, and I am glad you asked that. As far as
I know, the study was reviewed by two individuals. The sum
total of one of the individual's comments was, ``I looked it
over and it's terrific. Nothing to add. Congrats.'' If this is
the quality of the peer review of that study, then I would
suggest to you it is a study that EPA could certainly not put
its weight behind.
EPA is required to do peer review analysis of its studies;
it is required to have our studies have analytic consistency,
rigor, real peer review, transparency. The last report that EPA
went out and contracted for and worked through was peer
reviewed by 34 economists and technical individuals. We had a
thorough public comment process. What I have here holding is a
double-sided copy of just their last comments that they
submitted to us during the peer review process.
Two individuals does not make a substantive peer review
process, when we have repeatedly asked for the underlying data
and have not been provided it by Crain and Crain or by the SBA.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I know my time has expired, but I would just
like to suggest to all of us that taxpayer funds should be
spent on studies that really give us good data, and certainly
the data should be available to us and to the taxpayers of this
country. So I would hope that as we look at ways of making sure
that government operates effectively, that we require that
moving forward. Thank you.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the lady. She makes a good suggestion.
Following up on that, Ms. McCarthy, in the closing of your
testimony you say, I will close with a statement by the Small
Business Majority, and you quote the ability to regulate
greenhouse gases should not be limited. Do you know how many
members, what the membership is in the Small Business Majority?
Do you know that number?
Ms. McCarthy. I am sorry, I do not.
Mr. Jordan. Well, according to a New York Times story July
8, 2009, Small Business Majority has no membership. Its
founder, Mr. John Arensmeyer, says it can no longer objectively
represent small business if it had membership. So while the
gentlelady from California's point is good, the close of your
testimony cites a group, at least according to the New York
Times, that has no membership and yet portrays itself as an
organization representing small business. So I think both
points are well taken and you should make sure in your
testimony to quote from a source that actually might reflect
something of the interest of small business.
With that, I would yield to the chairman of the full
committee.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am sorry that my
colleague from California left. Let me just make something
clear for the record.
Ms. Rodgers, Ms. McCarthy, you are both working for
departments headed by President Obama, political appointees,
right?
Ms. Rodgers. Yes.
Mr. Issa. So when she sort of implies that one side of your
two positions must be good and the other is ill-conceived and
doesn't care about the same things that we all saw President
Obama elected for, at least, Ms. Rodgers, I suspect you object
to some idea that you don't care to get it right or that
somehow your mandate is different in some way. Wouldn't that be
true?
Ms. Rodgers. Yes, Congressman, I would absolutely object.
Small businesses care about clean air and care about the
environment, so we want to make that point as well.
Mr. Issa. Let me ask you both a question. Isn't it true you
could both be right, that Ms. McCarthy, with a mandate to
essentially have the cleanest possible air and water, can in
fact, in good conscience, make every effort to be as pure as
possible? We used to say driven snow, but I have seen what it
looks like when it melts, so I won't go there.
And isn't it possible, Ms. Rodgers, that you, when you go
out and you get a study that shows $1.75 trillion, that you are
not saying that you can save all of it and still have the level
of clean air and clean water the American people expect?
Couldn't you both be right?
Ms. Rodgers. I would absolutely agree.
Mr. Issa. Now, Ms. McCarthy, wouldn't you agree that
somewhere in $1.75 trillion, if that is an accurate number,
that some of that should be reviewed and reconsidered to see if
in fact changes could save much of that burden and free up
those dollars for other uses, even if they are uses to help
clean the environment; that not every regulation has
accomplished what you wanted it to in a sound science way?
Wouldn't you agree?
Ms. McCarthy. We are in the process now of complying with
the President's Executive order and doing a review of our
regulations.
Mr. Issa. But I actually was looking at the conclusion.
Wouldn't you conclude that there has to be something there that
you could re-look at that would help get burden off the backs
of small business, and maybe even not small business; that, in
fact, on a tradeoff of cost-benefit is not the best regulation
out there?
Ms. McCarthy. Mr. Issa, I would suggest to you that we
continually look at those issues and we are working with the--
--
Mr. Issa. OK, then maybe you can explain something to me.
In Boiler MACT you have a standard that can't be adhered to,
and you have gone to the courts asking them to give you relief,
and they have said we can't relieve you from your stupidity; go
to Congress. Now, isn't that slightly vulgar, but pretty much
the exact truth; that you have something that does not exist,
you have created a rule that cannot presently be done, you have
gone to the courts trying to get temporary relief in hopes that
some day it will be able to be complied with, rather than
saying what is it that exists that can be complied with?
Wouldn't that be a fair characterization?
Ms. McCarthy. I don't believe so, no.
Mr. Issa. OK, what part of it was inaccurate? Tell me in
specificity?
Ms. McCarthy. The specific issue is the Boiler MACT rule
went through a public process----
Mr. Issa. No, I am looking at the outcome. Is the science
attainable today according to----
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Issa. It is? Then why did you ask the court for relief?
Ms. McCarthy. Because we believed that it deserved
reconsideration because some of the legal underpinnings during
the public comment process, because of comments we heard from
industry, many of them small businesses, we made substantial
changes from proposal to final which warranted additional legal
underpinnings through a public comment process.
Mr. Issa. So why----
Ms. McCarthy. We will do that.
Mr. Issa. Why wouldn't you just pull the rule?
Ms. McCarthy. There was no need to do that and we were
under a court order to deliver a final rule within a given
point in time, which we did.
Mr. Issa. So now we have something for which you have asked
the court for relief and they can't give you relief.
Ms. McCarthy. No. What we intend to do is reconsider the
rule in due time. We will respond appropriately; it will be
legally sound. And it is already scientifically credible.
Mr. Issa. But not currently available.
Ms. McCarthy. Oh, it is actually a final rule.
Mr. Issa. No, no. I am talking about the actual technology.
Ms. McCarthy. Oh, no, I am sorry. I believe that the
requirements in the rule are achievable.
Mr. Issa. Well, thank you, I appreciate your having that
opinion under oath. The mandate for these impacts, last year--
and it has probably been brought up, but I will just bring it
up again. Last year I sent the Administrator, Administrator
Jackson, a letter requesting EPA suspend finalization of its
greenhouse gas proposals until after the Agency complied with
the Office of Advocacy demand.
You sent me back a response on February 4th, informing me
that the Agency's decision was to move forward. At that time,
you indicated that your outreach under 609(c) fully satisfied
EPA's obligation to assess the impact and actions on small
business. Do you still stand behind that?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Issa. Ms. Rodgers, do you think that they have really
lived up to the spirit of that?
Ms. Rodgers. Unfortunately, no, we don't. Section 609(c) of
the RFA does allow an agency to reach out to small businesses,
but we don't feel that this relieves them of their duty to hold
a SBREFA panel. And as I said in my testimony, outreach to
small business is not the same thing as a SBREFA panel.
And the advantages of a panel that you don't get from
outreach are at the pre-proposal stage you have the three
member panel, our office, EPA, and the Office of Information
and Regulatory Affairs at the White House; and at the end of
the process you end with a panel report that has the
recommendations from actual small businesses on various
alternatives that get put into the document.
Mr. Issa. I had another question to this round, if I can,
since I think we have a little time here.
Section 317 of the Clean Air Act requires EPA to complete
an economic impact assessment for any regulations propagated
under Section 202 of the act, which applies to the car rule.
Did EPA conduct a Section 317 economic impact assessment before
any of its greenhouse gas rulings were made?
Ms. McCarthy. It did conduct a regulatory impact assessment
associated with the light duty vehicle rule.
Mr. Issa. If so, did the analysis assess the following,
which are required by statute: the cost of compliance?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes.
Mr. Issa. The potential inflationary or recessionary
effects?
Ms. McCarthy. I believe so.
Mr. Issa. The effects on competition with respect to small
business?
Ms. McCarthy. The rule exempted small business, Mr. Issa,
so we probably did not need to go into much detail there.
Mr. Issa. Do you intend on always exempting small business?
Ms. McCarthy. No. When it is appropriate we do.
Mr. Issa. No, no. Do you expect that this rule will never
change; that in some future time you wouldn't do it?
Ms. McCarthy. If the rule changes, we will have to go
through a rulemaking process----
Mr. Issa. So you carved out small business in order to
essentially keep yourself from having to do that assessment or
that assessment simply wasn't necessary and that was never part
of the consideration?
Ms. McCarthy. That was obviously part of the regulatory
impact assessment, was to look at all costs. What I am
explaining to you is that we did not----
Mr. Issa. The reason I asked the question is you don't
exempt anybody without a reason. Obviously we don't want clean
air and clean water only for big companies; we want clean air
and clean water. So in your decision to exempt small business,
wouldn't you need a cost reason to do so?
Ms. McCarthy. Actually, we did provide a thorough
assessment of why it was appropriate to exempt. Cost was part
of the consideration; lead time was part of the consideration.
Because you are asking significant improvements in cars, and
many of the smaller manufacturers would not be able to produce
and comply with the rules in the same way that large industries
or large manufacturers were able to do that.
Mr. Issa. OK. The next test was the effects on consumer
cost. Did you take that into consideration?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, we did.
Mr. Issa. The effects on energy use, did you take that into
effect?
Ms. McCarthy. Yes, we did.
Mr. Issa. To the extent that EPA has conducted any economic
impact analysis, I respectfully request that you provide that
to the committee. Are you prepared to do that?
Ms. McCarthy. Oh, we certainly will.
Mr. Issa. OK. I would very much appreciate it. That, in our
opinion, has been requested previously and is long overdue.
I am getting head shaking. Christina, am I wrong? We have
requested that?
[Remarks made off microphone.]
Mr. Issa. OK, I think if you look through the series of
letters, you will find that was certainly something we had
expectation of getting; we haven't gotten. But I appreciate
your willingness to give it to us today and yield back.
Thank you, Chairman.
Ms. McCarthy. It is part of the rulemaking. That is public
information and is in the docket.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the Chair.
Ms. McCarthy. And it is on the Web site.
Mr. Jordan. I just have one other question and will be
happy to yield back if the chairman has anything additional.
In your testimony, Ms. Rodgers, you indicated that the
panels work.
Ms. Rodgers. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. The panels work and you feel like you have a
good relationship with Ms. McCarthy and anyone and everyone
else that you work with there. It is a process that makes sense
and that has been effective.
Ms. McCarthy, would you agree with Ms. Rodgers' testimony,
what she said in her testimony, that these panels work and that
it is a good process?
Ms. McCarthy. Our relationship works very well. I would
submit to you that we both are extremely concerned that EPA get
appropriate information and feedback on small businesses and
impacts to small businesses relative to those that we are
regulating through a rule, yes.
Mr. Jordan. But to the specific question, the SBREFA panels
work? The process works.
Ms. McCarthy. It has worked very well, yes.
Mr. Jordan. OK. Now, so I come back to what I asked you
earlier. A rule of this magnitude, in light of the debate that
took place in the U.S. Congress dealing with cap-and-trade,
this issue that has been front and center for the American
people, a process that you both indicate works, why didn't you
follow it for something, again, of this magnitude, of this
importance, with the debate the way it is, with the concerns
expressed by small business owners in front of this committee
today? Look, I understand hindsight is 20/20 and all that, but
if you had it to do over again would you have convened a panel
and went through the normal process?
Ms. McCarthy. Let me explain to you, if I----
Mr. Jordan. Can you answer that question? If you had it to
do over again?
Ms. McCarthy. No, I would not. I would do it exactly the
same way.
Mr. Jordan. OK.
Ms. McCarthy. And that is because these panels are designed
to address issues relative to a rulemaking that sets a standard
or establishes a requirement on a business sector, a small
business entity. They are asked specific questions like what is
the reporting and recordkeeping and compliance; what are the
Federal rules that might duplicate it; what alternatives do you
have to the proposed rule? We did not enjoin a panel because
the rules that you are talking about did not immediately or
directly regulate small business.
Mr. Jordan. Wait a minute.
Ms. McCarthy. So there was no way in which we could apply
this rule----
Mr. Jordan. You just said you had a great relationship. Ms.
Rodgers is an intelligent lady. The folks who work for her are
intelligent people. They suggested that you do it. So you may
not have thought it was absolutely necessary, but why not do
it, again, when they are saying this makes sense to do and
business owners were saying it makes sense to do? We have heard
testimony of the concerns they have. Why not just do it? Why
not be safe rather than sorry?
Ms. McCarthy. On the tailoring rule we did a voluntary
program where we had an outreach with 23 SERs. We had a panel;
we got their input. What we are not agreeing to is that this
rule, and there was a requirement for panels to be developed
when we have a rule like the endangerment finding that isn't
directly regulating small businesses like the tailoring rule--
--
Mr. Jordan. Ms. Rodgers----
Ms. McCarthy [continuing]. That is de-regulating small
businesses. It doesn't mean we don't appreciate the input of
small business, and we try to get that input into the process.
Mr. Jordan. Ms. Rodgers, you understood, when you suggested
the panel, that the EPA could in fact take the route that they
took? You understood that? You didn't think it would happen
because it was out of the norm.
Ms. Rodgers. Exactly.
Mr. Jordan. Yet you still said this was important to have
this panel. Give me why you were so focused and why you have
expressed comments after the fact why it was important to have
that panel.
Ms. Rodgers. I would be happy to. One of the reasons the
endangerment finding, no, did not directly regulate small
businesses; however, it did set the greenhouse gas regulations
in motion. The foreseeable impacts of this rule on small
businesses certainly were there. The next rule to come about
was the vehicle emissions rule, of course. They were regulating
large automobile manufacturers.
However, just by beginning that process and starting to
regulate greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act on one part
of the Clean Air Act automatically triggered the greenhouse gas
regulation or regulating greenhouse gases under the entire
Clean Air Act, thereby subjecting small businesses to
permitting requirements under the Clean Air Act.
Mr. Jordan. So you could foresee what was coming. Why
couldn't they?
Ms. Rodgers. I can't answer that question, but what I can
say is by not----
Mr. Jordan. And it was clear. Your team who suggested this,
was there any disagreement? Was it unanimous, we need to move
with this panel?
Ms. Rodgers. It was unanimous.
Mr. Jordan. So it was strong. You had to do this.
Ms. Rodgers. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. You could foresee what was coming.
Ms. Rodgers. Yes, we could.
Mr. Jordan. And you have proved right, based on the
testimony we got from the first panel.
Ms. Rodgers. We think we have, yes.
Mr. Jordan. Yes. And yet they just couldn't see it.
Ms. Rodgers. Unfortunately, no.
Mr. Jordan. OK.
I see we have no further questions for the panel. I want to
thank you both for attending. Again, I want to apologize for
the schedule. We look forward to visiting again.
We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Additional information submitted for the hearing record
follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7721.115


