- THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA'S FISCAL YEAR 2010 BUDGET: ENSURING FISCAL SUSTAINABILITY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA'S FISCAL YEAR 2010 BUDGET: ENSURING FISCAL
SUSTAINABILITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH CARE, DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, CENSUS AND THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 12, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-48

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-515 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Health Care, District of Columbia, Census and the
National Archives

TREY GOWDY, South Carolina, Chairman
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona, Vice         DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois, Ranking
Chairman                             Minority Member
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Columbia
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
JOE WALSH, Illinois

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 12, 2011.....................................     1
Statement of:
Gandhi, Dr. Natwar, chief financial officer, District of
Columbia; Matt Fabian, managing director, Municipal Market
Advisor; and Dr. Alice M. Rivlin, senior fellow, the
Brookings Institution, former Chair of the D.C. Control
Board......................................................    35
Fabian, Matt.............................................    68
Gandhi, Dr. Natwar.......................................    35
Rivlin, Alice M..........................................    73
Gray, Vincent, mayor, District of Columbia; and Kwame Brown,
chairman, D.C. City Council................................     2
Brown, Kwame.............................................    14
Gray, Vincent............................................     2
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Brown, Kwame, chairman, D.C. City Council, prepared statement
of.........................................................    16
Davis, Hon. Danny K., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, prepared statement of...................    32
Fabian, Matt, managing director, Municipal Market Advisor,
prepared statement of......................................    70
Gandhi, Dr. Natwar, chief financial officer, District of
Columbia, prepared statement of............................    38
Gosar, Hon. Paul A., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona, prepared statement of....................    93
Gray, Vincent, mayor, District of Columbia, prepared
statement of...............................................     5
Rivlin, Alice M., senior fellow, the Brookings Institution,
former Chair of the D.C. Control Board, prepared statement
of.........................................................    75

THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA'S FISCAL YEAR 2010 BUDGET: ENSURING FISCAL
SUSTAINABILITY

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 12, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Health Care, District of Columbia,
Census and the National Archives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 8:50 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Trey Gowdy
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Gowdy, Gosar, McHenry, Davis,
Norton, and Clay.
Staff present: Ali Ahmad, deputy press secretary; Robert
Borden, general counsel; Molly Boyl, parliamentarian; Lawrence
J. Brady, staff director; Benjamin Stroud Cole, policy advisor
and investigative analyst; John Cuaderes, deputy staff
director; Howard A. Denis and Peter Haller, senior counsels;
Adam P. Fromm, director of Member liaison and floor operations;
Linda Good, chief clerk; Frederick Hill, director of
communications and senior policy advisor; Christopher Hixon,
deputy chief counsel, oversight; Jim Lewis, senior policy
advisor; Mark D. Marin, senior professional staff member; James
Robertson, professional staff member; Laura L. Rush, deputy
chief clerk; Matthew Tallmer, staff investigator; Peter Warren,
policy director; Ronald Allen, minority staff assistant; Jaron
Bourke, minority director of administration; Yvette Cravins,
minority counsel; Ashley Etienne, minority director of
communications; Jennifer Hoffman, minority press secretary; and
Mark Stephenson, minority senior policy advisor/legislative
director.
Mr. Gowdy. The committee will come to order.
Mr. Mayor, Chairman Brown, thank you for being with us
today.
It is my understanding, Mr. Mayor, you have city business
to tend to, which we understand and appreciate, and we want to
be very good stewards of your time. So my friend Mr. Davis and
I are going to waive our opening statements so we can spend
more time with you and Chairman Brown. And again, on behalf of
all of us, thank you for being with us.
It is the policy of the committee to swear in all
witnesses, so I would ask both Mayor Gray and Chairman Brown to
rise with me and raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Gowdy. May the record reflect both witnesses answered
in the affirmative.
It is my pleasure to introduce Mayor Vincent Gray, the
mayor of the District of Columbia, and recognize him for his 5-
minute opening remarks.

STATEMENTS OF VINCENT GRAY, MAYOR, DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA; AND
KWAME BROWN, CHAIRMAN, D.C. CITY COUNCIL

STATEMENT OF VINCENT GRAY

Mayor Gray. Thank you very much, Chairman Gowdy, and to the
other members of the committee.
Mr. Gowdy. Could you turn your mic on, please?
Mayor Gray. Thank you very much, Chairman Gowdy and other
members of the committee.
I am Vincent C. Gray, mayor of the District of Columbia,
and I am here today to talk about our proposed fiscal year 1912
District of Columbia budget.
I have had to make tough choices in submitting this budget,
choices that, frankly, I wish I didn't have to make. But the
reality is that the financial health and backbone of our city
could be imperiled unless thoughtful, balanced, and measured
choices are made and honored.
This budget was the product of three very intense months of
scrubbing agency budgets and exploring every reasonable option
for additional revenue. I participated in over 100 hours of
intensive meetings focused exclusively on the budget with the
city administrator, our deputy mayors, agency directors, and
our Office of Budget and Finance. This budget meets and
addresses the reality we face, a reality that I've discussed in
town hall meetings with District residents in all eight wards
during the past several weeks.
In order to close a $322.1 million structural budget gap, I
employed a balanced approach of expenditure reductions and
revenue increases. My budget focuses on four key priorities of
my administration: physical stability, high-quality public
education, jobs and economic opportunities, and safe
communities.
My goal is to ensure a structurally balanced budget. The
fiscal year 2012 gross funds budget for the District of
Columbia is $8,986,000,000, representing an increase of
$164,690,000, or a 1.9 percent increase above the fiscal year
2011 approved budget. The majority of the 1.9 percent growth
occurred in two areas. $96 plus million occurred in public
education largely due to enrollment increases in D.C. public
schools and D.C. public charter schools, and $67.76 million
occurred in our financing and other appropriation titles due
largely to mandatory increases in debt service for capital
borrowing under the previous administration. This budget has
been certified as balanced by the independent chief financial
officer, who you will hear from later.
I would like to take this opportunity to detail each one of
my four key priorities in this budget.
The first is to introduce a budget that reestablishes
fiscal stability in the District of Columbia. When we met with
the bond rating agencies in February, all three agencies
highlighted three recommendations for ensuring the District's
reputation on Wall Street after the last 4 years in which our
fund balance was spent down by 41 percent, from $1\1/2\ billion
to $890 million. They underscored the need to have a
structurally balanced budget, meaning we would not spend more
than we take in; to live within the debt cap of 12 percent,
which we have established; and rebuild a fund balance. My
fiscal year 1912 budget achieves those goals.
High-quality education is the second of my four key
priorities. Providing high-quality education for all district
residents is critical to our long-term prosperity. This budget
provides the resources necessary to continue the pace of school
reform and to provide an educational continuum from ages 3 to
24. My ultimate goal will be to extend this continuum to ages 1
to 2 as the economy rebounds and more funding becomes
available.
The increases in the budget for D.C. public schools and
D.C. public charter schools are due principally to increased
enrollment. We're now beginning to witness the success of the
universal pre-kindergarten program. We're retaining students
who enter the pre-K programs at its inception through a growth
of enrollment in grades K through 2.
We also have included increases for the first time in years
for the University of the District of Columbia, especially our
community college, including $4 million.
And, also, this budget focuses on beginning to solve a
longstanding problem of spending tens of millions of dollars to
educate children with disabilities in nonpublic schools.
Job creation and economic opportunities for all District
residents is a third of my key priorities. Despite reductions
to Federal and special purpose revenue, I'm continuing to fund
adult job training by adding $2.6 million to the fiscal year
1912 budget.
As everyone knows, I've been a major proponent of the
concept of ``one city.'' However, the current disparity between
areas of our city is particularly pronounced in the area of
jobs, with a number of communities experiencing chronic
unemployment. In ward 7, 17 percent; ward 8, 25 percent.
The fourth priority is sustaining safe communities so that
residents feel safe in their neighborhoods. Most of the agency
budgets in the public safety and justice cluster were held
constant at their fiscal year 2011 level, but we're providing
funding to hire 140 police officers to reopen the police
academy which essentially had been shut off.
Mr. Chairman and the members of the committee, the District
of Columbia raises over $5\1/2\ billion per year in local funds
from our residents in property taxes, sales taxes, and income
taxes. A majority of the functions of the District Government,
including all the services provided by any other State, are
funded through those locally raised dollars. Nevertheless, it
is the lengthy and complicated Federal appropriations process
that has severe effects on the District Government.
As you know, in order to comply with the Federal process,
the District must develop its budget months in advance of the
timeframe needed by the city. In fact, the District has had to
adopt the Federal fiscal year of October 1st to September 30th,
when another fiscal year may be more appropriate for the city.
The congressional appropriation schedule prevents the
District from being able to make better and more current
revenue estimates and expenditure needs that lead to a budget
based on better and more complete data.
Further, the dual nature of the Federal appropriations
process requires two affirmative actions by Congress. The
District's appropriations are often caught up in national
policy disputes that typically delay our local budget enactment
and have nothing to do with the District of Columbia. This flaw
was made abundantly clear a month ago when the District was
forced to spend its very limited funds preparing for a
potential shutdown. Our chief financial officer in an
assessment indicated we could have lost between $1 million and
$6 million a week as a result of the shutdown.
Mr. Chairman, the District of Columbia's overall fiscal
health is strong. For more than a decade, we have presented a
balanced budget; and we have received clean audits in each of
those years. As have been noted by Members of Congress, we have
clearly demonstrated our fiscal responsibility.
I believe strongly, Mr. Chairman, that the financial rigor
the District exhibits proves that we are more than capable of
managing our own resources. It is time for Congress to adopt
legislation that would remove the approval of the District's
local budget from the Federal appropriation process. This
request does not remove the oversight authority of Congress, of
course, as provided for in the Constitution. It will simply
allow the District to spend its local funds in the same way
other States and local jurisdictions do. I've detailed reasons
why I believe budget autonomy will facilitate the ability to
run the city, and we hope that the Congress and this committee
will consider that.
Again, thank you very much for your time in having me here
today to talk about the fiscal year 1912 budget, and we will be
happy to try to answer any questions you may have today and as
we move forward.
As a final point, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for
coming over to meet with us a few weeks ago at the Wilson
Building. It's most appreciated. I think it has established a
constructive working environment, and we look forward to
continuing to work with you.
[The prepared statement of Mayor Gray follows:]

Mr. Gowdy. Well, Mr. Mayor, before I introduce Chairman
Brown, you were a very gracious host. To take somebody from
South Carolina, who hadn't visited the District of Columbia
since he was a kid in high school, you've done a wonderful job
helping introduce me to your beautiful, magnificent city, and I
thank you for your time. I know you have a very busy schedule.
For you to take time to meet with me a couple weeks ago was
very much appreciated.
Mayor Gray. I was delighted to do it, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. Yes, sir.
It is my pleasure to recognize the Honorable Kwame Brown,
Chairman of the District of Columbia City Council.
Mr. Brown.

STATEMENT OF KWAME BROWN

Mr. Brown. Good morning, Chairman Gowdy, Ranking Member
Davis, and members of the Subcommittee on Health Care, District
of Columbia, Census and the National Archives.
I am Kwame R. Brown, chairman of the Council of the
District of Columbia, the District's elected legislature. I'm
pleased to speak with you today about the Council's role in
developing the District's fiscal year 2012 appropriations
request.
This year, the Council has the difficult task of reviewing
and finalizing a budget that continues to provide necessary
services to residents, businesses, and visitors of the District
of Columbia, despite the slow pace of recovery from the
recession. I would like to commend Mayor Gray and the CFO for
submitting a balanced and structurally sound budget proposal to
the Council. I think the mayor's proposal does not use the
District's fund balance to pay for reoccurring services. It
keeps in place funds created to reduce the debt and replenish
our reserve. These aspects of the District's budget are
particularly important to bond rating companies, a message that
was conveyed to Mayor Gray and CFO Gandhi and myself during a
recent visit expressing that this was an issue for them.
Over the next 2 weeks, the Council will continue to review
their budget proposal before voting on the fiscal year 2012
Budget Request Act on May 25th. We are poised to follow the
District's practice, Mr. Chairman, now entering its 16th year,
of submitting a balanced budget to Congress.
Major cost drivers for the budget include ever-increasing
health care costs, as well as the District's continuing
education reform efforts, a commitment shared by both the mayor
and the Council. These pressures, together with revenues that
have not fully rebounded to pre-recession levels, of course
makes it difficult to continue to be competitive while
providing much-needed services and programs to the residents of
the District of Columbia, as well as businesses.
But let me say to this committee that we will rise to the
challenge. The budget passed by the Council will represent a
focus on the District's core priorities of being fiscally
responsible, continuing education reform, economic opportunity,
and public safety.
Because of the ongoing legislative process I'm unable to
forecast exactly where each dollar will be budgeted until we
vote, of course, on the Budget Request Act on May 25th. We will
comply with, of course, our open meetings law by openly
debating proposals for spending cuts as well as revenue
enhancements. Each Council member's priorities will be the
subject of negotiation. Every budgetary shift will be reviewed.
However, let me guarantee you as the chairman of the Council of
the District of Columbia we will pass a balanced and
structurally sound budget request to send to this Congress.
After the Council reaches consensus and passes the budget I
welcome, quite frankly, the opportunity to brief any member of
this subcommittee personally on the Council's modifications to
the mayor's budget proposal.
In order for the District to provide vital services to the
public, I ask that you pass this year's appropriation act in a
time for the start of the new fiscal year and that you provide
those citizens of the United States of America who call the
District their home the right to govern their own affairs
through the representation of their elected officials.
Let me stop to thank all of the members of this committee,
Congress, as well as the President, for keeping the government
open. As you know, had negotiations failed and the government
shut down, the District of Columbia would have been the only
place in the United States of America where U.S. citizens would
have been left without the basic government services enjoyed by
developing countries, such as trash collection or pest control
or interpretation services for the blind. All of these services
and many more would have been suspended because the District
lacks the power to continue to spend even its tax dollars in
the event of a Federal shutdown. As you know, these services,
no matter where you are, no matter who you are, constituents
should not go without. Yet even under the circumstances where
no government shutdown is at stake the citizens in the District
should always be able to assert local control over its local
funds, and I would hope that you would work with the members of
this committee to give the district budget autonomy that the
residents in the District deserve.
In closing, let me say that we are willing and able to
stand with this committee to work together, to work together on
the things that we can move this great city for, knowing that
we may not agree on everything, but the things that we do agree
and have in common we should do everything in our power to
continue to give the residents of this great country the
opportunity to flourish and to continue to make this the
greatest Nation in the universe.
On that note, I look forward to questions and answers, and
thank you for allowing me an opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brown follows:]

Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And again, in an effort to be good stewards of both your
times and recognizing that there's a panel to come behind and
we want to be good stewards of their times, I'm going to
recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions; and I'm going to
hopefully impose the same green, yellow, red light barriers on
myself that we will subsequently be imposing.
What I would like to do and acknowledge up front, Mayor
Gray and Mr. Chairman, is there is not a governmental entity I
don't think anywhere that's not struggling with the same things
that you have just elucidated. In Spartanburg County, which is
my home county, we had furloughs last year of law enforcement
officers and prosecutors. The State of South Carolina is
struggling. Heavens knows the U.S. Congress is struggling with
respect to its fiscal obligations. So what I would love to do
is ask a question, give both of you a chance to answer it, and
kind of seek your perspective on the challenges that you faced
as you proposed your budget.
It looks like Medicaid, if I read your testimony and the
documents prepared correctly, Medicaid continues to be the
largest single expenditure. Are there any lessons that you can
share with the panel with respect to how you are dealing with
Medicaid? Any reforms that you would advocate? Any pearls of
wisdom or perspectives that you could lend to us as we struggle
with the same thing in South Carolina and the U.S. Government?
Mayor Gray. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
As you know, Medicaid is a key part of health care reform
as we move forward. We have quite a robust Medicaid program in
the District of Columbia; and, in fact, it has been essential
in our ability to have such a low rate of uninsured people in
the District of Columbia. We have only 6 percent of our adults
who don't have some form of insurance in the city and only 3
percent of our children who are not insured.
One of the things that we've done is to start to look at
every one of our optional services--as you well know, there are
mandated services and there are optional services--to make sure
those services are delivered in the most efficient way.
I'm delighted to have brought in a gentleman, Wayne
Turnage, who is very experienced. He happened to have worked in
Virginia for a number of years in health care and health care
reform and brings that experience to us here in the District of
Columbia.
We've brought in an ASO, an administrative services
organization, that is helping us to manage; and we are
increasingly now focusing on the use of managed care
organizations to try to start to influence health care
behavior.
One of the things that we have in the city that we're
working on that is going to take some time is to try to make
sure that we have health care services spread across the city.
We will in the next year open three additional clinics in areas
that have historically been underserved, and we believe that
will facilitate the use of insurance tools like Medicaid
because people will have services more accessible to them.
So I think in terms of lessons, if there have been any, it
would be to try to make sure that we have external controls,
external assistance, like with an administrative services
organization, and try to increasingly make health care more
accessible to people who may have the insurance, may have the
coverage, but if they don't have access to services they're not
likely to use them except on an emergent basis.
Mr. Gowdy. Chairman Brown, let me ask you this. I had the
pleasure of meeting your chief of police, with whom I was very
impressed. I've had the pleasure of meeting your attorney
general, who I similarly have been impressed with. But it also
appears as if the budget proposes a cut with respect to public
safety. How do you decide which areas to cut, given the fact
that's a core function of government? What process did you go
through, and can the citizens of the District expect to see any
diminution in services, given the cuts?
Mr. Brown. Well, I mean, the budget that's in front of the
Council in the District of Columbia currently, there is clearly
a lot of discussion going on to make sure that, from the public
safety standpoint in a reduction of officers, that doesn't
happen. I think the mayor's proposal doesn't quite lay that
out, that it will be a reduction of police officers. But we
want to get the officers, number of officers, back up to an
appropriate level; and I think an additional 100 officers or
200 officers is where we want to go, somewhere between 3,800
and 3,900 officers. And I think this is a phenomenal
opportunity to really focus as all the Members want to move in
that same direction. So I don't think what you will see as
relates to a budget proposal is a reduction of police officers
in the District of Columbia.
Mr. Gowdy. I am going to try to lead by example, and the
yellow light is on, so I'm going to recognize the distinguished
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman; and, Mayor
Gray and Mr. Brown, thank you both for being here.
You know, many American citizens, as well as people around
the world, would be surprised to learn that the Congress of the
United States has to approve the local budget of the Nation's
Capitol, a city of 600,000 residents, before it can spend its
own local taxpayer money.
In 2003, a Republican-controlled Senate passed a bill by
unanimous consent to allow the District's local budget to take
effect without congressional approval. Former President George
Bush supported budget autonomy in his fiscal year 2004 to 2006
budgets, and President Obama supported budget autonomy in his
fiscal year 2012 budget. Congresswoman Norton has introduced--
reintroduced, actually, her budget autonomy bill this Congress.
Mayor Gray and Mr. Brown, both, if the District of Columbia
were to be able to set its own fiscal year and implement its
local budget without congressional approval, how would that
affect the District's ability to provide service to its
residents?
Mayor Gray. Well, I think, Congressman Davis, that it
really would provide enormous flexibility to us.
Now we have a situation where our budget is essentially
adopted at the city level in June and not later than July, and
then we have characteristically gone many months thereafter
without having an approved budget because of the need to send
it to Congress. The average time has been about 4 months. In
this instance, I think it was more like 6 or 7 months this
fiscal year.
Frankly, it also would probably give us an opportunity to
adopt a different fiscal year. What we have now is a fiscal
year that is adapted to the Federal fiscal year, October 1st to
September 30th. Just one of the practical problems that creates
is that our school system, and that is the largest budget but
for Medicaid in the District of Columbia, actually spans 2
fiscal years, because the school year starts in one fiscal
year, that is, in August, and you have expenditures associated
with that school year from August until September 30th, and
then you have the rest of the fiscal year or the rest of the
school year beginning October 1st and running until the next
June. So it will allow us to streamline our operation of our
services.
Also, frankly, it would give us more time to have a better
sense of what the revenue projections are likely to be and to
be able to look at data from the most recent past as we craft
the budget for the future.
So, again, being able to streamline how we operate and
having a better timetable that we can operate on in terms of
projecting what our expenditures and revenues would be would be
two of the biggest gains that we would experience.
Mr. Davis. Thank you.
Let me ask you, Mr. Brown. We've had continuing resolutions
since 1870 technically, but you don't really expect to have
continuing resolution after continuing resolution after
continuing resolution up to the point of brinkmanship. How does
operating under these continuing resolutions affect the
budgeting process and the operation of city government for the
District of Columbia?
Mr. Brown. Well, first of all, let me start by thanking you
for all of your support of the District of Columbia. Clearly,
as it relates to budget autonomy, I think you understand the
importance of it and have always been a strong supporter
working with Congresswoman Norton on these particular matters.
Your question has to do with how does Congress amend the
District's budget and what does the continuing resolution--
clearly, what role does it play? What's interesting is that
Congress has not amended our budget. And when you look at--
since I've been on the Council, they have never amended the
budget. So the clear question is, why do we have these
resolutions over and over and over, DCRs over and over again? I
think it gives an opportunity to set a clear direction of where
we want to go, gives a clear understanding how we get there,
and I look forward to working with you and others to see how we
can get budget autonomy passed in the District.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman.
The chair will now recognize the gentleman from Arizona,
Dr. Gosar.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mayor, I know we all share a common thread in regards
to educating our children; and in looking at the budget, we had
about a 5.4 percent increase in education funding. Are you
concerned about that?
Mayor Gray. I'm concerned only, Dr. Gosar, that we can't
invest even more money in education. Education reform has been
afoot now for several years in the District of Columbia, and it
is a huge priority of mine.
Some of the increases, frankly, reflect an increased
enrollment. For the first time in 41 years, we saw an increased
enrollment in our traditional public schools, and for the first
time since the advent of charter schools we saw an increased
enrollment in both. We had an increased enrollment of about 900
children in the traditional D.C. public schools this year and
another 1,700 in charter schools for an enrollment increase of
2,600. So carrying that forward, some of the increases in our
budget are to ensure that we provide an adequate education for
those children, as well as projected enrollment increases.
We have made a very healthy investment also in pre-
kindergarten, early childhood education services; and, as a
result, I think that is a contributing factor to our enrollment
increases. And we want to continue to do that because we
recognize getting these children at the earliest possible point
will make a huge difference in educational outcomes and,
frankly, life outcomes.
The other thing that we are doing, Dr. Gosar, is we are
tackling a problem now that has been longstanding, and that is
how we educate children with disabilities in the District of
Columbia. We have had far too many children who have had to be
educated in nonpublic tuition placements, as we call them, at
great expense to the city. Last year, we spent about $160
million on those children, plus another $93 million on
transportation of kids with disabilities in traditional public
schools, charter schools, and nonpublic placements.
So we are going to invest more in our public education
system next year, hopefully to incentivize that system to begin
to bring our children back in the public education system to
comply with the law of the land which changed in 1975 and
still, of course, exists in 2011 in the form of the Individuals
with Disabilities Education Act.
So I think we're making progress on the education front. We
still have a very, very long ways to go to be able to say that
we are adequately educating every child, but I think we're
going in the right direction.
Mr. Gosar. I'm sure you're aware that we have H.R. 471, the
Scholarships for Opportunity Results Act. I'm also from Arizona
that struggles with the same type of educational aspect. And we
look at everything on the table, all aspects of where we can go
with assets, to try to attain and help every child. Do you
support that act?
Mayor Gray. I support strong public education, Dr. Gosar,
and that's where I've placed my emphasis. I believe that
education and strong public education is a great emancipator,
it is a great liberator, it is what levels the playing field.
And so I place my emphasis, and I've indicated here before, on
public education.
I will continue to do that. I will implement whatever laws
and programs are required of the District of Columbia, of
course. But as a product of public education of the city I know
what it can do for children, I've seen what it can do for
children, and I want us to have the strongest possible public
education system.
And we have a lot of choice. We have a lot of choice in
terms of 123 traditional public schools; and we now have the
most robust charter movement in the country, 52 charter schools
operating on 93 campuses with almost 30,000 children enrolled
in those programs. So we probably offer the greatest variety of
choices in public education when compared to anywhere else in
the Nation.
Mr. Gosar. Well, I would hope that, particularly in light
of the Supreme Court ruling with Arizona with the voucher
system, that we would also embrace the voucher system and look
at it as a tool in order to facilitate all children all across
the board. Because you need all opportunities to embrace
children. So I would hope that we would really, truly look at
that system and integrate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Dr. Gosar.
The chair would now recognize the ranking member of the
full committee, the distinguished gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Chairman, I yield to Ms. Norton, please.
No, you go, please, Ms. Norton.
Ms. Norton. I thank the ranking member for his generosity
in yielding to me; and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, let me commend the mayor and the Council chair on
how well you worked together on the budget even while the
chairman and his subcommittees have engaged in very rigorous
oversight of your budget. I know it is awkward for you to
appear to discuss the budget when there is no budget.
But as far as you go, I want to commend you on the budget
that the mayor--first, you, Mayor Gray, have submitted. That
budget we, of course, see. It is not the final budget. It is
not the District of Columbia budget. It is a tough budget with
admirable balance. It spreads the pain. It gives us in--what is
this--your 13th year of a balanced budget without drawing from
your cumulative funds balance, your reserve balance. I wonder
if there is another jurisdiction in the United States that even
has a reserve, much less not drawing a penny from it in order
to balance its budget. You have shown yourself not wedded to
any ideological catechism in drawing your budget but requiring
the whole city to participate in what it takes to balance a
budget.
And you, Chairman Brown, your oversight--and I see from
channel 16, or was it channel 13, and from the papers--has been
very rigorous. You are apparently making changes, while keeping
the rigors represented by the mayor's budget.
I think both of you are a model for the Congress of working
together on a budget without rancor and working together in the
first place.
I apologize for the extra cost to the District in redundant
budget processes and hope that the committee will understand
from your testimony the urgent need for budget autonomy.
I want to discuss a subject close to my heart. The chairman
says correctly that the budget is not amended. The budget is
never amended. No one here would know how to amend the budget.
I don't have a clue how to change the budget. No one could get
into those weeds except you.
The budget is here for one purpose. The budget is here for
riders, because Members from Arizona want you to do what they
do in Arizona, or Members from Ohio want you to do what they do
in Ohio.
I want to speak about one of those riders. For about 10
years Congress kept the District from spending its own local
funds on needle exchange programs, even though every large city
and many smaller jurisdictions use needle exchange programs
because they have been found to be effective by all the
objective organizations in reducing the spread of HIV/AIDS.
House republicans once again even in light of this evidence
tried to reimpose this ban this year after we got the ban off
in the prior years. We were able to resist that.
But I have to ask both of you, what would be the impact on
the HIV/AIDS rate in the District of Columbia--first, how would
it affect the city generally, and what would you do if Congress
were to reimpose this rider on the District of Columbia, again
which has taken so many lives here in this city?
Mayor Gray. Well, frankly, the needle exchange program has
been an incredibly important tool for us in fighting HIV and
AIDS in the District of Columbia. The national average is 1
percent, and anything above that would be regarded as an
epidemic. We have a 3 percent rate overall in the District of
Columbia of people who are HIV positive or have AIDS.
Ms. Norton. Do you think that is directly traceable to the
rider?
Mayor Gray. Well, I don't know if it's directly traceable
to the rider or not, but certainly having a tool available to
us to attack this problem is going to reduce the transmission
of the virus. We know that intravenous drug use is now one of
the most prevalent ways in which the virus is transmitted, and
being able to have people access clean needles has made a
difference in how the virus is transmitted. The absence of that
I think is going to result in a rise in the transmission of the
virus in the city.
And, frankly, you asked a question what we would do. When
the ban was in place before, there was an organization,
Prevention Works, that came into being that raised private
dollars in order to run this program; and in fact it is now out
of business because they could not sustain themselves.
So, Congresswoman Norton, I'm not really sure what we would
do. We ought to have the flexibility, as I think more than 200
cities now nationally do, to be able to continue to operate
this program. It is an important prevention technique, it has
proven its worth, and we need to have this available to us.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much.
Chairman Brown, did you want to say anything on that issue.
Mr. Brown. Well, let me just start to say that the
Department of Health's HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis, STD, and TB
Administration----
Mr. Gowdy. Mr. Chairman, I hate to interrupt you, but I
want to fair to everyone. And what I would propose is, after I
recognize the gentleman from Maryland, to maybe have a
lightning round if, Mr. Mayor, if you would be willing to have
just maybe one quick question so I could get all of Ms.
Norton's questions asked but also be fair to the gentleman from
Maryland.
So, at this point, I would recognize the ranking member of
the full committee, the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman; and I want
to thank you for calling this hearing. I want to thank Ms.
Norton certainly for her advocacy for the District. And to you,
mayor, and to you, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for being
here.
I literally reside in two cities: Washington, DC, and
Baltimore. And I must tell you that, as I listen to you, Mr.
Mayor, and to you, Mr. Brown, and then I combined what you have
said this morning to what I read in the Washington Post this
morning where it said, Alice Rivlin, senior fellow of economic
studies at Brookings, said, ``for more than a dozen years, D.C.
has been a model of fiscal responsibility.''
And it goes on to say that Matt Fabian, managing director
of the Independent Research Firm Municipal Market Advisor, said
that the District operates in a highly conservative manner with
a strong financial management team and institutionalized
financial controls. Even as the economy struggled, he found the
District faring better than most other cities and States. He
says something.
You know, I notice the media, all of them are up in here
today, and if we need to do nothing else we need to give you
credit for what you've done and what your predecessors have
done.
But the thing that made my heart glad, as my mother would
say, is that not only are you doing this thing, managing the
money that you have well and you're making the cuts that you
have to do and doing what you got to do, but you're also doing
it with compassion. I heard you talk about the 6 percent and 3
percent, the adult, 3 percent children uninsured. I think
that's what you said, Mr. Mayor, is that right?
Mayor Gray. That's right, sir.
Mr. Cummings. You know, and you talked about spreading the
clinics, having more clinics, and you talked about basically
wellness and prevention. That's what you're talking about.
This Congress could take some lessons from D.C. and it is
interesting that you have to come up here and go through these
changes. Since the District of Columbia Government cannot
obligate or expend its locally raised funds until Congress
appropriates these funds back to the District, the District of
Columbia Government would have had to shut down if the Federal
Government shut down during the fiscal year 2012 Federal
spending fight, even though the District had passed its budget
the prior spring. Duh.
If I recall correctly, Congresswoman Norton offered
multiple amendments at the Rules Committee to allow the
District of Columbia to continue to spend its local funds for
the remainder of fiscal year 2011. The Republicans rejected
each of these amendments and refused to consider her stand-
alone bill that would have accomplished the same goal.
Mayor Gray, how much time did you and other members of your
administration have to devote to shut-down-contingency
planning?
Mayor Gray. It was scores of hours and scores of people who
worked on it. The city administrator had the responsibility,
Mr. Cummings, for directing this effort. We had the city
administrator, all the deputy mayors, and every department head
involved in this exercise in putting together a plan, beginning
with going back and researching what happened about 15 years
ago when this occurred previously.
A plan was put together. And, frankly, had it been
implemented, and you heard the chairman talk about this,
Chairman Brown talk about this, there would have been service
shutdowns that really would have affected adversely the people
of the District of Columbia. Libraries would have been shut
down. Trash would not have been picked up. The Department of
Motor Vehicles would have had to shut down. Our Consumer and
Regulatory Affairs Agency would have had to shut down.
And, frankly, we have the money in our budget to be able to
do that. We were being treated like another department of the
Federal Government, when in fact we aren't. We're not the
Department of Commerce or Justice or Health and Human Services
or Interior or any other department like that. We are a
separate jurisdiction. We raise $5\1/2\ billion a year to
support those services. We had a balanced budget that we
adopted, as you've indicated, last spring and early summer; and
we're ready to implement that.
We never should have been caught in this; and, frankly,
having to put together a shutdown plan diverted the attention
of our department heads, as well as our other leaders, from
running the services every day in order to craft a plan in
anticipation of a shutdown.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
I see my time is expired, Mr. Chairman, and thank you.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Gray, I believe if I recall correctly you have city
business to tend to beginning at 9:30.
Mayor Gray. Yes, sir. I have to be back up shortly, back up
to the Wilson Building.
Mr. Gowdy. Chairman Brown, I know you have important
business to tend to as well. We have another panel. So what I
would propose is maybe a continuing dialog. I know that you
have one with Ms. Holmes-Norton and I'm sure others and been
gracious enough to host me as well. Love to talk to you about
the Metro and anything else on your minds, but I also want to
keep my word and get you where you need to get.
Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Chairman, just for the record, in light of
the fact that Mr. Cummings is here, I would like to note for
the record that Mr. Cummings' city, Baltimore, has had a needle
exchange. Baltimore is a city that struggles considerably more
than the District. This has been a white collar town. The
District has had the highest AIDS rate in the United States,
higher than our good sister Baltimore. One would not have
expected that, and it would not have been the case if the
Congress of the United States had not denied the District of
Columbia the right to spend its own local money to save the
lives of District of Columbia residents.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gowdy. Yes, ma'am.
Mayor Gray, the distinguished gentleman from California,
the chairman of the full committee, a lot of us, as you know,
have to go from committee to committee. Judiciary is having one
this morning as well. I don't know whether your schedule will
allow me.
Mayor Gray. Of course.
Mr. Gowdy. Then I would recognize--and thank you for that,
Mr. Gray. But I would recognize the gentleman from California,
the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mayor, Chairman, I really appreciate your making the time
this morning. Hopefully, this can be a regular dialog, not
always at a formal hearing. But under both of my predecessors,
I think there continues to be a good relationship.
One of the challenges--and the gentlelady from the District
of Columbia does a good job of representing a point of view of
the District, but one of the things that we seem to see here is
that there are more views of the District than just hers. And I
might note and actually comment on the impact of both chartered
public schools and the private school community within the
District and how you feel you will work with Federal funding
that helps in that effort.
Mayor Gray. Well, we'll try to make everything work that's
required of us.
As I indicated, Mr. Chairman, earlier, we have a very
robust commitment to public education in the city. We're making
very substantial investments in that regard. The biggest
increase in this budget proposed for fiscal year 2012 is in
public education and especially in early childhood education
and trying to get our kids with disabilities back into public
education environment. So for me, and I've said it many times
before, I think that the future lies for us in having a robust
public education system.
Our charter movement I think is second to none in the
Nation. As I indicated earlier, we have 52 charter schools,
we're adding four more on 93 campuses, and they serve now
30,000 children, or close to it, which provides an opportunity
to offer an enormous amount of choice to our kids.
It's the first time we've seen enrollment increases in our
traditional public education in 41 years, and the first time
since the advent of charters back in the 1990's that we've seen
enrollment increases in both. So I think we're going in the
right direction.
Mr. Issa. Let me have a followup question on a completely
different subject, but I think one that is near and dear to all
of us who went through a series of continuing resolutions, no
budget last year, essentially one after another short-term
financing of the government, and I know that impacts you as the
Federal city. If we're able to come up with a system that
allows you to continue operating not with Federal funds but
with your own means, if for any reason there is a break in full
funding or, in another way of putting it, even if there isn't,
if we wait to the 11th hour for you to maintain all services
even through a period of uncertainty, do you believe you're
prepared to do that on an annual basis with a budget that
reflects a contingency for no Federal funds coming?
Mayor Gray. Well, for the most part, we receive Federal
funds in the same way as other States do.
Mr. Issa. No, I understand that. But if the Federal
Government had not fully funded all aspects of the government,
the States would have been without certain Federal funds, but
they would have, for example, picked up Medicaid. No Medicaid
person would have found themselves without money. Because the
States, as sovereigns, would have found a way to meet their
obligation, even if Federal funds were delayed.
My question to you, and it's an important question, when
you look at your budget and contingencies, if we essentially
allow for the city to be, at least on an annual basis, early on
disconnected from what may or may not happen in a continuing
resolution, a budget battle, a debt ceiling, all of those which
I think this committee is concerned, are you able to give us a
contingent budget that shows that for X period of time you can
continue to provide all the required services of the Federal
city?
And I said ``Federal city'' because we're not just talking
about school. We're talking about police and all the functions,
many of which are ultimately services that are provided, often
with reimbursement. Your city receives a certain amount of
impact aid equivalent to make up for the fact that embassies
don't pay property tax and so on.
So my question today is one of can you now or in the near
future give us, if you will, a contingency plan so that this
committee could look at a way to say, OK, per that plan, on an
annual basis we can forward allocate authorization so that the
District of Columbia is never caught up in what might be weeks
or months of uncertainty in the budget process?
I would like to see the city have that capability on a go-
forward basis, but I'm looking for some sort of a structured
mechanism to where this committee could say, they have a plan,
they can live without Federal dollars and still meet the
requirement. And each time that is received it would allow us
to say, we have no reason to be in the way of your spending
your dollars if you can make the commitment. And we all
understand the contingent plan would not fully fund everything
you want to do, and it may not be able to do it for a full
year, but can you comment on that?
Mayor Gray. Well, first of all, again, as I indicated, we
raise $5\1/2\ billion in local tax dollars. And many of our
services----
Mr. Issa. By the way, I'm very aware that I pay twice as
much as a nonvoter in the District of Columbia than your voters
do, and I'm very aware that you have a wonderful scheme to make
sure those without representation pay twice as much tax. But go
ahead, please.
Mayor Gray. I would like to hear more about that so we can
expand it to others.
No, I think many of our services----
Mr. Issa. It's called your homestead, but go ahead.
Mayor Gray. Many of our services, as you know, Mr.
Chairman, are completely funded with local dollars; and we
certainly would be prepared to be able to do that with budget
autonomy. That's one of the points that we have made.
Again, and I think you're saying this as well, if it was
something like Medicaid for us, our Medicaid formula is 70/30,
70 percent Federal, 30 percent local. And that formula is no
less than 50/50 for every State. So we wouldn't find ourselves
in any different situation than the States would on programs
like that.
But those things that are wholly funded with local dollars,
we've demonstrated we can do that, and we are prepared to do
that. That's one of the, I think, strongest arguments we have
for budget autonomy. That if you look back over the past 13 to
15 years we've indicated that we've had balanced budgets, we've
had clean audits, and demonstrated our ability to manage our
finances in a very prudent manner.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. I thank the gentleman for his
indulgence and yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me quickly recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman; and let me
appreciate your sensitivity to the needs of our witnesses to
move on to other pressing business.
I also appreciate the presence of both the chairman of the
full committee and the ranking member as an indication of how
important this issue is to all of us.
And I would ask unanimous consent to submit for the record
an opening statement, as well as an editorial from the
Washington Post entitled Congress Should Loosen Its Fiscal
Reins on D.C., and I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. Yes, sir, Mr. Davis. Without objection, indeed,
all Members may have 7 days to submit opening statements for
the record and any other extraneous material.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Danny K. Davis follows:]

Mr. Gowdy. Mr. Mayor, Mr. Chairman, on behalf of all of us,
thank you for your time. As the second panel approaches, we'll
take a brief recess. And if you have an extra second I would
like to come down and thank you both in person.
[Recess.]
Mr. Gowdy. It is my pleasure to recognize our second panel
and welcome you and thank you for your patience and indulgence
for being the second panel.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn
before they testify. So I would ask you to please rise with me
and raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Gowdy. May the record reflect all of the witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
I will introduce the witnesses from my left to right, your
right to left. First is Dr. Natwar Gandhi, who is the chief
financial officer of the District of Columbia. In the middle is
Mr. Matt Fabian, who is the managing director of the Municipal
Market Advisors. And last but not least is Dr. Alice Rivlin,
who is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and was
former Chair of the D.C. Control Board.
I will recognize each of you in the order I introduced you
for 5-minute opening statements. And again, thank you for
joining us.

STATEMENTS OF DR. NATWAR GANDHI, CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER,
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA; MATT FABIAN, MANAGING DIRECTOR, MUNICIPAL
MARKET ADVISOR; AND DR. ALICE M. RIVLIN, SENIOR FELLOW, THE
BROOKINGS INSTITUTION, FORMER CHAIR OF THE D.C. CONTROL BOARD

STATEMENT OF DR. NATWAR GANDHI

Mr. Gandhi. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, members of the subcommittee, Mr. Davis, Ms. Norton,
Mr. Clay.
I am, as you pointed out, Natwar Gandhi, chief financial
officer of the District of Columbia Government. I am pleased to
be here for the subcommittee's hearing on Mayor Gray's proposed
2012 budget and financial plan.
Mr. Chairman, in 1995, the U.S. Congress created the Office
of the Independent Chief Financial Officer to work with the
mayor and the Council to maintain the District's fiscal
stability and enhance its financial liability. Since then, we
have completed 14 consecutively balanced budgets and expect to
end the current year in the same manner.
Between 1996 and 2008, we turned a cumulative $550 million
deficit into an impressive $1.2 billion fund balance. Further,
we transformed a nearly bankrupt District Government, plagued
with junk bond ratings, into a financially credible
jurisdiction with strong credit ratings.
Indeed, our turnaround from junk bonds to status A category
bond ratings was faster than any other major city that has
undergone similarly a financial crisis, including New York,
Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Detroit. Attachment 1 to my
testimony and the board before you on my left tells the story
of the District's successful return to fiscal solvency and
financial stability.
This turnaround is a case study in commitment to improved
financial management and practices. Our General Obligation bond
ratings have increased at an unprecedented speed. They now
stand at A+ from Standard & Poors and are in the AA category
from Moody's Investor Services and Fitch Ratings. In addition,
our Income Tax Revenue Bonds are rated AAA by Standard & Poors.
This is indeed a record of which the District can be
justifiably proud.
As in the case of many jurisdictions around the country,
the recession of the past several years have taken a toll on
our finances. Our General Fund balance has dropped from a peak
of $1.6 billion in 2005 to $890 million at the close of 2010, a
decrease of some $695 million over 5 fiscal years. In early
February, the newly elected leadership and I visited the three
rating agencies to discuss the reserves and lay out a plan for
the future.
I am pleased to report that the mayor's 2012 budget and
financial plan meets the rating agency expectation despite the
difficulties experienced due to loss of about a quarter of
previously projected 2012 revenues and expiration of the
Federal stimulus fund, a loss of some $228 million compared to
the previous fiscal year.
The mayor's proposed budget meets all the criteria required
for certification by the chief financial officer, and they are:
This proposed budget is balanced.
It does not use any Fund Balance; that is, it requires the
District to live within its means.
It is in compliance with our Debt Cap Act which limits the
debt service on our tax-supported debt to 12 percent of
expenditures.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to take the issue with those who
proclaim that the District's finances are failing to the point
that a reinstatement of a Control Board is imminent. Yes, the
District is facing challenges, but none of the seven Control
Board triggers will be breached. Congress in its wisdom created
the Office of Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
preventing any of those triggers. Our elected leadership
pledged to the rating agencies, and to District residents, that
they will do what is necessary to balance the budget without
the use of fund balance and limit borrowing to stay within the
debt cap.
Our challenges, however, are significant. The District, as
the urban center of a large metropolitan area, houses a
disproportionately large share of very poor and needy citizens.
The District's overall poverty rate of 17 percent and the child
poverty rate of 26 percent are among the highest in the Nation
and more than three times the comparable rate across the
neighboring counties. Unlike other jurisdictions that provides
services to a large share of the region's poor, the District
cannot divert resources from wealthier suburban areas to serve
its urban poor.
In this environment of continuing expenditure needs, the
challenges posed by reduced revenues is substantial. Kindly
permit me to briefly note two areas that merit continuous
attention. Both go to the unfunded mandates that restrict the
District's own taxing power.
The prohibition on taxing the income earned by
nonresidents, including those who commute into the city on a
daily basis. That 66 percent of income generated in the
District is earned by nonresidents makes the simple point.
The District also has an especially high concentration of
nontaxable real property, much of it off the tax rolls due to
the presence of the Federal establishment. The value of
property here by the Federal Government alone is 30 percent of
the nonresidential property values.
Mr. Chairman, I will not belabor on the issue of the
District's budget economy. The mayor and the chairman spoke so
eloquently about that, but I emphasize my endorsement of their
views.
I want to thank you for your leadership, sir, and
appreciate your wisdom in visiting our offices, and I
appreciate your interest very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gandhi follows:]

Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Dr. Gandhi. It was a pleasure to meet
with you.
Mr. Fabian.

STATEMENT OF MATT FABIAN

Mr. Fabian. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before I begin to speak about the District of Columbia, I
just wanted to emphasize that Municipal Market Advisors, my
firm, is a pure independent research company. So we make no
money on trading, underwriting, investing in municipal bonds.
We provide pure research and sell that research for
subscriptions, and that makes up about 95 percent of our
revenues.
You know, normally when we do an awful lot of commentary
about the municipal bonds--oh, and I have my statement which
I've submitted but I will speak off of that just to keep things
time efficient.
Normally our company talks a lot about the municipal bond
market in general, and we have spent a disproportionate amount
of time in recent 2 years looking at distressed credits,
Jefferson County, Harrisburg, Vallejo, California, so it is a
real pleasure to spend some time and look at the District of
Columbia, which has done so well in the financial crisis of
managing largely through the practices from the management team
like Dr. Gandhi.
I have to say that as things have gotten tighter, as credit
conditions and tax revenues have gotten thinner across the
country, the financial abilities of city managers across the
country has been strained, and it has begun to undermine
willingness in some cases to honor obligations. That is
completely the opposite of the case in the District. We have
seen very strong management responses and, if anything, an
increasing willingness toward bond holders and toward servicing
their obligations. Just so with that as sort of the opening
context.
You know, there's two--and I have an awful lot of
information in my statement about the structure of the bonds
and investor perception of the bonds. But you know, let me say
that there's two particular successes I'd say that management
has had over the past few years.
First is the imposition of the more conservative debt cap
to 12 percent of annual spending. Sorry. Yes. And that has been
from widely recognized by the rating agencies as a credit
strength and from looking at, you know, at the future economic
prospects of the District and the country things will continue
to be very difficult. The financial crisis for the States and
for cities and for governments like the District is
transitioning from a revenue problem into a spending problem.
So, you know, proactive limits on debt and leverage are
very well received in the municipal bond market today.
In addition, their restructuring of their variable rate
debt over the last few years. Variable rate debt, it is long
maturity bonds where the coupon resets every week or every day.
Mostly these are packaged with derivatives. Prior to the
financial crisis, the District had about 22 percent of its debt
in these kinds of instruments. It is very difficult because
that is the exact kind of instrument which came under pressure
in the financial crisis.
The District was able to use its new income tax bond
structure and because of its very high ratings was able to
restructure a huge amount of that debt, and now its exposure to
variable rate is a very manageable 9 percent. So I have to say
they have been very proactive in hitting the exact area where
the municipal bond market was weakest in their response.
Looking forward, you know I do say that like I said before
the financial crisis is not necessarily abating for cities and
States. The National Governors' Association has talked about a
lost decade for State revenues starting last year. So 2010 to
2020 are going to be a very difficult time for government
managers everywhere. So I think continuing to prepare for the
fiscal crisis is exactly what the District has done.
The improvements, the situation that has come up in the
earlier panel talking about budget autonomy, it is a very
important one for the municipal bond market. If you think about
what happened just prior to the government shutdown, you know,
the District because of its--because of how their debt is
structured is able to service most of its debt even without
congressional authorization and without the city budget
appropriation except for the city certificates of
participation. So there is a $240 million bonded obligation
that the District has which under the law would not have been
able to pay had the Federal Government shut down.
So there could now--the city managers were doing all they
could to make sure that didn't happen. But they were taking
emergency steps to do so. In theory, they may not have been
able to pay those interest payments, which is something that
even in the depth of a financial crisis the District did not
miss a payment.
So you know in this current municipal bond market where
there is an enormous amount of concern being put on credit
quality of State and local issuers, to have the District even
incidentally miss a debt service payment because of the actions
of Congress you know would have had a real impact on the debt
service cost of the District going forward.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fabian follows:]

Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Fabian.
Dr. Rivlin.

STATEMENT OF DR. ALICE M. RIVLIN

Ms. Rivlin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for inviting me to
testify today. I have been involved with the District's
finances for a long time, for more than 2 decades. Over that
period, our Nation's capital has gone from a financial basket
case to a responsively managed and fiscally healthy city. In my
brief remarks, I will try to put the District's situation in
some historical context.
This year Washington, like most cities, is dealing with
difficult budget choices. The deep recession and the
extraordinary weakness of the housing market has cut city
revenues, especially property tax revenues. And at the same
time the increased needs of the jobless and homeless residents
have put upward pressure on spending.
This combination has made balancing the budget far more
challenging in the last 3 years than earlier in the decade when
things were going better. That's true of all cities. The impact
of the recession on D.C.'s finances has been considerably less
serious than in many cities that were hit harder by the
recession and the foreclosure crisis.
Compared to other cities, the D.C. economy is actually
doing quite well. Jobs are up, population is growing, economic
development is resuming and city revenues are beginning to edge
up again.
However, as the mayor and the Council Chair have
emphasized, Washington is a bifurcated city with prosperous
areas primarily on the western side of the city and high rates
of poverty, unemployment, and underemployment primarily on the
eastern side. So efforts to mitigate these problems make the
D.C. budget challenging.
The District must provide both city and State-like services
and it has a narrow tax base mainly because Congress prohibits
the District from taxing the incomes earned in the city by
nonresidents.
Mayor Gray has proposed a combination of spending cuts and
revenue increases designed to close a budget gap that was
estimated at $322 million. This is a rather small shortfall in
a $9.6 billion budget of which $6.3 billion are locally raised
funds.
There will be a debate about this budget in the Council,
but I am confident that the final budget will be balanced in a
fiscally responsible way.
The main reason for my confidence is that the city has a
strong record of fiscal responsibility stretching back to the
end of the 1990's. More importantly, the mayor, the Council,
and the chief financial officer are all committed to
maintaining that record and avoiding any danger of the
triggering of a new control period.
I was personally involved in that unfortunate period of
D.C. fiscal history and share the view that it must not happen
again. In early 1995, the District was facing imminent
bankruptcy. It was a really bad situation. The Federal
Government had to step in and do what a State normally does:
Put in place a Control Board.
I was President Clinton's point person on doing that, and I
worked closely with Delegate Norton, with Congressman Chair Tom
Davis of the Congress, with Speaker Newt Gingrich and the
leadership of the Senate. It was a thoroughly bipartisan
effort. It had to be. And it resulted in the creation of the
Control Board and the Office of the Chief Financial Officer.
We wound up the Control Board successfully in 2001.
The District residents and officials have taken the lessons
of that difficult period to heart. For more than a dozen years,
as has been emphasized before, the District has been a model of
fiscal responsibility, has continued to balance its budget,
built up its fund balance and cash reserves and improved its
credit rating remarkably.
In the last several years as the recession reduced
revenues, the District has drawn down its fund balance, that's
what reserves are for, but not to dangerous levels, and it is
now in a position to begin replenishing those reserves.
It is now past time, I believe, for the Congress to
recognize the District's exemplary fiscal behavior and pass
legislation giving the District fiscal autonomy, the ability to
spend its locally raised revenues as its elected government
sees fit. This would represent your faith in representative
democracy that works.
I've testified before on this subject, and I attach my
testimony of November 2009 for the record.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Note.--The information referred to was not provided to the
committee.]
Ms. Rivlin. In short, Mr. Chairman, I believe that the
District of Columbia has a manageable fiscal challenge this
year and can be counted on to balance its budget in a
sustainable and responsible manner, and I also believe that the
Congress should demonstrate its faith in representative
democracy by granting the District fiscal autonomy.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Rivlin follows:]

Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Dr. Rivlin.
Dr. Gandhi, can you take maybe a minute or so and update us
on the hospital in the District?
Mr. Gandhi. Yes, sir. As you know, we took over the
hospital in July of last year primarily to make sure that the
satisfactory health care services are provided in the area
where there is a large needy population, and we wanted to make
sure there is no interruption of health care services.
So at that time we took over the hospital. Like any public
health hospital, not-for-profit public health hospital, this
hospital also has its challenges. In addition, it had a
troubled history and it has substantial issues that we need to
resolve.
At the end of the day, the District will have to be quite
mindful, given of our experience earlier with D.C. General
Hospital some 10 years ago. When we went to Wall Street, there
was substantial concern about our owning the hospital again.
The mayor and the chairman and the leadership at the Council
and in the Mayor's Office, they're all quite concerned about
the viability of the hospital. We want to make sure that we
provide health care services distributed, but at the same time
we do not want to be in the hospital business. My expectation
is that the mayor and the Council will resolve the issue
satisfactorily.
Mr. Gowdy. Dr. Gandhi, the District has a problem that
other cities have, although the District problem may be more
exacerbated, which is tax exempt properties, properties where
you have to provide the service but you can't collect any
taxes.
Do you have a strategy? Do you have a plan? Is there a
means by which you can adjust for that, the fact that you're
providing services to buildings and places where you can argue
there's not a contribution toward the greater good.
Mr. Gandhi. That is one of the two major issues that we
presently face in managing of our so-called constrained limited
restricted tax base. One is of course the inability to tax
people who work here and don't live here. And second is, as I
pointed out in my testimony, a large chunk of real property is
tax exempt. As I pointed out, the Federal Government, the tax
exempt institutions, the World Bank, IMF, embassies, etc.
I used to have an office on the 11th floor on the Judicial
Square building. Outside I look. Beautiful museums, monuments,
galleries. Nothing I could tax. That is a major problem for the
city. It is that limited tax base.
Other cities like Hartford, Cambridge, Philadelphia, they
do have a PILT payment, payment in lieu of taxes. I am not so
sure that is going to work here. But I think the Federal
Government needs to take into account the fundamental
limitation of our public tax base.
In spite of all of this, our commitment to you, sir, and
certainly of the independent chief financial officer, despite
this limitations on our taxes, we will balance the budget, even
maintain our financial viability and financial credibility on
Wall Street.
Mr. Gowdy. Dr. Gandhi, I've got about a minute left, so
I'll ask the question quickly and then you can have the
remainder of the time. Long-term pension liabilities in the
city, what's the status? Any reason for concern?
Mr. Gandhi. Well, I think in general we manage our
liabilities very well. We do not have the major concern of the
rest of the jurisdictions around the country of the pension
liabilities. We do not have that. The Federal Government took
over a bulk of our liability on that front. All of our long-
term liabilities, in particular the pension liabilities, are
actuarially funded, fully funded, actuarially speaking, so we
are very blessed and I would give great credit to our elected
leadership, mayor and the Council, for abiding by that
requirement.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you.
I would recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
given the fact that Representative Clay has a markup that he's
involved in, I would ask that I switch time with him and let
him go and then I will take his order. I ask unanimous consent.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
Mr. Clay. Again, let me thank the gentleman from Illinois
and thank the chairman for conducting this hearing.
A question for all three witnesses. How would you
characterize the District's fiscal health in relation to other
large cities?
Starting with you, Dr. Gandhi.
Mr. Gandhi. Thank you, sir.
I'm pleased to say that relatively speaking, Washington,
DC, is in better financial condition than perhaps any other
major cities out there. We have still $343 million of so-called
rainy day fund. We make sure that our budget is always
balanced. We have a very independent and vigorous Office of
Independent Chief Financial Officer that tracks our budget on
a--almost on a weekly basis.
So when you look at all these considerations, we are in
very good financial condition. And that is not just me saying
it. Wall Street says that. They reaffirmed our AAA bond rating
on income tax bonds, a plus category bonds ratings on our GO
bonds, with a stable outlook. That is more than what can be
said about many other jurisdictions around the country.
Mr. Clay. Mr. Fabian.
Mr. Fabian. Well, I would agree also with Dr. Gandhi. I
think that the location of the Federal Government has been a
tremendous economic stabilizer for the city in addition to its
management practices.
Looking forward, you know one of the things that cities and
States around the country have been very loath to do is to
raise taxes to help balance the budgets. The District is at
least considering this. And I think that you know from a Wall
Street perspective having a city or a jurisdiction that is
willing to look at all financial options to correct its
structural budget gap is a real positive.
Mr. Clay. Thank you. Dr. Rivlin.
Ms. Rivlin. I agree with Dr. Gandhi and Mr. Fabian. We're
in relatively good shape. And we're very lucky. I have
sometimes said to the mayor when he was sounding down about the
fiscal situation, ``Cheer up. You could be Mayor of Detroit.''
The situation in cities that were in trouble anyway because
they were losing their manufacturing base is much worse than it
is here. And we are lucky that our major industry is the
Federal Government and the activities that it attracts. And
those are in pretty good shape.
Mr. Clay. Thank you all for your response.
And Mr. Chairman, as well as Chairman Issa, not to engage
in a debate over the merits of the bill at this time, but as a
question, could this committee seriously or the full committee
take a serious look at Representative Norton's bill that gives
the city control over its own tax dollars? I think that with
the testimony that we've heard today, the city has certainly
demonstrated their ability to, in a fiscally prudent way,
manage their resources. Perhaps it is time that we actually
take a look at giving the city more responsibility. We are
guests here. And I just would like to hear.
Chairman Issa. If the gentleman would yield.
Mr. Clay. Yes.
Chairman Issa. I have looked at the gentlelady's draft
legislation earlier on. And now I am reasonably confident that
no, we cannot accept budget autonomy fully. But I am going to
be offering an alternative that I hope the gentlelady will join
with me on that provides a mechanism for a separate vote and
separate consideration of the District's funds. And that's what
I was alluding to in my question with the mayor. And what I
hope to be able to work with Delegate Norton on is an ability
to have an early on annual vote to accept the budget--what I
would call a contingent budget, the budget of exclusive
jurisdiction of the District, meaning what they do with their
money as it shall come in.
I think that we would be hubris for us to assume that we
could do anything about the appropriation process of other
funds. But I think by bifurcating them, we can in fact come up
with something that accomplishes what Ms. Norton is asking for.
We can do it early on in every Congress and do it separate from
the sometimes difficult budget process.
Mr. Clay. Yes, and I thank you for your response. I would
have to take a look at your proposal in more detail because----
Chairman Issa. I'm looking for cosponsors when I drop it.
Mr. Clay. But really I still think that we are treating
this locale as a stepchild, and it is probably time we loosen
the strings that we have applied to them since the 1990's and
move forward. I mean, they have certainly shown fiscal
responsibility.
I know my time is up, but I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Missouri.
At this time I would recognize the chairman of the full
committee, the gentleman from California, Mr. Issa.
Chairman Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
indulgence as all of us go back and forth to Judiciary today.
Dr. Gandhi, earlier on when I asked the mayor about
contingent budget proposals, I knew I was asking the wrong
person. But he was the right person to be asked first. When you
look at the finances of the city, as a Federal city with all of
the responsibilities, certainly we've met with your police
chief many times and she has a responsibility like no other big
city police chief because protests come here, other activities
come here which she must deal with first even though she has
backup of Federal agents.
Do you believe that the District could produce an annual
contingent budget? Now let's assume for a moment that we were a
three-quarters/one-quarter ratio of all Federal funding to the
District's self-funding for a moment. Do you believe you could
produce a full funding document that would say we have a
contingent capability for, let's say, 10 months meaning that if
we receive substantially less, we can continue operating. If we
receive nothing, we can operate for 10 months. And of course if
it looks like for some reason there is no money coming, you
could adjust.
But do you believe that you could produce that contingency
that would take us, let's just say, from this month to the end
of the year on an annual basis?
Mr. Gandhi. Yes, sir. And I say that quite advisedly
because the Federal contribution to the District, distinctly
for the District, is less than 2 percent of its budget. We get
about $174 million, if everything the mayor is asking for 2012,
the President is asking for is $174 million in a $10 billion
budget.
What the budget autonomy that I am endorsing here is that
let us spend our local dollars and obviously $174 million that
I'm talking about must be appropriated by the Congress in its
usual regulatory and legislative way, and that's fine with us.
All we are suggesting here is that when we pass our own
budget, as we will in June, that we should be allowed to spend
money. And second, if you give us budget autonomy, then we
would like to realign our budget with our specific needs.
October, September, the timeframe doesn't work for local
government.
The next thing I would say is that dependent upon the
Federal Government----
Chairman Issa. What date would work for you, Doctor?
Mr. Gandhi. The date for any other local jurisdiction which
is June-July.
Chairman Issa. So echoing what you're saying, if we
considered a D.C. money only--and by the way, that would
include, for example, a school lunch program that you expect to
have Federal money for not getting it. So I want to make sure
that when we talk about no Federal dollars, that you would
maintain all that you believe you need.
If that were the case and we were to deliver, you were to
deliver us a budget by let's say March, we were to forward it
through the Congress and have it passed before July as a free-
standing separate from appropriations, that would meet your
needs very well, recognizing that the dollars that would come
from the Federal Government would come on a different schedule?
Mr. Gandhi. Yeah. I understand that. And all, again to
repeat myself, all we want is to make sure that we spend, are
allowed to spend our local dollars according to our own wishes
and according to our own timetable.
Chairman Issa. Any other comments on the idea of
bifurcating the two?
Mr. Fabian. I think that it would be a real credit strength
from a Wall Street perspective. We're still having that level
of Federal oversight to make sure that the District keeps its
game clean. But otherwise, again, absolutely.
Chairman Issa. You said something and I want to be careful.
I don't to accept ``game clean'' but the view at least from
this side of the dais for myself has been that the District,
although it has done a very good job in recent years, lacks an
equivalent--Los Angeles does a good job, but ultimately
Sacramento has a major role in education and so many other
areas. The view is we don't have as major a role but we have a
role. And I think that's what you were saying.
Mr. Fabian. Yes. Exactly, absolutely.
Ms. Rivlin. Yes. I think this would be possible and that it
is a very good idea. And the Congress would not be
relinquishing its ultimate oversight responsibility and the
provisions that in extremis would bring back a Control Board.
Chairman Issa. Well, it is the goal of this committee to
have sufficient oversight and have sufficient good conduct that
we will never go back to the days in which you had hands in
every aspect of it far beyond this committee.
I thank the chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Chairman Issa.
The chair would now recognize the distinguished lady from
the District of Columbia, Ms. Holmes Norton.
Ms. Norton. The ranking member is taking Mr. Clay's place,
so I understand.
Chairman Issa's proposal is something I want to very much--
it is the first I've heard of it, but it is one I certainly
very much would like to work with him on and to build on.
Indeed, during the shutdown I had a number of bills just to
keep us open for the rest of the year. But then I had one bill
that said in the event of a shutdown, in any year, the District
may spend its local funds so that we would not have to go
through what we went through this time.
If what you say on schools--and I'd like any or all of you
to speak about that--the incongruity between the fiscal year of
the Federal Government and the fiscal year of every other
jurisdiction in the United States I know has created real havoc
in some years. Could you speak about that incongruity and what
it does to a local jurisdiction to be faced with schools
opening in September before the fiscal year has even begun?
Mr. Gandhi. Yeah. Let me first comment on your suggestion
on the Federal Government closing itself and impact it has on
the District Government. My expectation is that we would lose
anywhere from $1 to $5 million a week and that is just a taxing
fact.
Ms. Norton. If we had closed down.
Mr. Gandhi. Yes, ma'am. And if we talk about the economic
impact, you're talking about $15 million a week.
Further, the idea of us deciding on our own gives us a
flexibility to adjust ourselves. We basically manage our budget
based upon the revenue assumptions that were made some 18
months ago. So there is no flexibility when circumstances
change, revenues decline, expenditures go up. We don't have a
way to adjust of ourselves.
Next is that any emergency arises, as in case of hospital,
when we had to take over the hospital, we had no authority to
spend money there. So what we had to do is to borrow money from
other contingency funds just to make sure that hospital remains
operational, that the emergency care is provided, that doctors
are paid, the salaries are paid.
And last on the school issues, because the schoolyear
doesn't correspond with the fiscal year, what we have to do
every year, we have to give an advance money so the school can
start planning ahead of time for that academic year which
doesn't coincide with the fiscal year.
So I think it would be a major implement of our ability to
manage budget if we have the budget autonomy. To repeat myself,
we are talking about only the local dollars. We're not talking
about Federal dollars.
Mr. Fabian. From a bondholder's perspective they certainly
value predictability and flexibility in any issuer. So having a
sense that revenues will continue to come in and that they
could be spent in a predictable way is very important. I think
that from the idea of the fiscal year shift, you know again it
speaks to the exact same issue and it may also facilitate the
District's needs to borrow for cashflow midyear if it does need
to do that.
Ms. Norton. Dr. Rivlin.
Ms. Rivlin. I agree with all of that.
Back on the school issue, I believe every State has a June-
July fiscal year and the reason they've chosen that is for this
reason, that schools are majorly inconvenienced by starting in
August or September and not getting their budgets until the end
of September.
Ms. Norton. Can I ask one more question?
I was very concerned during the shutdown period about
possible default or having to somehow redo contracts if some of
them came due during the time or in between the time and what
those who held these notes would think and whether it would
have consequences the next year when you went to get contracts
or notes. And I wish you would comment on the effects on
possible default or on other contracts and on contracts in the
future given the fact that you were close to default this time.
Mr. Gandhi. Yeah. I think that is a major concern for us.
Obviously our debt service on gender obligations bonds, income
tax bonds is assured because we put that money in escrow.
However, we do borrowing on what is known as certificate of
participation, 240-plus million dollars out there, which we use
to buy police cars and safety equipments, hospital staff. On
that we will not be able to pay our debt service because there
will be no appropriation for us to be able to pay because
Congress was shut down, and that would cause a major havoc in
those areas, in public safety, in public health. And as Mr.
Fabian pointed out, the bond agencies and financial market want
certainty and what now appears to be a likelihood that
government, the government may shut down because of the debt
limit controversy at the Federal level. Then you know that
causes problem for us.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Fabian.
Mr. Gowdy. Mr. Fabian, I hate to cut you off. We ran
through the red light by about a minute. So we may have time to
come back to Ms. Holmes Norton, but at this point I'd like to
recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. McHenry.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the chairman, and thank you for your
testimony, and I read--have taken a look at your testimony and
I am obviously interested in this issue.
I have a subcommittee, I chair a subcommittee which
Chairman Gowdy is also on. We have been looking at State and
municipal creditworthiness. It is a very interesting issue in
light of unfunded pension liabilities.
Now Dr. Rivlin, I know you have a unique experience here,
but in the 1990's basically the Federal Government did bail out
D.C.'s pension liabilities, and then D.C. has since switched to
a defined contribution pension plan. Has that been successful?
Has it provided stability financially for the District and its
taxpayers?
Ms. Rivlin. Yes, it has. The District pension liability was
very large. I forgot the numbers, now but it had been
accumulated while the Congress ran the District. It was pre-
home rule liability. So those of us in the District didn't
think of it as a bailout. We thought of it as the Federal
Government facing up to the liabilities that it had created.
Fortunately it did, and the District was able to essentially go
forward with a better constructed pension plan.
Mr. McHenry. Dr. Rivlin, you know you certainly have a
unique perspective and you certainly put forward some
interesting ideas on entitlement reforms writ large, and we
appreciate your service to your government. Thank you for being
here today.
Ms. Rivlin. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Fabian, in terms of a municipality or
State or it is the District's credit profile, does that defined
contribution versus defined benefit pension liability or
pension fund, does that have a bearing on their credit profile?
Mr. Fabian. The existence of one versus the other is really
inconsequential. It is just about the annual burden of how they
fund up the contribution and how they manage the long-term
liabilities. So the fact that we switched to defined
contribution, it doesn't really impact the credit quality. Bit
just let me say that going forward in the last year and over
the next few years, pension liabilities will become a larger
factor for the rating agencies so they will tend to bring
ratings down. The fact that the District doesn't have that
means that the District rating will not be subject to those
same pressure.
Mr. McHenry. So net positive going forward that they have a
defined contribution rather than a defined benefit plan in
terms of credit rating?
Mr. Fabian. Yes, sir.
Mr. McHenry. And in terms of the accounting of those
pension liabilities. I mean basically what you're saying is if
you have a well funded, well capitalized pension plan, you
don't really make a judgment about the contents of it. You just
simply judge whether or not it is appropriately funded, right?
Mr. Fabian. That's right.
Mr. McHenry. But the accounting of these pension funds, do
you have some concerns about how States, municipalities, and
the District account for--I'm sorry, not the District but
larger than this, but the accounting of these defined benefit
pension plans?
Mr. Fabian. Well, you know for sure you know there has been
or there have been accounting issues in the past. I think that
the efforts of the GASB to reconcile that and begin to organize
it are definitely a positive. The Nunez-Issa-Ryan bill I think,
which would require more uniform accounting of those pension
liabilities, is from a credit analyst's perspective, is maybe a
step in the right direction, although there are limits on
looking at limiting the States access to tax exempt markets,
you know, is also very difficult to say. I think it needs to be
carefully drawn, you know, encouraging those or requiring those
conditions but at the same time not necessarily limiting access
to the capital markets.
Mr. McHenry. Dr. Gandhi, can you comment on your view in
terms of your role on whether or not this defined contribution
pension plan has been helpful in terms of your role in making
sure the District is fiscally solvent?
Mr. Gandhi. Well, the District is fiscally solvent. Whether
we want to have a defined benefit or defined contribution plan,
it is a policy decision of the mayor and the Council. My
obligation here is to make sure that we don't land it, suggest
and implement, to be appropriate for District. That land must
be properly actuarially funded. And as I pointed out earlier,
our plan is actuarially fully funded. And I think we may be
among the very, very few jurisdictions in the country to claim
that and, as Mr. Fabian pointed out, it suggests a great credit
strength on our part.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, and thank you for your service to
our government.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the distinguished gentleman from North
Carolina.
And I would now recognize the distinguished gentleman from
Maryland, the ranking member of the full committee, Mr.
Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much. Again, as I've listened
to the testimony, I am convinced that, Dr. Rivlin, I'm
convinced that the District of Columbia could teach the
Congress some things.
I find it interesting that we bring the District of
Columbia here and looking at their budgetary situation, one
which has been addressed in a very responsible way, as I said,
combined with compassion, and keeping people well, making sure
kids are educated. There are cities and States that could, and
this Congress that could take a few pointers.
But I want to just ask you, Dr. Gandhi, and then I am going
to yield, Mr. Chairman, to my colleague Ms. Norton, Holmes
Norton. You know the one thing that the District has that I
wish we had in Baltimore is that you've got property--by the
way, congratulations on your great work.
Mr. Gandhi. Thank you.
Mr. Cummings. You've got property values that are going up.
Mr. Gandhi. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Which is phenomenal. I mean that to me is
major. I mean has there been sort of like a rediscovery of the
District? I mean, in other words, it seems like everybody wants
to now live in the District. And I remember when I was a
student at Howard University a long time ago back in 1969, I
remember I used to see all of these vacant houses and I used to
say to myself as a student, it would seem as if every square
inch of the District of Columbia would be invaluable because it
literally is the capital of the world. And it seems like people
are discovering that. And I am just wondering how does that
help with your stability with your tax base and help you to
collect that $5 billion plus that the mayor talked about?
Mr. Gandhi. Your assessment is entirely correct, sir. The
District is presently perhaps the most sought after commercial
real property market in the country, if not in the world. The
last two major investments that have happened in just last 2
months, one at the city's center, $700 million development, the
money came from Middle East; $500 million investment in
Convention Center, a hotel, again money came from the Middle
East.
People are flocking to the District, and the amount of the
revenues that have added roughly $165 million in a--basically
all of that is real property, commercial real property.
I think the image of the District of eighties and nineties
is gone. What you have now is a vibrant, hip city that is
culturally very diverse. It has cultural climate. It has
attraction in terms of the entertainment, in terms of
education, in terms of governance that are truly unique.
Mr. Cummings. Did you say ``hip'' city? Is that what you
said?
Mr. Gandhi. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. I thought I was hearing things.
Mr. Gandhi. All I suggest is Mount Pleasant area and
Gallery Place area. And 30 years ago when I used to be at the
General Accounting Office--now the Government Accountability
Office--that area around Gallery Place, Chinatown, you know was
really not a safe area in the evening. Today you will see
thousands of people every evening.
Mr. Cummings. I know. I see it. I go to the movies down
there.
Mr. Gandhi. That's our Times Square, sir. That's our Times
Square. And wait till another few years and you will see the
area around the stadium is going to be very attractive area.
Today the city has more theater per person than any other
city in the country. We have world-class Shakespeare Theater,
Kennedy Center, Arena Stage. I mean, I can go on and on, and
great educational institutions here. I think the city has a
great future ahead, a great future ahead and great credit
should go to District mayors and Council and community and
civic leaders like Dr. Rivlin here. I think the city is on a
great promise here.
Mr. Cummings. I see Dr. Rivlin wants to say something.
I'm sorry, Ms. Norton. Dr. Rivlin.
Ms. Rivlin. I just want to add a cautionary note. I agree
with everything, the enthusiasm of Dr. Gandhi about the city.
But that very resurgence and the upward pressure on property
values and rent creates problems for a city which has a large
low-income population and creates needs in terms of affordable
housing that are difficult to meet.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman from Maryland.
The chair would now recognize the distinguished gentleman
from Illinois, the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr.
Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I thank all
three of you.
Dr. Gandhi, tell me, how long have you been involved with
the financial operation.
Mr. Gandhi. I have been the chief financial officer now for
10 years.
Mr. Davis. And prior to that time?
Mr. Gandhi. I was head of the Office of Tax and Revenue and
before that I was with the General Accounting Office [GAO]--now
the Government Accountability Office [GAO].
Mr. Davis. I was just as I listened, thinking that probably
yourself, Dr. Rivlin, and perhaps council member and former
Mayor Marion Berry probably knows very much about the history
and operation of District of Columbia finances and government
as anybody alive. I mean, there would probably be nobody else
alive who knows much about this as the three of you.
My question is, and I've served for three terms as a member
of a large city council, the City Council in the city of
Chicago, and I was trying to rationalize what is it that
Congress provides other than money in terms of the oversight
for resources--and of course we used to get an awful lot of
Federal money from--we don't get nearly as much anymore, but
there was a time. And the oversight was of the money, but then
of course Congress did not approve our budget.
So what is it that Congress provides that the District of
Columbia could not provide for itself?
Ms. Rivlin. Other than the money, which is very--the direct
money is very, very small, as Mr. Gandhi has pointed out, it is
hard to think of much of anything.
I would like to commend the Congress actually for having
moved over the last few years away from micromanaging the
District and trying to play City Council. I have sat with
Delegate Norton in Mr. Istook's office and I couldn't believe
it. I thought we were just sitting here talking about street
repairs and potholes and I thought what is the Congressman
doing wasting his time talking about this?
Fortunately, that era has passed. And we have not had much
interference except on some major social issues like the needle
exchange or abortion.
Mr. Davis. Last question. I find intriguing the proposal
that the chairman of the committee has put forth separating or
having essentially two budgets. I mean while it is possible,
but do you see where it would pose any challenges, any
difficulties in the budgeting process?
Mr. Gandhi. I do not think so because primarily what we are
asking for is managing our own local dollars. And Congress
would let us do that, it would facilitate great deal of our
management of the city, of our school system, and would not
create any problems for us.
The Federal appropriation can take its own course, as it
usually does. So I would wholeheartedly support Ms. Norton's
idea of a budget autonomy that would give us flexibility to
manage our own resources.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much. I have no further
questions, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the distinguished gentleman. I have just
been informed that Judiciary is calling for a recorded vote,
and one of my goals is to not miss those if I can avoid it. But
on behalf of all of us I want to thank the three witnesses not
just for your expertise and your acumen, but also for your
professionalism and civility with which you treat one another
and the members of this panel. And if you will excuse my poor
manners, I would like to come thank you in person, but
Judiciary is calling. So Dr. Gandhi, I look forward you seeing
you soon. Dr. Fabian, Dr. Rivlin, my colleague and friend Paul
Ryan has extraordinarily kind things to say about you, and I
would look forward to the chance to talk to you in person at
some point in time, too.
With that, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:50 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[The prepared statement of Hon. Paul A. Gosar and
additional information submitted for the hearing record
follow:]


