- REGULATORY IMPEDIMENTS TO JOB CREATION IN THE NORTHEAST--PART I

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REGULATORY IMPEDIMENTS TO JOB CREATION IN THE NORTHEAST--PART I

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON REGULATORY AFFAIRS,
STIMULUS OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT SPENDING

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 20, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-43

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
68-365 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs, Stimulus Oversight and Government
Spending

JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chairman
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York, Vice    DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio, Ranking
Chairwoman                           Minority Member
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JIM COOPER, Tennessee
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              JACKIE SPEIER, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on April 20, 2011...................................     1
Statement of:
Bender, Jolene, supervisor, town of Marion, NY; Maggie
Brooks, county executive, Monroe County, NY; and Barry
Virts, sheriff, Wayne County, NY...........................    65
Bender, Jolene...........................................    65
Brooks, Maggie...........................................    71
Virts, Barry.............................................    76
Mandina, Mike, president, Optimax; Rebecca Meinking,
executive vice president, Radec Corp.; and Bill Pollock,
CEO, Optimation............................................     4
Mandina, Mike............................................     4
Meinking, Rebecca........................................    11
Pollock, Bill............................................    19
Martin, Cathy, president, Monroe County Farm Bureau; Jonathan
Taylor, Oakridge Dairy; and John Teeple, Teeple Farms Inc..    32
Martin, Cathy............................................    32
Taylor, Jonathan.........................................    42
Teeple, John.............................................    52
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Bender, Jolene, supervisor, town of Marion, NY, prepared
statement of...............................................    67
Brooks, Maggie, county executive, Monroe County, NY, prepared
statement of...............................................    73
Cummings, Hon. Elijah E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Maryland, prepared statement of...............    87
Mandina, Mike, president, Optimax, prepared statement of.....     6
Martin, Cathy, president, Monroe County Farm Bureau, prepared
statement of...............................................    36
Meinking, Rebecca, executive vice president, Radec Corp.,
prepared statement of......................................    14
Pollock, Bill, CEO, Optimation, prepared statement of........    22
Taylor, Jonathan, Oakridge Dairy, prepared statement of......    45
Teeple, John, Teeple Farms Inc., prepared statement of.......    54
Virts, Barry, sheriff, Wayne County, NY, prepared statement
of.........................................................    78

REGULATORY IMPEDIMENTS TO JOB CREATION IN THE NORTHEAST--PART I

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 20, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs, Stimulus
Oversight and Government Spending,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Rochester, NY.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:06 a.m.,
Irondequoit Town Hall, 1280 Titus Avenue, Rochester, NY, Hon.
Ann Marie Buerkle (vice chairwoman of the subcommittee)
presiding.
Present: Representatives Buerkle and Kelly.
Staff present: Joseph A. Brazauskas, counsel; Sharon Casey,
senior assistant clerk; Adam P. Fromm, director of Member
services and committee operations; and Cecelia Thomas, minority
counsel.
Ms. Buerkle. Good morning, everyone. The hearing on
Regulatory Impediments to Job Creation in the Northeast will
begin.
Before we start this morning and get under way, I would ask
all of you to join me in a moment of silence. This morning's
paper had an article. Three Fort Drum soldiers were killed in
the line of duty in Afghanistan. We sit here this morning and
we enjoy the freedoms to talk, to discuss the issues, and it is
because of the service and sacrifices of the military.
Join me in a moment of silence to remember those brave men
who lost their lives, as well as their family and their
children. These are young men who have wives and children and
parents, and their lives will never be the same. So please just
take a moment of silence. Thank you.
[Pause.]
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
Before we begin our Oversight Hearings in Washington, our
chairman, Darrell Issa, always begins with a Mission Statement
of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee. So I will do
likewise here in our District Hearing and our subcommittee
Hearing.
Oversight Committee Mission Statement: We exist to secure
two fundamental principals.
First, Americans have a right to know that the money
Washington takes from them is well spent.
And second, Americans deserve an efficient, effective
government that works for them.
Our duty on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee
is to protect these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to
hold government accountable to taxpayers, because taxpayers
have a right to know what they get from their government. We
will work tirelessly in partnership with citizenship watchdogs
to deliver the facts to the American people and to bring
genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy.
This is the mission of the Oversight and Government Reform
Committee.
The Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs Stimulus Oversight
and Government Spending will come to order.
First of all, let me express my appreciation to all of you
for being here. We have many of the local elected officials
here to the Town of Irondequoit. Our thanks for providing this
wonderful venue to have this hearing.
Today we will continue an effort that my subcommittee and
the Oversight and Government Reform Committee have been
examining since the beginning of this year. Our committee has
focused on the regulatory impediments to job creation. Our
committee has focused on what government has done to get in the
way of business and success in our economy.
We've heard from job creators across the country about how
the Federal Government stifles job creation, and today we'll
focus on the issues that affect job creation in upstate New
York.
The strength of the economy and unemployment are on the
minds of most Americans. The nationwide unemployment still
hovers at around 9 percent. That unemployment figure does not
reflect the millions who have given up looking for work. The
rate is the same in the State of New York, 8,000 of our
neighbors received unemployment benefits during the month of
March. This is unacceptable. We must create more jobs and turn
the economy around for all New Yorkers.
Today we will hear from our local job creators in business
and in agriculture. They conduct business right here in central
New York. Our witnesses are construction workers, dairy and
apple farmers, berry farmers, defense contracts and others who
employ many members from the local community and provide
necessary goods and services to our region.
As we attempt to recover our economy and put the people of
this region back to work, we must begin to understand the
regulations that these industries face on a day-to-day basis as
they attempt to survive. Industry faces an enormous amount of
regulations from many Federal agencies. This committee has
heard from job creators about regulations from the
Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Labor,
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and the Food and
Drug Administration. The cumulative impact from regulations
from all these agencies is particularly harmful because of the
difficulty in implementing these regulations, as well as the
tremendous cost of compliance. These costs negatively impact
job growth and really are a hidden tax on businesses.
Worse yet, last week the EPA testified before a different
house committee and admitted that the EPA ignores the affects
on jobs and the regulations that they issue.
Local governments and municipalities are struggling to deal
with the state of the economy in continuing to provide
essential services to constituents while dealing with the
Federal bureaucracy. The practice of the Federal Government
pushing unfunded mandates down to the States leaves local
municipalities under intense pressure to make their budgets
work. These local governments already have major budgetary
constraints and struggle to provide basic services for their
community. Moreover, regulations that range from health care to
street sign replacement pile on even more costs to local
government together with unfunded mandates.
This hearing this morning will allow businesses, farmers
and local governments from New York and upstate New York to
provide Congress with an opportunity to hear about Federal
agencies and how they affect their ability to create jobs and
provide for their communities. We are listening to all of you
and we want to hear what you have to say.
At this time I would like to introduce my friend and my
colleague from Pennsylvania, Mike Kelly, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
First of all, I want to thank the Congresswoman for
inviting me here today and to be with all of you. And because
our mission really is to listen to what's going on and to hear
what you have to say. This is not about Republicans, it's not
about Democrats, it's not about finger pointing; it's about
fixing what we have in front of us all right now for all
Americans. So I would hope that as we go through this, and you
witnesses especially, thank you. It is critical that we learn.
And it's great to be with one of my favorite freshmen. We
met early on when we got to Washington, and I think we have the
same type of background. We understand what it takes to run a
business; we understand how difficult it can be; and we
understand also right now the influence of government on what
it is that we try to do every day because we truly are the job
creators. We are the people that will drive the economy forward
and make it possible for people to get back to work if we can
get government in the role it should be, and get their boot off
our throats so we can operate our businesses in a manner that
they need to be operated.
So Ms. Buerkle, thank you so much. It's a pleasure to be
with you and it's a pleasure to be in New York. Thank you all
for being here.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
I want to say, for the record, that Members may have 7 days
to submit opening statements and extraneous materials to our
record. We will also be accepting other statements and
testimony from other individuals who will not be testifying
here today so that we have a good comprehensive look at how the
government is impeding success here in upstate New York.
Now I would like to welcome our first panel of witnesses
this morning and our first panel is small businesses. I would
like to introduce, first of all, Ms. Rebecca Meinking. She is
the executive vice president of Radec Corp.; Mr. Bill Pollock,
and he is CEO of Optimation; and Mr. Mike Mandina, he is the
president of Optimax.
Good morning and welcome to all of you and thank you for
being here this morning.
Pursuant to the committee rules all witnesses will be sworn
in before they testify.
So if you would stand up and I'll ask you to raise your
right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Ms. Buerkle. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Thank you very much. Please be seated.
In order to allow time for discussion and for our questions
from the Congress, we'll ask that you limit your opening
remarks to 5 minutes. However, given the fact that there is
just two of us, we have a little bit more flexibility. So we
are anxious to hear your opening statements.
Mr. Mandina, if you would like to start.

STATEMENTS OF MIKE MANDINA, PRESIDENT, OPTIMAX; REBECCA
MEINKING, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, RADEC CORP.; AND BILL
POLLOCK, CEO, OPTIMATION

STATEMENT OF MIKE MANDINA

Mr. Mandina. Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here, and I
certainly did not want to be the first one to start.
Optimax is a precision optics manufacturer. We currently
have 150 employees. We are the classic startup with one person
20 years ago, and we are a high-tech manufacturing company just
outside of Monroe County, in Wayne County.
Two issues, one that I have written in the testimony is
about the work force issues. Optimax, having hired 150
employees and currently hiring four employees a month for the
next year, is faced with the issue of lack of skill sets for
what we provide for our services, and I think that the--there
are ways that--there's a lot of waste in the system in terms of
getting the proper training to the fresh minds that should be
able to do the work that we do.
And one of the things that I have been promoting is the
SECTORS Act, which is a Federal-level act that has passed the
House. This allows a clustering of around regional
competencies, if that were allowed to exist, then we could dig
down deep and get rid of some of the waste and the cost and it
would be cost savings. But this is creating an entity that
doesn't exist right now.
I will point to the WIRED grant funds that brought together
our region, which we won $13 million, I believe, here a few
years back. And that was the first time that I participated in
anything that brought our region together around wealth
creation. Now, around wealth creation that generates taxes and
that allows strong voices to do the right thing, including all
the stakeholders; the academic institutions were at the table,
government was at the table, the manufacturers and hospitals,
it was wonderful. So we had 60 or so people at the table and we
could have done something with that. When the funds ran out, it
stopped. And I think that was the catalyst to drive cost out of
government, to drive cost in a very efficient flow of services
down.
So I would like to see--and I think the SECTORS Act is a
way to bring that back. It did pass unanimously. It's a very--
both sides of the aisle agree on it. So I think that is
something that can help to get to the root of what you're
wanting to do in terms of removing impediments to jobs.
The other key thing, which is not in my testimony which I
didn't put in there because I couldn't remember all the words
to the acronym and I still don't know, it's called ITAR. It's a
trade restriction about shipping technology overseas. So for
technology manufacturers who want to sell globally, it is a
hurdle. Optimax does 1-week delivery on precision optics. We
have to get permission to ship those optics. The permission
takes 3 to 4 weeks to get. And we've actually been denied
sending a simple lens to Israel, to a company that was in
Israel, because they were associated with a nuclear power
plant. So it makes no sense to me whatsoever--so I'm sure
Germans or some other entity supplied those optics.
We currently have a--which I was sweating bullets on this--
we have a multi-billion dollar opportunity with a Chinese
company selling high-precision optics--actually they're
visiting Optimax today. We have a ground-breaking ceremony
today for 20,000-square-foot expansion which has to do, to a
large extent, with this firm that we're selling optics to
China. We were sweating bullets that ITAR would not approve
that because it was for technology applications. And it did go
through; we were very pleased with that. However, we almost
didn't even try because it's such a hurdle that we have decided
strategically to only sell domestically.
If the Chinese--this company had not sought us out and
asked us to participate, we would have not. We are not the only
firm that has this issue. So anybody that's in the technology
space who tries to sell--and if the United States can't sell
technology globally, I'm not sure what else we can sell. The
ITAR restrictions are a restriction on our ability to sell
globally and to bring foreign capital into the United States.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mandina follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Mrs. Meinking.

STATEMENT OF REBECCA MEINKING

Ms. Meinking. Good morning Vice Chairwoman Buerkle and
Committee Member Kelly. I would just like to thank you for the
opportunity to testify.
My name is Rebecca Meinking. I am the executive vice
president at Radec Corp. We're based here in Rochester. We are
a full-service, residential, commercial and industrial
electrical contractor. We perform between $10 and $12 million
of electrical work annually, and we've been in business for
about 35 years, a family owned business recently transferred
from the founding generation to the next.
At our high we employed approximately 80 local people. In
the last several years, besieged by the bad economy, rising
costs of construction materials and, quite frankly, government
regulations that are doing little more than strangling us and
really not providing any benefits to us, we've had to cut our
work force by about 30 percent.
I also appear before you today as a member of Associated
Builders and Contractors, the Empire State Chapter. ABC
represents around 23,000 merit shop contractors nationally and
here in New York. The Empire State chapter represents
approximately 500 of merit shop contractors like me.
ABC's membership really is bound by a shared commitment to
the principal that a free and open market where government
regulation is kept to a minimum--we certainly don't propose
that there should be no regulation--but where government
regulation is kept to a minimum, really does provide the best
foundation for job growth and economic vitality for all of us.
I'm going to share with you three different areas where we
are experiencing difficulty from a Federal regulatory
standpoint.
Executive Order 13502, signed into law by President Obama
back in February last year, or actually February 2009,
basically encourages the use of project labor agreements on
Federal construction projects exceeding $25 million in total
cost. As a construction industry employer, Radec's ability to
maintain and grow employment opportunities within our company
is contingent on our ability to be able to compete and perform
work in the public sector. Executive Order 13502 strips away
that opportunity from our company and it does the same for the
many merit shop contractors here in upstate New York, in New
York State and, quite frankly, nationally.
As a merit shop contractor, Radec Corp. cannot and will not
work under the terms of a project labor agreement and there's
two main reasons why we won't. First a PLA requires that we, as
a company, ignore our own highly skilled work force and,
instead, employ workers from the union hall. And in our case we
are forced to employ workers from the union that works day
after day to try to unionize our company or to put us out of
business. As a small business our employees really are part of
our extended family, and we can see no reason to take away
their opportunity to work to provide opportunities for their
union counterparts.
It forces us basically to discriminate against our own
workers and that's just plain wrong and we won't do it as a
company. What right does any government entity have to tell me
as a business what workers I can use on a project and what
workers I cannot use on a project. It really is analogous to
either of you running for re-election next year and the
government telling you, you have to draw your campaign work
force from the campaign work force of your opponent. It makes
absolutely no sense.
Second, as a merit shop contractor, if I work under a PLA,
I have to force the few workers from my own work force that I
am allowed to use on the project to pay union dues and to,
essentially, join the union for the duration of that project.
Radec Corp. employees have freely chosen to not join a union.
They don't believe union representation is in their best
interest. So a PLA is a losing proposition for them and we
value and respect them much too much to force that upon them.
So our only option is to not bid jobs that have project labor
agreements attached.
Our tax dollars and our employees' tax dollars are funding
those projects, but because we have chosen to work in an
environment free of third-party interference, our government
takes away our opportunity and our workers' opportunities to
work on those projects.
PLAs discriminate against hundreds of legitimate local
businesses and they're a significant obstacle to us in our
ability to maintain our current work force, let alone grow that
work force. I would strongly encourage both the House and the
Senate to immediately pass H.R. 735, the Government Neutrality
and Contracting Act which I'd like to publicly thank Vice
Chairwoman Buerkle for being a sponsor of, because it will
really ensure that we all, as construction companies, whether
we're union or non-union, will have an opportunity to
participate in public construction projects financed with
public dollars.
Second, the National Labor Relation Board. They have some
proposed rulings and proposed rulemakings that would
significantly change the way that the work force is governed
going forward and how American workplaces will function from a
labor perspective.
One of the rulings that they are being rumored to make is a
ruling that would require employers like Radec Corp., who allow
well-meaning, charitable organizations, to come on to our
worksites or into our offices and talk about the work that they
do and promote the work that they do to our employees. The NLRB
wants to force us to give the same access to union organizers
to come on to our job sites if we provide that access to
charitable organizations.
Another contemplated ruling would basically change the way
collective bargaining units are determined. Right now in order
for a union to organize a company, they have to get the
majority of the whole work force that performs similar work to
agree that union representation is in their best interest. The
NLRB would like to change that and allow for different worksite
organization. So for a construction company like mine that
performs work on several sites on a daily basis, the unions
could actually go in to one of my job sites, organize my
workers there, but my workers on four other job sites would not
be organized. So I'd be dealing with different pay scales,
different work rules within my own company. Rather ludicrous,
in my opinion.
Last, the NLRB issued a proposed rulemaking. My
understanding is they are preparing to finalize this rule that
will require us as employers--and I think I have gone over my 5
minutes, I apologize, I knew I was going to do that--they want
us to post a notice to our employees that basically lists a
very incomplete list of rights of our employees to organize.
And when I say ``incomplete,'' what I mean is the notice tells
our employees all about their rights to organize, but it sort
of leaves out the fact that they also have a right to not
organize, and quite frankly, the way the notice is worded, it
almost appears as though we, as Radec Corp., are actually
encouraging our employees to organize, which I can assure you
is quite far from the truth. These really egregious outreaches
by the NLRB I believe need to be curtailed and I would
encourage Congress to do whatever. I don't know the answer to
it, but I would encourage for you to look at whatever ways you
can find to pull them back a little bit.
Last I just want to touch on OSHA. OSHA has, in the past,
been somewhat collaborative in how they work with employers to
ensure job-site safety. But they have very publicly advertised
a much different approach which is really enforcement driven.
They're focusing on finding worksite violations and issuing
substantial fines instead of working collaboratively with us as
employers to promote the overall safety of our work places.
This is pretty clear in the construction industry specifically.
This new approach is just another costly burden that we, as a
business, have to deal with and it really creates a level of
financial uncertainty for us that really requires us to hold
back in terms of any sort of expansion.
The other issue is, right now when OSHA finds a violation
on a worksite, only the employer is fined for that violation. I
would encourage OSHA to look for collaborative ways to work
with employers and employees who do have a level of
responsibility in their own safety and the safety of those who
they work with to come up with programs that will help to
encourage that level of safety creating those types of programs
instead of seeking to financially cripple businesses to coerce
safety, really, I believe, would result in safer work places
overall.
So I would encourage Congress, again, to look at ways to
help OSHA to return to their collaborative and cooperative
spirit of working with employers instead of the punitive
approach they are currently taking.
Then I want to thank you for the opportunity to share some
of these issues. I do just want to point out, Vice Chairwoman
Buerkle, you are my congressional representative, and I'm
thrilled that you are. And I remember in your campaign you ran
on the statement that: Government does not create jobs,
business does. And it really is paramount that government
realize that they are there to create the type of environment
that we, as businesses, need to grow and prosper and contribute
to the economy. And I can't thank you enough for allowing us to
bring some of these things to light in hopes that we can
resolve them and work together to help to restore our economy.
So thank you very much for the opportunity to be here
today.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much for your comments.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Meinking follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Mr. Pollock. Good morning.

STATEMENT OF BILL POLLOCK

Mr. Pollock. Good morning and thank you for inviting me.
I'm the president of Optimation Technology, which is a
privately held ESOP company, and we are in the business of
designing and building factories; so that puts us in the
manufacturing sector.
During the period from 2000 to late 2008, we grew the
company from 50 employees to 350 employees. What we have
discovered is that even when manufacturing isn't as strong as
it could be, if you have good automation and good tools, that
you can keep competitive manufacturing going in the United
States. And if you look at the statistics, you know, of course,
that Monroe County is a great exporter of all kinds of
manufactured goods around the world. We can manufacturer at
Optimation things which are sold competitively all over China
and Taiwan and Japan and Korea and Singapore and other places.
So it is a good place to be here. The difficulty, as you've
asked us to talk about, is what is the government doing to hold
us back. And that's what I would like to talk about a bit
today.
I can remember distinctly the morning of July 12, 2010, and
that was the morning I came into work early, as usual, to get
going and I opened my mail from the day before and there was a
registered letter there from the U.S. Department of Labor. And
in the letter they had lots of big words and talked about
administration and enforcement and Title 1 and how they were
established there to make sure that compliance was held.
Now, it's not only the case that there's plenty of
compliance issues going on at the Federal level, there's lots
of audits going on at the Federal level. And this letter was
announcing an audit of the Optimation Technology's medical
health care plan. ``The Secretary shall have the power in order
to determine which person, if any person, has violated or is
about to violate any provision of the titled regulation.''
Now, when I read that, basically what it said was they were
there coming to audit our health care plan and that we had 7
days to produce 28 documents and answer four pages of
questions. And, of course, we buy the health care plan from MVP
or Excellus, we don't create the health care plan, but now we
have to take all the books, read through and become experts of
the health care plan and we have 7 days to respond to this or
we're going to be subpoenaed in violation. We asked for an
extension. We were told that 3 days was the maximum extension
you could have.
Now, at that point in time, when I got that letter, I will
be honest with you, that was the first time I actually
seriously considered throwing in the towel. And I sent an email
to my vice president and said, you know, it's really not worth
it. We should just give it up.
This letter was the seventh audit we had received from a
governmental agency in 2010, and we're only in July. We were in
the middle of an IRS audit that had begun in May. When the IRS
auditor arrived, I said to him--first day we gave him 40,000
pages of transaction files so he could peruse through and start
looking through things--``How long are you going to be here?''
He said, ``Six months.''
And then began--we gave him an office, gave him coffee, we
moved him in--began the ordeal. And every day I'd go down and
he would ask questions and we would produce more documents. I
will say at the end of IRS audit--well, part way through, we
were almost wrapping up--He said, ``No, we've talked this over.
We'd like to audit another tax year.''
They did stay for 5\1/2\ months, at which point in time we
got a letter from them which said that there were no findings
and that everything was fine.
And in truth, we got through the Department of Labor audit
as well and all the other audits. We have had no fines and
punitive actions. And in truth these audits were put there
really in compliance issues. They may have been looking to find
money, as Becky has implied, but they didn't find anything from
us. We are very good at responding to audits. We are very good
at staying in compliance. We are very good at creating jobs and
creating factories as well, but when our energy is sucked off
to do things which are counterproductive to the business,
essentially audits are just there to poke around and see what
you have done wrong.
And there's a mindset that's put into these auditors as
they are trained that businesses are essentially criminals,
they must be doing something wrong, they must be abusing their
employees, otherwise, how could they be so successful.
And I'll tell you the reason we are successful is because
my employees have my back all day and every day, and they do
everything double, and triple and quadruple what anybody would
even consider reasonable in order to maintain the company.
But we have to deal with the Department of Labor. And these
are the State level, of course, as well as the Federal level:
With the IRS, with ARISA, with health care, with 401(k) audits,
with ESOP audits, with the Census Bureau sending endless forms
to be filled out under penalty if you don't, with OSHA, and
other regulations. Sarbanes Oxley has lowered down to very,
very small businesses. We hire two accounting firms: One to
provide counsel so that we can make sure we are in compliance
when the audit firm comes in. Then we have to have the two
firms duke it out is what really says in the regulation.
So it isn't a simple business running a small business
anymore. I estimate that even on that IRS audit, myself, last
year I spent 200 hours of my own time. If that time had been
freed up to do marketing and sales and work with clients, we
could have created 10 additional jobs instead of just dodging
government bullets.
And so, I mean, I think the first piece that has to come
down is we have to look at every regulation and say, is this
reasonable? Is it practical? But then above and beyond that,
how many auditors have been hired? How large has the government
bureaucracy been grown in terms of IRS and OSHA and other
people in order to force compliance, and how much of that money
is being spent is counter productive to growing the economy?
Because not only are those people sucking off of tax dollars in
order to get their paychecks, they are also sucking off our
backs and taking us away from the opportunity to grow our own
companies and do other things.
I appreciate you listening to us. I don't have any great
expectations, but we are going to survive one way or the other.
We don't ask for handouts. We are not asking for support above
and beyond. Let's be a little practical about how we go about
things.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pollock follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. And thank you to all three of our witnesses
this morning for your very compelling comments.
We have had a number of these hearings, and down in
Washington DC, and I have been so--and I know my colleague Mr.
Kelly as well--we have been so profoundly affected when you
listen to a group of witnesses who have run small businesses.
And the question was asked to all of them: If you knew now what
you--if you knew then what you know now regarding regulations
and all of the impediments to job creation, would you have gone
into business and would you have done what you have done.
And each one of the members of that panel said, ``No, we
would not.''
And so we have reached a point in this country--and when I
listen to your testimony, Mr. Pollock, what you went through
with all of your audits--we begin to wonder what's happened to
the United States of America in our free enterprise system and
our capitalist system, where we have an understanding that the
government can't create jobs. It is the private sector. It's
the private sector that's going to get this economy back on
track. It's the private sector that does the job hiring and
expands businesses and buys more equipment and improves
technology.
So I want to tell you that this subcommittee and our entire
Oversight and Government Reform Committee is committed to doing
that, to recognizing and understanding the impediments that
stand in the way of businesses and their success. We will do
everything in our power to help small businesses do what they
do best, and that is to create and grow a business, to work
hard and be successful. Because that's the American way. That's
the American dream and why many of you have gone into business.
So with that, I would just like to talk a little bit about
your testimony and then--so I will. I'd like to just start with
the same question to all of you, whether or not you would be in
this business if you knew now--if you knew then what you know
now. You can all answer and you can start.
Mr. Pollock. Sure. The answer is, yes, I would. And really
the rewarding part is the employees and the company team. I
mean, everybody needs jobs and if I can be a catalyst to help
that happen, then I'm going to do it.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
Ms. Meinking. Well, I'm not the company owner actually, but
I'll speak for him. And I don't think that he would not be an
owner of a business simply because of the ability that being a
business owner allows you to contribute to your overall
community through job creation and things like that.
I think we, as a company, are very proud of what we do.
We're just looking for some assistance in making it a little
easier to do what we do.
Mr. Mandina. I think many people involved in small business
are survivors and very creative and they're entrepreneurial and
that's why they're doing what they're doing. So certainly no
matter the odds, I think most would attempt to be successful.
As the odds are stacked against them or those that actually are
successful, become fewer and fewer.
And certainly the migration of manufacturing jobs overseas
in this country is appalling. And certainly manufacturing can
be profitable and it can grow in this country. But we have to
have some fortitude and we have to have some policies that help
support that because manufacturing jobs are really--generate,
on the order, seven other jobs once they're here. Optimax has
high-paying jobs. These are career jobs. You can have cars, put
your kids through college. Those types of things. They're not
all gone; they are here and they're actually growing. But we
have to support that. And we are not the adversary. And the
adversary is the global market space, and we are competing
against countries with policies that make it very easy to
manufacture, and I certainly would be--I can speak for myself
and my partner--we would absolutely do what we are doing with
Optimax in spite of whatever the rules were and how ridiculous
they were. But it would create impediments to our growth and we
may not be successful, but that's just the nature of an
entrepreneur, not because we're being asked to do it.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you. I just do want to comment, Mr.
Pollock, if this gives any piece of mind, the Continuing
Resolution that we voted on last week did stop the IRS from
hiring 10,000 additional employees. So we were able to de-fund
those positions.
Mr. Pollock. Thank you.
Ms. Buerkle. With that, I'll yield my colleague Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. Mandina, I think it's important, because the
general public doesn't understand what--I'm an automobile
dealer. That's what I've done for a living. If somebody asked
me 2 years ago would you be in Congress, I would say,
absolutely not. I'm too busy raising my family and running my
business. So I have a little bit of an idea what it's like to
deal with OSHA and everybody else that comes into our business
and has absolutely no investment but is a partner we don't
really need to have on our back.
This ITAR--because I've talked to other people in the same
type of business--kind of walk us through what ITAR is and what
you have to do in order to compete and why it makes it so
difficult for you.
Mr. Mandina. If a firm in a foreign land who's on a list
of--if they're not on a list, it's fine. But most countries are
on the list. So Israel, I thought, is a friendly nation.
They're on the list.
Ms. Buerkle. Explain what the list is.
Mr. Mandina. The list is now--it puts you to another list
of questions that you now have to go and process. This is for--
we're a OEM manufacturer so we quote things. So we win about 25
percent of what we quote. So we now have to decide if we want
to quote something. And so anyway, there's a process. I have to
decide whether you want to do the work on 75 percent of the
inquiries that you know you're not going to win.
So if it's Israel, we now have to look at--go through the
list and ask questions about what is the use of this optic. So
we have to go to our customers--and in the technology space, a
lot of times they don't want to tell you because it's
competitive information. So you have to say what are you using
this for; what's the end product; who's our customer--explain
to another customer, who's your customer; what country are they
in; what are they putting it in? That's kind of ridiculous.
Mr. Kelly. The idea is, if you would, because most people
don't understand this. The idea is at the end of the assembly,
this product could possibly be used by a terrorist country or
be used in a military fashion. So you're responsible for every
little piece that goes out somewhere into the world as to
finding out where it's actual end use is going to be? Is that--
--
Mr. Mandina. That's correct. An example of that could be
that it goes into a laser welding machine that is made in
France, going to be sold to China. And you can use laser
welding equipment to make weaponry. So that's--it's--you just
draw the dots. Everything goes everywhere. So, well, ultimately
you can make weapons with a lot of things. You need rubber
bands to hold the paper together.
Where do you stop? And so you go through that. You ask
those questions. You go back and forth, intimidate your
customer, make them feel like they're having to divulge
information they don't want to give you. Then you quote the job
if you think it's--oh--then you can't actually get their
license for it until you get the order. And then once you get
the order, you then go and ask for permission to sell if
they're on that list, and they can say no. And so it takes 4
weeks.
So meanwhile you've gone through the whole dance of going
back and forth. You've done the bid. You somehow miraculously
got an order. They have to wait to see if you can move on the
order or you have to wait until you can move on the order. Then
they say no. So meanwhile your customer has gone 8 weeks
through the cycle and then they have to start over again
because the U.S. Government said this manufacturer cannot sell
this to you.
How they make the decisions about what you could sell and
what you can't, I really have no idea. It is an absolute crap
shoot. And we have decided--we do almost $20 million worth of
business a year. We do almost zero overseas, and we could sell
overseas. We get inquiries all the time. We have said no,
because we don't want to have to deal with the government--the
uncertainty of the government. It takes way too much extra work
on our end. We're probably $5 million worth of business a year
that we're just turning our back on because of it.
Mr. Kelly. What agency do you work with--who is responsible
for the ITAR? Who does it go through?
Mr. Pollock. Department of Commerce.
Mr. Kelly. There's a lot of them. I know it's hard.
Mr. Mandina. Tell you what. I was really fresh on this a
year and a half ago when we decided not to do this. And so--
because we're not doing it, it's out of my mind. I'm into
growth in the domestic market space.
Mr. Kelly. I think the bottom line of this whole thing, is
you're in a business that you have an opportunity to sell a
certain product or pieces for a product that's going to be
assembled. You now have, because of this overreach, have
decided not even to bid that business.
Mr. Pollock. Exactly.
Mr. Kelly. I would assume, like everything else in
business, time is of the essence. The process that you have to
be to go through would be a lot different than a foreign
competitor would have to go through. Plus waiting for the
licensing, waiting for the OK, it's just better for you. It's
the old story: Don't worry about the mule, just load the wagon.
I think at this time, the mule is about ready to walk away.
I appreciate your testimony. I can tell you really, the
American public has absolutely no idea what you are going
through on this, not only what you are going through with ITAR,
but the other regulations. I think that's the one thing we are
finding out on a daily basis. We have to find some way of
amplifying this problem so that people understand. This isn't
just you coming here and complaining because you can't compete.
You're coming here talking about a situation that makes it
impossible for you to compete and, unfortunately, it's your own
country. So I appreciate your----
Mr. Pollock. If I can add one more thing. There's another
part to that restriction and it has to do with employment. We
had 130 people working at Optimax and one was a part-time
consultant, Canadian. Because that person did not have a green
card and was not a U.S. citizen, we had to put locked cabinets
and create a whole infrastructure of security for this
dangerous Canadian consultant that we had working, otherwise we
were in violation.
The Canadian quit because she didn't feel it was
appropriate that we go through all that expense in order to
keep her employed. And now most companies in technology,
manufacturing companies, will not hire anyone who does not have
a green card or is a U.S. citizen. There are a lot of very
smart people who are--who don't have green cards, who are not
U.S. citizens that could really help generate wealth in this
country that we can't hire because we have to put these
infrastructures in.
It's most technology manufacturers, certainly in optics,
and many machines shops and other places are--do some level of
defense work. If you do some level of defense work, you have
this other barrier now that's in place.
So there's had a lot of cost around this. I understand the
reason too for it. Certainly there's reasons for it, but the
way it's structured is so ridiculous, it's actually impeding
U.S. exports.
Mr. Kelly. I have friends in Meadville that do the same
thing and they're going through the same process and problems.
I think what really disturbs all of us is who is it that makes
up these lists and what's the criteria for somebody being on
the list or not being on the list. And it would be like me
selling a car and before I sell the car, I'd have to ask that
person: Is there any time in the future that you think anybody
could possibly be getting in and out of this car that maybe
could be a problem for the country. If I couldn't answer that,
I couldn't sell the car.
So I get it and I've got to tell you, it is the scope of
overreach and over-involvement that's killing all of this. I
appreciate fully. Don't give up on us. We're not going to quit
until we get it fixed. Thank you.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you all very much. I have one last
question and I'm not sure if you have anything left?
Mr. Kelly. I did want to ask Ms. Meinking something.
And I know right now, because of the events in Wisconsin
and around the country, there's a renewed interest. And often
it's become too polarizing between organized labor in the
private sector. I think that's done a tremendous disservice to
both sides. And I would certainly think--we're interested in
it. I gotta tell you, I have friends on both sides of it. I
have friends that do both.
PLAs are something that a lot of people don't understand.
People understand Davis-Bacon, and I think Bacon is a
Republican from New York, and Davis is a republican from
Pennsylvania. So when people say, ``Come on, these Republicans
don't like unions,'' those are the two guys that started it,
and they're both Republicans.
As we go forward--and I think we would all agree that
bargaining is part of the practice, but bankrupting an entity
is not. And if you can't--because I know you are very
concerned. I read your testimony with the PLAs. Explain a
little bit what that does to you and your ability to bid on a
job. You can bid on a job using Davis-Bacon, but with the PLAs
that's had a little different. That's more exclusive, is it
not.
Ms. Meinking. That's correct. In fact, if we do bid a job
that is a Federal job, we are required, by law, to follow
Davis-Bacon rules which, in essence, means that we're paying
union scale wages and benefits. And the whole principle, of
course, behind Davis-Bacon was to level the playing field, if
you will, from a wage standpoint. So when we bid and perform
work at the Federal level, we do pay Davis-Bacon wages.
You don't need a PLA to level the playing field from a wage
standpoint, because you already have Davis-Bacon or if we're
talking New York State, we have New York State prevailing wage.
A PLA literally, as I said in my testimony, tells me that I
cannot use my own workers. And, quite frankly, we have crews
that are supervised by very experienced foremen who work with
these people day in and day out. They develop processes and
procedures to make us the most effective and cost-effective
contractor that we can be. And when we have to put people who
have absolutely no vested interest in the success of our
business and, in fact, have an invested interest in the
shutting down of our business, to eliminate us as competition
to their signatory contractors, I mean, it's kind of like
asking me to swim through a pool of alligators and hope I don't
get bit.
You know, it's ridiculous. And I will honestly tell you
that if we see PLA language in a bid, we aren't going to take
the time to even bid it. Can we bid it? Absolutely. We can. But
it sets up a scenario that, from a business standpoint, it's
completely and utterly impractical for us. So we close the
specifications and we throw them in the garbage. And
unfortunately, that takes away opportunities from our current
employees and takes away our opportunity to grow our business
using tax-payer-funded projects to do it.
Mr. Mandina. Could I comment on that as well?
We, like Radec, are a non-union contractor. We have over
200 journeymen. We have a New York State certified
apprenticeship program where we're bringing up 24 young men and
women into the trades. We are 1 of 9 out of 100 something
apprenticeship programs that's non-union in New York State.
Ms. Meinking. And we are one of the others.
Mr. Pollock. Our principle and practice, based on the
regulations, is that we simply do not bid any governmental jobs
whether they're local, State or Federal. We find our business
entirely elsewhere, because the compliance issues are immense.
It's not that we couldn't do it, it's just it's not cost
effective to stay in line.
And in truth, every single governmental job that we have
ever done, someone has guaranteed that we were audited. The
time spent was pretty humongous, so we backed away from it. So
our position maybe is different from theirs, but similar. We
just find other work.
Ms. Meinking. And we do, as well, but quite frankly, in
this economy, the private sector has not been building as much
as they used to. So in many cases we're forced to look to
markets that we might otherwise avoid simply to stay in
business.
Mr. Kelly. And the other thing, if you would just comment
briefly, because I've been through OSHA audits. And, again, it
comes down to the public's awareness of what these mean.
I have always been a little disappointed. I've been through
some OSHA reports. Remedial action would be something in my--if
you find something wrong in my workplace, I want to make sure
it's safe for my guys. One of the things our guys are supposed
to wear if they put cars up in the air, they're supposed wear
hardhats and goggles.
I don't know if you can mandate common sense in a
workplace. I think you can set guidelines, but at the end of
the day, I don't know how you get one of the people that works
for you to look out for their own good. So having said that,
the remedial process is the one that I think is lacking in all
these audits.
We used to have something called the Voluntary Protection
Plan, which makes sense, which is where you sit down and you
talk about these possible problems and how to fix them. I know
with OSHA, when they come in and they do an audit, most of
these things, there's no cost-benefit analysis. It's just this
is wrong, this is wrong, this is wrong, fine, fine, fine. I
don't think it accomplishes the same type of an effect that the
insurance company coming in trying to help you to eliminate
possible losses or dangerous situations in your business to,
because they're actually there to do something with you to fix
it.
I get the feeling, when I hear folks talk, that the
government comes in, the idea isn't to fix it; it's to fine
you. So let me know. Am I reading this wrong in my little
corner of the world?
Ms. Meinking. You're reading it exactly correctly. In fact,
I will tell you that we recently had an OSHA inspector show up
on one of our job sites and--you know, this is an OSHA
inspector that we have seen on other job sites. And you're
absolutely correct. As an employer, safety is paramount to us.
We want to make sure that every one of our people goes home
every night to their family. Nothing is more important to us.
We have had an OSHA inspector who has been on a number of
job sites, and we are a very safe contractor. We do not have a
lot of issues. But this OSHA inspector confided in us that the
directive from above from Washington DC is that these
inspectors are to go onto job sites and find violations that
can result in fines. Because, my understanding is, that it's
because OSHA is sort of self funding and they need to generate
the revenue to support all these additional inspectors and
things that they have decided will be their approach to safety,
as opposed to the programs like the VPP program and things like
that.
So it's a complete reversal from, quite frankly, what OSHA
used to be in terms of being a collaborative agency. They are
now simply looking for ways to generate revenue, and to me,
that's counter productive.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you.
Ms. Buerkle. We had OSHA in and we did hear their
testimony, and were able to ask them questions. And we were
really struck by the fact, in one of the people--one of the
members from OSHA was there, and he mentioned the fact that
employers will comply with OSHA regulations in order to prevent
a visit because they fear OSHA going onsite to visit their
business.
And I said to him, ``Fear? This is the United States of
America. We shouldn't be fearing government agencies. We should
be working with them,'' as you said, to find and ensure safe
work places for our employees. No one cares more about
employees than the employers. Not OSHA, but the employers.
So we were struck by the fact that it has changed from
being a partnership to work together for safety to this
punitive--trying to look for and find for offenses.
Ms. Meinking. I do think, to a certain degree, it goes back
to the mentality that seems to be pervasive in government now,
that employers are bad, and they are looking to profit on the
backs of their workers at any cost. And I think until we change
that mindset, quite frankly, partnerships and collaboration
between government and business is going to be hard to
accomplish.
Ms. Buerkle. Well, then, I think a good way to end our
first panel here is to say to you, to all of you and all of the
businesses in upstate New York that we appreciate you. We
appreciate your sacrifice; we appreciate your entrepreneurial
spirit. We know that you are the job creators, and we hope you
will work with us to continue giving us information we need so
we can go back to Washington and begin to create an environment
where businesses can do well and be successful and not be
penalized for all of their hard work and efforts.
I want to thank all three of you on behalf of Mr. Kelly and
myself. Thank you for being here this morning and sharing your
testimony here with us.
With that, we'll conclude panel No. 1 and seat our second
panel this morning.
Ms. Buerkle. We will begin the hearing of the second panel.
This morning I'd like to introduce Ms. Cathy Martin. She is
the president of Monroe County Farm Bureau; and Mr. Jonathan
Taylor, he's owner of Oakridge Dairy; and last, John Teeple,
owner of Teeple Farms.
Welcome this morning to our hearing.
It is the custom of Oversight and Government Reform
Committee to swear in our panelists, so if you would please
stand, raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Kelly. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Thank you very much.
Ms. Buerkle. Ms. Martin, if we could start with you, with
your testimony.
Again, thank you all for being here this morning.

STATEMENTS OF CATHY MARTIN, PRESIDENT, MONROE COUNTY FARM
BUREAU; JONATHAN TAYLOR, OAKRIDGE DAIRY; AND JOHN TEEPLE,
TEEPLE FARMS INC.

STATEMENT OF CATHY MARTIN

Ms. Martin. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you today. I appreciate your time and consideration on these
important matters to agriculture.
My name is Cathy Martin and I'm the office administrator
for John B. Martin and Sons Farms. We are a 3,000 acre fruit
and vegetable farm and have a small on-farm processing
operation for cabbage and winter squash.
Both our cabbage and squash operations are labor intensive
and we require approximately 100 employees on a seasonal basis
and 40 full-time employees. My job has oversight of all aspects
of office procedures for the efficient day-to-day running of
our farm. In the past few years the most difficult and time-
consuming aspect of my job has been working to require legal
employees from the Federal H-2A Visa Program.
I'm here today before you to discuss the regulatory
impediments to job creation in the northeast. New York has
become one of the most heavily taxed and regulated States in
the United States and many farms are struggling to stay in
business. With all the complications that are currently
endured, short growing seasons, extreme and unpredictable
weather and labor shortages, it continues to become more
difficult to keep farms in business with the constant addition
of new regulations. Among these regulatory impediments is that
of the H-2A Guestworker Visa Program. This program is intended
to supplement farms with foreign labor when there is a domestic
labor shortage. However, the complications within the program
have largely increased, growing to a level that is causing the
program to become unusable.
The H-2A Program was created in 1987 and was not updated
until 2008 when the Bush administration made changes that
helped growers by streamlining the application process and
making the program easier for farmers to use. However, with the
new administration coming forward in 2009, these changes were
quickly reversed and an even harsher environment for using the
program was created with excessive time delays and paperwork
burdens.
While immigration issues have become a growing concern
across the Nation, agriculture still needs access to a liable,
stable, legal work force through a Federal guestworker program.
It is vital to my farm that when my application is submitted
for use of the H-2A Program that there is a consistency,
accuracy and timeliness in execution of the program and
process. At this point there are different interpretations of
the program rules and this has made compliance increasingly
difficult.
While I understand there must be proper paperwork and
documentation in this process when I specify a date of need for
my workers on the application, it is often overlooked and not
met by the U.S. Department of Labor. These extreme delays have
caused a loss of--loss in my crops as workers have not been
available to plant, pick or do essentially work on the farm
that is crucial to staying in business.
Processing problems have repeatedly occurred in the
National Processing Center in Chicago. Within the past year
there have been an abnormally large deficiencies and denials of
H-2A certificates. Many of the deficiencies and denials have
involved requests for experienced workers within specific
employee classifications of a job order, reference
requirements, temporary and seasonal work and a differing
interpretation based on prevailing practices--surveys that are
conducted by the State Department of Labor with inconsistent
results. These difficulties cause delays in the process and
force farmers, in desperate need of workers, to engage in
costly, stressful and time-consuming administrative appeals.
This is a huge burden on the farmer especially when most of
these appeals have been ruled in favor of the farmer.
When an employer is filing their H-2A job order, there are
sections that include a description of the employee's job
duties. Also included is a section stating the level of
experience required to be able to sufficiently complete the job
description. These types of employee requirements can vary from
farm to farm and depend on numerous factors:
The farm is able to provide more training, therefore, they
are able to lower the amount of experience required by the
farmer.
Different modes of production vary from farm to farm and
not all requirements are the same. For example, when apples are
picked for fresh market, it requires more experience and
delicacy than when applies are picked for processing.
And similar to other job qualifications outside of farming,
there are times when a job description may have different
requirements from year to year--job expectations can change and
farms should be allowed to determine what is necessary on their
farm.
However, when applications are sent through, the regulatory
requirements of this program force farms into a ``one size fits
all'' scheme. That makes it extremely difficult for my farm to
fulfill requirements for the application process and ensure
that we will have access to labor that will accurately and
safely complete the job order.
Farmers must advertise for workers in three separate States
to demonstrate that they cannot find domestic labor.
Advertisements in newspapers must be for a specific number of
days and on specific days of the week. This advertising adds
expense and time to the application process. Farmers seldom
recruit domestic workers through this process and almost never
from further away than the local area even given the recent
high rates of unemployment.
While I understand the need of foreign workers must be
demonstrated to access the program, these advertising
requirements must be adjusted to be a procedure that actual
employers would reasonably undertake with an ability to recruit
potential domestic workers. At it's current level, the
recruitment requirements are unrealistic.
The regulatory process of the H-2A Program also creates
problems with it's restrictive definitions and limited use of
program for certain industries within agriculture. Dairy and
other livestock farmers, who have a year round rather than a
seasonal need for labor, are not able to access the program
because they're not included in the agricultural employment
definition. However, they face the same challenges in
recruiting reliable workers as fruit and vegetable farms.
Additionally, farmers cannot use H-2A workers for
incidental employment. On my farm there are a large variety of
tasks that must be done to keep the operation running. It is
unrealistic to expect one worker to only complete one task
throughout his or her entire employment period. Coupled with
illnesses or days off for other employees, at times there are
situations that require workers to pick up extra tasks to get
the needed jobs done. Allowing H-2A workers to do these
incidental tasks while employed by a farm would be extremely
helpful and common sense. Expanding these definitions will
allow for a stronger and more efficient use of workers during
their employment, while at the same time, creating stronger
work force on the farm.
Prevailing Practice Surveys are distributed yearly by each
State in the United States as required by the H-2A Program--to
farmers based on their commodity, asking detailed questions
about farm practices and labor experience. These surveys have
caused complications at both the State and the U.S. Department
of Labor as the survey develops a standard for employment and
allows applications to be denied if farms deviate from the
norm.
It is not appropriate to determine that all agricultural
operations will have standard needs across an entire State.
Every farm is unique and will have different requirements and
job positions in its application depending on its needs.
All these factors, including others, have caused great
complications within the H-2A system through the past years
and, specifically, over the past 3 years. The regulatory
burdens that complicate this program have hindered job
creation, not helped to create a usable work force within
agriculture. While farms utilize all attempts possible to bring
in domestic workers, there comes a point when the H-2A Program
becomes crucial to gaining foreign workers.
If we don't have a reliable work force in agriculture to
plant, pick, cultivate and tend to animals, then our farms will
not survive and job creation throughout New York and the United
States will fail. For every one job on a farm there's a ripple
effect that creates three more jobs off the farm.
With coordination these are problems that can be fixed to
create a usable guestworker program for agriculture. As these
problems are fixed, farms will be able to spend more time
directly working with their employees and tending to the crops
and animals. This opens up opportunities for a strong business
environment and a successful work force on my farm and off the
farm as well.
I look forward to working with the committee on these
important issues. I truly appreciate the opportunity to express
these concerns with you and hope to continue this dialog in the
future. During a time of such economic concern, it is important
to discuss the potential for a stronger, more reliable
agricultural sector which, in turn, will create recovery.
Thank you for the time to discuss this regulatory
impediment on job creation and potential solutions that could
be addressed to lessen the burdens.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mrs. Martin.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Martin follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Mr. Taylor.

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN TAYLOR

Mr. Taylor. Good morning and thank you for allowing me to
testify before you here today.
I am before you as a dairy farmer and a representative of
the New York Farm Bureau, the State's largest general farm
organization. New York Farm bureau represents nearly 30,000
family farm members and I represent the members of the Finger
Lakes region, including orchards, vineyards and wineries,
vegetable growers and other dairies.
I'm a fourth-generation dairy farmer and agriculture has
fundamentally changed from my father's generation. More than
ever, family farms, like where I work, must recognize and adapt
to my generation's new realities--volatility in the global
marketplace, increasing energy costs, and a relentless
regulatory burden being placed on the farm community. Whether
as a blunt sledgehammer or micromanaging guardian, overzealous
regulation is killing our family farms, depriving it of any
potential for growth and eroding our local food infrastructure.
Without question, producers of all sizes and sectors
identify the myriad of regulatory stresses from the Federal and
State level as the No. 1 obstacle to business growth,
profitability, and in some cases, business survival. Government
mandates have become a tangible barrier to our farm families
being able to pass their business on to future generations as
they compete with foreign competitors who do not have to
tolerate such rigorous and expensive regulations. No one wants
lesser quality food from questionable sources, like China, but
with the diminishing number of farms in New York State due to a
hostile regulatory climate, who will be left standing to fill
in the food gap? If food security, public health and
accessibility to local, nutritious, high quality foods are
Federal priorities, then something must be done to reign in the
many regulations that demand extremely high compliance costs
from family farms with very little environmental, public health
or any other beneficial gain.
New York's family farms are experiencing an unprecedented
level of Federal regulatory and agency oversight in the sectors
of environmental management, labor and food safety. Much of
this regulatory activity is being seen in the form of broad-
based mandates that do not take into account existing Federal
and State regulatory and voluntary programs and, most
importantly, do not take into account their success record on
the ground.
While simplistic in theory and implementation, such
mandates are counterproductive in providing effective solutions
for each specific State and waste the limited resources of
farmers, taxpayers and government agencies. For example, the
original draft to the Chesapeake TMDL would have discounted the
progressive best management practices [BMPs] farmers have
installed under the State's Agricultural Environmental
Management program and replaced them with less effective and
more expensive protocols that work against New York's unique
landscape and agricultural traits. In cases like these, farmers
think government should follow the common-sense adage, ``If
it's not broken, don't fix it.''
In the last 6 months alone, New York Farm Bureau has
invested a great deal of time and resources on a number of
regulatory and agency policies that comprehensively will drive
New York family farms, particularly smaller farms, out of
business. For example, the Chesapeake Bay TMDL; NRCS Nutrient
Management Practice Standard Code 590; Greenhouse Gas
Regulation; Duplicate pesticide permitting under the Clean
Water Act; FDA Milk Residue Sampling Assignment; Web based
pesticide labeling; Protection of dairy product identity;
Exclusion of certain vegetables from the school lunch program.
Today I will address three of the most urgent issues:
The EPA has brought agricultural industry under intense
scrutiny for its environmental sustainability. Continually
improving water quality and the environmental conservation is a
paramount priority for New York farmers. While we support the
EPA's intent of improving water here in New York and
nationwide, we do feel that their reasoning and methodology in
development and implementation of certain regulations lack a
foundation in sound science and ignore inherent State-specific
factors that will influence compliance like seasonality and
topography. These regulations also fail to produce any
environmental gain outside of what can already be achieved
through alternate, less costly means that have proven to be
equally effective.
I offer the following examples: To improve and restore
quality in the Chesapeake Bay, the EPA developed a regulatory
framework called the Total Maximum Daily Load [TMDL]. For New
York and the other five States with waters entering the
Chesapeake Bay.
The EPA's draft TMDL was inequitable, unattainable and
threatened the livelihood of all 900 farms in New York and the
Chesapeake Bay area without markedly improving the water
quality for the bay. The EPA's proposed TMDL imposes
disproportionately stringent restrictions and requirements on
New York's farm industry at a cost of billions of dollars in
order to help other States meet their overall TMDL goal.
If intervention was not made by New York Farm Bureau, other
partners and our congressional delegation, the final TMDL, the
farm community would have seen small farms put out of business
and those remaining would have seen large increases in costs,
staff, time and red tape to adhere to the restrictions.
The NRCS Practice Standards provide a suite of tools for
farm site-specific solutions for sustainable environmental
management. In the past, these guidance documents were usually
found on practical, science-based approaches that do not place
undue burden on farm families. NRCS stepped away from this
philosophy with several policy revisions that abandon
scientific justification in place of a one-size-fits-all
mandate. Particularly New York Farm Bureau strenuously opposes
the NRCS proposal to implement a national calendar ban on
nutrient spreading for farms of all sizes and management
levels. A one-size-fits-all Federal practice standard cannot
replicate nutrient use efficiencies, optimum crop response and
environmental gain that Cornell University on-farm research and
trial results have provided to New York farmers to inform their
farm management and business planning decisions.
New York Farm Bureau requests that the committee intervene
with NRCS to withdraw this overreaching policy.
Greenhouses Gases: The EPA is using the authority under the
Clean Air Act to regulate greenhouse gases. Dairy farms with 25
cows or more would be considered a major source of emissions
forced to pay an annual permitting fee of $175 per cow. The
average dairy size in New York is 100 cows. So we have more
than 3,300 dairy farms in New York State that would have to pay
this tax under the EPA greenhouse gas ruling. EPA itself
estimates that 37,000 farms nationwide would be impacted at an
average annual fee of $23,000. In New York we have farms that
would pay in excess yearly of $300,000 for this tax. It's
really difficult, if not impossible, for farmers to control the
amount of emissions from their animals. A natural process for
this regulation is equivalent to a cow-tax penalty just for
growing food. This kind of regulation by the EPA on farms is
not going to provide a positive impact on greenhouse gas on
this country. Instead it's going to be another barrier, another
expense for farmers like myself who are just trying to put milk
or other food on the table.
Another barrier our farmers are facing is duplicative
pesticide permitting structure that EPA has been forced into by
a court decision in January 2009. This court ruling forces
applicators to get a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System permit under the Clean Water Act in addition to the
usual Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act
[FIFRA].
Previously, pesticides governed by FIFRA were exempt from
regulation under the CWA because they go through extensive
testing before they are allowed in the market and applicators
must receive thorough training and follow label guidelines
before they can apply pesticides. Farmers complying with FIFRA
were never intended to be required to receive duplicative
permits. It's like asking someone to have two drivers in the
same State. This duplicative pesticide permit only adds cost
and credit burden on the farmer, opens them up to citizen
lawsuits and there are no additional environmental benefits.
A bill to correct this H.R. 872 was recently passed in the
House of Representatives, but we must ensure that this actually
becomes law to protect farmers from this perversion of the
Clean Water Act.
And going forward, as Congress takes up environmental,
labor, food safety and financial/tax legislation, please be
judicious in your consideration and hold our farm businesses
harmless from overreaching policy. If my children choose to
carry on as the fifth-generation family farm to produce food, I
hope together that we can work to make that happen.
Thank you for your time to speak with you today. We
appreciate your immediate attention and concrete actions to
assist farm families.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much, Mr. Taylor.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Taylor follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Mr. Teeple.

STATEMENT OF JOHN TEEPLE

Mr. Teeple. Thank you and good morning. Thank you for the
opportunity to share with you some of the concerns of the apple
industry.
My name is John Teeple. We are apple growers in Wayne
County. We have been in business for over 50 years. I'm the
third generation. I have two nephews who are going to be fourth
generation. We are also part owners of Lake Country Storage.
It's apple storage that involves 10 other farms and we store
1\1/2\ million bushels of apples. We are also part owners of
the Empire Fruit Growers Coop, another farm coop and packing
facility. I've also served on the Board of the New York Apple
Association and currently on the U.S. Apple Association.
On our farm we have 12 full-time people, and during the
harvest season we will ramp up to around 65 people. At our
packing line and storage facilities we employ approximately 35
full-time people.
I'd like to focus on two issues that I think Mrs. Martin
and Mr. Taylor have done a great job on highlighting some of
those already. Mrs. Martin talked about labor. Labor is
probably the biggest issue for fruit and vegetable farms in the
United States. We need a reliable, legal labor force in this
country. The apple industry is a world market. We ship apples
all over the United States as well as export apples to other
countries. If we are to keep the apple industry in New York, we
must remain competitive. New York State needs approximately
8,000 workers for about 8 weeks to harvest the apple crop of 30
million bushels.
We need a unique labor force to harvest these apples. It
must be physically fit. Picking apples is hard work. They must
be dependable and work 8 to 9 hours per day, 6 days a week.
Apple are very time-sensitive and must be picked at the proper
time. They must have the ability to spot pick apples for color
and size and not to bruise them, so it's a specialized labor
force. There's not many people that meet that criteria and are
waiting for us to give them a job for 8 weeks in the fall, and
certainly not 8,000 when we need them.
At the same time that we are starting the apple harvest,
all of the other apple-related businesses are also gearing up,
the packing lines, the storages, the processing plants like
Motts. Most of our local people prefer these jobs as they're
more long-term, usually 45 to 50 weeks.
So to meet our needs we have to attract migrant labor
workers from around the country. We do this by paying them well
and giving them free housing. We pay by-the-piece rate, which
equates to about $10 to $15 per hour, plus the value of free
housing and utilities which is another $3 per hour.
Much of the employment documentation we are given at the
time of hiring turns out later to be inadequate. This puts the
employer in a position of having to terminate the employee and
possibly face stiff fines, or we have to use the off-shore
labor program, H-2A, which Mrs. Martin detailed very well. The
H-2A Program is administered by the Department of Labor, is
very expensive, it's cumbersome, it's very restrictive as to
the use of the workers and it's unpredictable as to the timing
of when we will receive our workers.
We need agricultural labor reform in this country.
Something like the AgJOBS bill that has been introduced in the
past. We need a legal, migratory work force that's willing and
able to move where the crops need to be harvested. We are
quickly approaching the turning point in this country. If we
are not allowed to import labor to harvest our fruits and
vegetable, we will be importing our fruits and vegetables.
My second point: Exports play a critical role in the
economic vitality of the American apple industry. Promotion
programs established under the Farm Bill help maintain and
increase overseas apple sales. Under these programs, the U.S.
apple growers partner with U.S. Department of Agriculture to
increase consumption of U.S. apples overseas. American apples
are grown commercially in over 30 States. Our $2.2 billion crop
is produced on approximately 350,000 acres of orchards. This
means that over one in every $3 in apple revenue comes from
exports. Our overseas apple sales are critical to our orchards
and the entire apple industry.
The America Access Program referred to as MAP, and the
Technical Assistance For Specialty Crops Program and the
Emergency Emerging Markets Program are part of USDA farm bill.
The industry provides matching funds for the MAP program. These
are good programs, vital to our industry.
I would urge your continued support for these programs in
the new farm bill. I would welcome any questions that you have
at this time and thank you for the opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Teeple follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Thank you all very much.
I think I would like to start, and I'll yield myself 5
minutes for questions, because for many months now, really,
it's been a recurring theme from the dairy industry, from
agriculture, from the apple industry, we need a reliable legal
work force.
So maybe we could spend a little bit of time today having
you tell us, what would that program look like? What would a
stable, reliable, legal work force, what would that process
look like and how can we help to achieve that.
And we can start with each one of you. I'd like to hear
your comments.
Ms. Martin. I think agriculture is very different from most
other industries. We have, as Mr. Teeple mentioned, we have a
short period of time that we need workers. The feeling in the
United States is that those workers are there because there is
unemployment. But you're not going to get somebody to give up
their unemployment--what they may make from unemployment to
come to work on your farm for a short period of time and the
work is very, very hard. It's been documented. I had workers
last year, domestic workers, who came to us--and by domestic we
mean from the United States, not necessarily like a domestic
worker in a home--who came to us and they lasted 4 hours. They
couldn't do the work.
That's not necessarily going to be true, but because that
is generally what happens, we need a program that allows me to
bring workers in. The H-2A Program is the only legal program
that I have available to me at this point. The Federal
Government has--it's not a well-run program. You can do one
thing 1 year and then the next year you do the same thing when
you put in your applications and they'll turn it down. That's
what's called a Deficiency Letter--and for no reason.
We just had a conference call with Congresswoman
Slaughter's office and the U.S. Department of Labor and we
tried to nail them down. Like, you know, we got a Deficiency
Letter because we did not put--we didn't say why we needed more
workers sent in the year before, for example. And they just
automatically threw it out. When we pointed that out to them,
why did that happen? They said, well, you didn't tell us why.
Well, where on the form does it ask us to tell us why? We just
answered the questions on the form. And their answer was, well,
there's no place on the form. You have to write a letter to us.
Well, that kind of thing--and you're also given 3 days to get
this done. So when you receive a Deficiency Letter, you have 3
days to correct it and get it back to them. It's an
impossibility.
Ms. Buerkle. Could I interrupt for a minute?
Currently when you file an application and it has to be
done every year for the temporary employees, and when you do
that, is there a timeframe at which the Department of Labor
must respond to you? Is there an expectation that within 10
days or 30 days, you're going to hear back with a
determination?
Ms. Martin. There is a timeframe and there is an
expectation. We are held to the timeframe. We are hopeful in
our expectations of what's going to happen. The U.S. Department
of Labor does not respond consistently or fairly. That's the
biggest part of the problem. We don't know.
And in agriculture when you have a product or something
that needs to be planted or harvested or cared for and you
count on your employees to be there, and they hold you up for 6
weeks, everything on your farm has been planted, everything has
been ready to go, and they don't--for no good reason that we
can figure it out, don't send you the workers and hold you up,
you've got 6 weeks of something that you have probably just
lost your entire--well, there will be no profit that year. And
there's no good reason and no explanation on their part.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
Mr. Taylor.
Mr. Taylor. Yeah. Dairy farms, at the minimum, need
inclusion into H-2A Program. There have been bills in the past
to try to do that. We do not qualify for H-2A as dairy farms.
We need year-round labor. Even in times of high unemployment,
in the last 4 years we've had three domestic workers come to
the farm and ask for jobs. Two high school young ladies are
helping on the farm, have taken those jobs and are happy to
have them. The other person was not even remotely qualified.
And that's kind of a misnomer with agriculture. A lot of times
people feel these jobs are unskilled and anybody can do them
and it's not true at all. There's a tremendous amount of
technology involved. We need a skilled labor force, and
regardless of pay, which is another misnomer, a domestic
laborer does not want to take jobs on farms unfortunately. So
the challenge for us is to find a labor force and many times
they turn to migrants for that.
One of the other challenges--you asked about is what would
it look like. We need a Visa Program, whatever you want to call
it, a Visa Program, maybe a 3-year Visa that would have to be
renewed for terms of 3 years. We need to bring these people out
of the shadows. Unfortunately the need for people to work here
has been rolled into the whole immigration discussion, and it
almost seems like it will never be solved because there's so
many factors with it. In agriculture we need a Visa Program. We
can't send them all back at once. We--simply farms would have
to shutdown because they could not continue without a labor
force. If you bring them in, make them pay a fine, get a Visa,
the ones who do not come in, those are the ones you need to
chase. If there is an issue, the ones that don't come in are
probably the ones you should go after.
So I would implore you to work for a Visa Program, at the
very least, we need to improve H-2A. Ms. Martin and Mr. Teeple
have talked about that quite a bit. We need a stable, reliable
work force, and Visa Program, if we could get one in place and
try to separate it from the emigration discussion as a full
package would help us tremendously.
Ms. Buerkle. Mr. Teeple.
Mr. Teeple. I would agree with Mr. Taylor. A Visa Program
to address the issue of the people that are here. You know,
there's an estimated 8 to 12 million undocumented workers here
in the United States. I think we estimate approximately 2
million work in agriculture. These people want to be legal.
They want to be able to come and work, and they want to be able
to go home. The current system has trapped them here. Right now
they don't dare go home because they can't get back across the
border. We agree, and I think in agriculture we agree that we
want secure borders. We need to make a provision for these
people legally to be here.
We had these 8 to 12 million undocumented workers working
here in the United States while we had almost full employment
in this country. It's a different labor force than the labor
force that's currently unemployed, especially for fruits and
vegetables where we need this migratory labor force.
The H-2A Program works sort of, but these people can't move
around the country. If you have an H-2A person come to your
farm, they can only work for your farm for that specific
purpose. They can't go to your neighbor if he needs work. A lot
of our help migrate around the country. Most of our people are
picking blueberries before they come and pick apples. That
won't work under the H-2A Program. We need the H-2A Program
changed and we need a Visa Program.
Ms. Buerkle. So you're talking having two separate programs
when you say improve the H-2A or have the Visa or both?
Mr. Teeple. Both. You need to address this population
that's here.
Ms. Buerkle. And the dairy industry has been excluded from
the H-2A Program because it's year round?
Mr. Taylor. Yes. Exactly. Under H-2A, I believe the maximum
is 8 to 10 months that you are able to continuously stay here.
I may be wrong on that, but--it's 10 months. OK.
And the dairy industry, we need laborers year round and
continuous and it's very--well, it's not allowed, but it would
be very difficult if it was allowed under the eight to 10-month
guideline. It would have to be allowed for year round work.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
I yield to Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
A question for all of you. This is not all that involved. I
don't know if you were here for the previous group. I'm an
automobile dealer by trade.
But my experience has been the people that come in to talk
to me never had any experience in what it is that I do. And
they've never actually done the job nor been involved with
anything of that job. They may be very good with laptops, but
when it comes to actually doing the job and understanding what
it is, the challenges that you all go through, if you could,
just help us. The people that you talk to, any of them have any
experience? Anybody ever sit down with you--and we have
something in the automobile industry called 20 groups where you
get 20 people of like size in different areas of the country,
sit down and discuss common problems and come up with solutions
that make sense.
I would suggest that's really where we seem to be dropping
the ball here. I don't know anybody that I have ever talked to
that's done an audit at my place that had any idea what it is
that I do.
So if you could--and you all are in agriculture, different
parts of it.
Ms. Martin. I think you're absolutely right. Most of the
general public knows about farming from what they hear, and
what they hear is advocate, labor advocates who have the
funding to be out there and to stage things, stage
presentations on how bad farmers are.
I think most people, my friends, most of my friends are
teachers. They're not in agriculture and they look at me kind
of, really, like if I have a thought that's important, it's
like, wow. You know, so you kind of have to overcome that a
bit.
But the other thing is, no, I think most people think we
pay minimum wage or we try to pay less than minimum wage.
That's not true. The Adverse Effect Wage Rate which is the
required wage for an H-2A worker is $10.65. I pick my workers
up at their house in Mexico; I get their Visas; I pay all their
expenses up to my house; I pay for their food even while they
travel; I provide free housing; take them to the store; take
them to the doctors; whatever they need, and that's in
addition--and then I send them home. And lately we've been
flying them home because of the border problems in Mexico.
That's in addition to the $10.65 an hour that they earn here.
That may not seem like had a great deal in industry, but
when you add in all the other things, it's really not a--it's
not an inexpensive way for us to run our business and it's not
a cheap wage for the workers.
So, no, I don't think people do know what we do. And we're
really too busy to do what we do to get ourselves out there to
share that. We also lobby in Washington DC and in Albany.
Mr. Taylor. This is a very interesting question for us
because it really hits home. And Congresswoman Buerkle's
district especially now, we're dealing--especially on
environmental issues. The non-farm community at large doesn't
understand what we do and why we need to do it and the amount
of regulation that we're under.
We have individuals in communities here who have tried to
make people believe that we're bad and that alls we want to do
is pollute the environment, which nothing else could be further
from the truth. Particularly in Wayne County now we have been
dealing with a group of three or four people that have spent a
lot of time, have a lot of time, sending us this message
against agriculture.
A number of us in the ``Ag'' community have stepped up and
tried to hold community meetings to educate them. We've brought
in people from Cornell. This Saturday we just had a tour on a
1,000 cow dairy to talk about methane digesters and other
things. And to really try to educate the non-farm public about
what farms are doing to protect the environment, which is a
tremendous amount. And yet, we still have people with ideas
that we aren't doing anything.
One thing that I did talk about at the Chesapeake Bay, one
interesting fact about that: New York is far and above a lot of
other States in the country in its environmental protection and
we're thankful for that and farmers have worked to embrace
that. We have medium sized CAFOs as well as large CAFOs based
on size.
The U.S. geographical survey just inside Pennsylvania shows
that the water leaving New York is clean. And if it were the
same water that reached the bay, the bay would not be impaired
and we would not be facing this Chesapeake Bay clean up.
So we've always tried to point out to people we're doing
everything we can, but sometimes it's a very difficult message
for us to get through and get people to understand. If we are
going to grow food in this country--and we have a tremendous
ability to grow food in this country. Globally in less than 40
years we have to increase our food production globally by 40
percent. That's the way we need to look at our food production,
is globally. There will be over 9 billion on the planet and how
are we going to do it? This country is positioned to do that.
We are environmentally sound; we have good management
practices; we produce a high-quality product and it's safely
done. Other countries like China, Mexico and Brazil, if we
don't do it, they're going to do it for us. And they will feed
the world and I don't think we want that.
So we certainly do have a number of challenges getting
people to understand what we're doing and why we're doing it
and the need for us to be able to do it. You can't move my farm
to China, but China will do the job for us. So I think it would
be better suited for us to realize that we can protect the
environment and produce a high-quality product.
Mr. Teeple. Ninety-eight percent of the farms in America
are family owned farms. We have our children, our relatives.
We're working on our farms. We're concerned about our farms;
concerned about the land. We're good stewards of the land. We
seem to be labeled as corporate farms; most of us are
corporations for business reasons. That doesn't mean that we're
still not family farms. We, you know, I think as I pointed out
in my testimony, I think we're going to be reaching a point
with high-labor farming in the fruits and vegetables that
either we import this labor to harvest these crops or we will
be importing our food. We can go the same way that the garment
industry did in this country.
In the northeast we used to have a lot of garment
factories. They didn't just all disappear overnight. Slowly
they started moving. The same thing is happening right now with
fruits and vegetables. The California area, it's very easy to
cross the border and have that produced in Mexico and it's
happening now. I don't think in this country that we want to
give up our production of food and especially on fruits and
vegetables.
Mr. Kelly. But do you have a chance--I mean the people that
come to see you, do you have a chance to review with them or do
they have any idea when they come there what it is that you do?
My whole concern is most of the people I talked to in these
agencies and bureaucracies never have done the job that they're
trying to regulate and that's scary to me.
Mr. Teeple. It is scary.
Mr. Kelly. And most of them have no clue. Thank you.
Ms. Buerkle. If I might, I just have a couple more
questions I want to flesh through a little bit more this labor
issue because it seems to be something that I've heard about
and is a big issue.
In New York State we have lost so much industry, and we are
fortunate to have agriculture and dairy farming. The
industries--that's one of the leading industries in this State.
So we need to work hard to ensure your success. And as we
talked about in the previous panel, to get the government out
of the way so you can do what you know how to do and what you
do best.
Regarding the labor issue, what are you hearing is the
impediments? Why can't this be streamlined? The Department of
Labor--or who you have talked to? What is the impediment? Why
won't they talk about reforming the process so you can get
people here reliably, get them back home when the season is
over with, and get what you need rather than the situation as
it is? What are the obstacles? What are you hearing.
Mr. Teeple. It's a huge problem. We're talking
comprehensive immigration, and it becomes larger. It's like the
comprehensive health care plan, and we've seen all the concerns
around that.
Immigration is probably larger than the health care plan as
far as it's issues. Because of that, it's difficult to tackle.
And with high unemployment, it's politically poisoned talking
about bringing in foreign workers. You know, maybe we need to
divide it up in pieces and work at it in smaller pieces.
Ms. Buerkle. I heard testimony, though, that the folks you
bring in to work don't want to stay here. They want to go back
home and then come back when it's time to work again. Is that
your experience?
Mr. Teeple. There's some of both, but a lot of the younger
fellas come and work and would like to go home. Usually in the
apple industry, speaking for apples, these folks have worked in
other areas of the country, working with sweet corn in some
places, watermelon, peppers and blueberries and apples are
about the end of the crop. We finish the first, second week in
November. A lot of them would like to go home for Christmas. A
lot of them don't dare.
Ms. Martin. I think your question of what needs to be done
to be fixed, that's the big question. We don't know. We don't
know why the impediments are there. It gets worse and worse
every year.
Our feeling as farmers is that they want to do away with
the H-2A Program, and also our feeling as farmers is that is
only legal option, we have to get go legal workers here. We're
trying to work within the system. Immigration, if you took
immigration aside and didn't even deal with immigration, we're
just asking for a legal work force anyway we can do it.
The impediments that the Federal Government is putting out
there, to us, make no sense. There's no reason. And we actually
ask--I personally ask the Department of Labor, the U.S.
Department of Labor, give me the name of someone I can contact
when I have a question--I had trouble between the State
Department of Labor and the Federal Department of Labor--just
give me a name so I don't have to just keep trying to work my
way up to an answer.
And their answer to me was, ``Well, on our Web site we have
a box that says ``help'' and you click the box and then you'll
get help. Well, it doesn't work. In an ideal world it would
work, but there's no one there who really is answering and
there's no one who wants to say, ``My name is so and so and I'm
going to give you this answer.'' I think that may be the way
the agencies work. But we have no answers and that's what we
would like to get to the bottom of. Just give us a program that
works--make the program work.
Ms. Buerkle. Have your organizations, have you put together
some piece of legislation or some kind of dream piece of
legislation, have you begun to put together what a good H-2A
Program would look like and could we, you know, get that from
you so we can begin to look at this process that would work? I
think you're right, maybe the issue to break it down and not
look at immigration like this, but look at a legal, safe work
program as a small piece.
Mr. Teeple. The jobs bill that has been introduced a number
of times in the past addresses the H-2A Program and the Visa
Program. It's a good piece of legislation but it just hasn't
garnered enough support to work through Congress.
Mr. Taylor. I know the New York Farm Bureau has made
several attempt to make changes to H-2A and to push for ``Ag''
jobs and other things and, unfortunately, we have not been able
get things to move through.
And, yes, some of the things that we've seen that have been
impediments to this, one example of something in H-2A that's
really absurd. Workers are required to apply online in their
own country. Most countries that these workers are coming from
to find a computer and then to understand how to use one, it
isn't even practical. So farms are actually paying people to go
down there, to get--find workers, help them apply online for
the H-2A Program to get them here. And it's things like that.
We have a fruit and vegetable grower in Ontario County,
that the way to--you have to start earlier and earlier in this
process each year--he's one of the largest cabbage growers in
the State--and 2 years ago his workers were supposed to arrive
on May 15th. June 15th he still didn't have workers. By the
time it was full cabbage planting time, he had help from his
neighbors and friends and other farms. Literally he had over 90
people on the payroll in 1 week just to plant cabbage. He had
no workers under H-2A until July 15th. There's horror story
after horror story like that.
If this is the program we are going to use, we need to have
it standardized and make some changes to it. And the other
issue is the rules have changed several times in the last 5
years. We had what we call the Bush Rules, then President Obama
came in, then we had the Obama Rules, and there were lawsuits.
That was upheld. We're going to stay with the Bush Rules for a
while. Now we're back to the Obama Rules. So the constant flux
and no improvements to the program is not helping call.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. I had one last question and I think, Ms. Martin,
you talked about it.
Because there's a feeling out there that when we say what
the minimum wage is, people write in there mind, look at what
the established Federal wages, in your case maybe it's New York
State. It actually has nothing to do with the effect of minimum
wage which is driven by the region you work in. It's the total
wage that you pay, because I think you said, it was $10 to $15,
plus transportation, plus lodging, plus, plus, plus. So your
minimum wage, your effective minimum wage, is the total,
cumulative value or amount, or the amount that you spend--and I
think that--and one of the things we're finding out when we
hold these hearings--and I don't mean this in anyway
disrespectful--the American people, if you were to ask them
where milk comes from, it's from the grocery store. Because
that's the way we've grown up.
But when it comes time to talk about what we have to pay
people--and I think this is the thing that bothers me--because
they're only minimum-wage jobs. Nobody has the idea of what a
minimum wage actually means to an employer.
So if each of you could tell me, what's your effective
minimum wage? It's not what's being posted as the minimum wage,
because I can't hire anybody at that. In my area I've got to
pay them much more than that.
So if you could just maybe talk just a tiny bit about that,
because I think it's important for folks to understand what
that dollar amount actually is.
Ms. Martin. Well, as I mentioned on the H-2A Program, it's
called an Adverse Effect Wage Rate that is set by the
government, and that right now is $10.25 an hour. Our average
workers--I would say, we have what's a cabbage line, we have
processing. I think the minimum that--and they all receive free
housing too. So I would say that normally on a farm you're
probably paying for a part-time worker; you're probably paying
$12 and probably--and some of our supervisors--you're probably
paying--and they get houses. I mean, these are not small little
places. So if you figure that in, they're probably getting $30
an hour.
I mean, some our supervisors who started out as a migrant
labor are making about $72,000 a year. And that is before you
get to their housing, before you get to all the things that
farms do. I don't think--I don't think that's--I don't think
that's out of line with what other people pay, but because we
aren't out there speaking for ourselves and--actually we've
learned in agriculture that you have to fly a little bit below
the radar. That's unfortunate.
I want to stand up and say, ``Hey, look it. I'm proud to be
a farmer and this is what we do and this is what we do in our
community,'' but I can't say it. Even in church I have to
listen, while we're taking up a collection for the ``poor
migrant farm workers.'' I'm like, I know what these ``poor
migrant farm workers'' are making. Lets build a little bit of
self esteem for them also. They're hard workers. They work
harder than most Americans I have had on my farms. So I think
they are well paid, and I think that they're extended family. I
don't think they get the credit that they deserve, and I think
we are blacklisted as employers who like to keep people down.
Mr. Taylor. On our operation the wage rate is from $8 to
$16 an hour. That also does not include housing. So it's
different for everybody, their skill level and time in
agriculture. So there's a varying scale for us.
Also I'd like to, you know, one thing that doesn't get
talked about a lot, people think that we set the wage rate as
employers and nothing could be further from the truth. The
employees set the wage rate. They know what they are----
Mr. Kelly. It's market driven.
Mr. Taylor [continuing]. It's market driven. They know what
they're--we like to say, ``They speak with their feet.'' If you
don't pay them enough and they are good workers, they're going
to go somewhere else and find another job.
Mr. Teeple. Excellent point. People aren't staying on our
farms. We're not forcing them to stay. They can go any place
they want to.
On our farm we pay by the piece rate, which most apple
picking is done by the piece rate. People aren't picking apples
for minimum wage; it's hard work. These people want to make
some money and they're making--on our farm the minimum would be
$10 an hour, most of our people are making $12 to $15 an hour
and receiving free housing and utilities, which I figure is
worth about another $3 per hour.
Mr. Kelly. I think this is the problem. Because we talk
about the domestic work force that doesn't want to do these
jobs because they're minimum-wage jobs. Just because it's
posted as $7.25 an hour, that's not what you pay. You pay what
the market in your area demands that you pay.
And I think--I mean, we've got a huge problem in our
country branding it for what it is and marketing it for what it
is and having to reaching frequency out there. When I talk to
people, they say I won't work for $7.25 an hour. I say, you
know what, not only you, but nobody else I've ever hired will
work for that. So I'm on board with you.
But you know what? We have an uphill battle with this
because minimum wage is certainly not the way it's being played
out. Thank you so much. Appreciate it.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you all very much.
We want to thank you for the hard work all three of the
industries that have been represented here today represent
years and generations of hard work and commitment, and we want
to thank you for that.
Thank you for what you bring to the upstate economy and to
the State of New York, and we look forward to working with you
to try to resolve some of these problems, and thank you so much
for being here this morning.
Ms. Buerkle. We will now welcome our third panel of
witnesses for this morning's hearing.
This morning we have Ms. Maggie Brooks, who is the county
executive of Monroe County; Jolene Bender, the town supervisor
for Marion, New York; and last, but certainly not least,
Sheriff Barry Virts, and he is the sheriff of Wayne County.
Welcome to all of you and thank you for being here. As is
the rule of the Oversight Committee that we will swear you in.
Would you please stand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Ms. Buerkle. Please let the record reflect that all
witnesses answered in the affirmative. Thank you.
We are very pleased to have you here this morning to
conclude our third panel of testimony regarding how the
government, the Federal Government, with its whole host of
regulations gets in the way of success. We've heard from
industries about small business as well as the agriculture
industry.
Now it's our pleasure to welcome all of you to speak about
municipalities and what the Federal Government is doing to
impede your success as well as affect the cost of doing
business in your municipalities in Monroe County.
With that I will start with Ms. Bender.

STATEMENTS OF JOLENE BENDER, SUPERVISOR, TOWN OF MARION, NY;
MAGGIE BROOKS, COUNTY EXECUTIVE, MONROE COUNTY, NY; AND BARRY
VIRTS, SHERIFF, WAYNE COUNTY, NY

STATEMENT OF JOLENE BENDER

Ms. Bender. Thank you. Greetings, Congresswoman Buerkle,
members of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform and
guests.
My name is Jolene Bender, supervisor of the Town of Marion
in Wayne County. I appreciate the opportunity to highlight some
of the regulatory changes placed upon the town and local
government by Washington.
I'd like to state that it is my belief that local
government is a government closest to the people. The key to
our success at the local level is the expansion of, and
improvements to, water lines, wastewater treatment and highway
infrastructure improvements. I appreciate your support which
allows local municipalities to buildupon their existing
infrastructure. We cannot build on the opportunity or create
jobs or enhance the movement of persons into our communities
without improvements to our basic infrastructure.
Some of the issues that I have faced with regard to water
district expansion and extension are:
One, often co-funding by more than one funding agency is
necessary to make a project affordable; however, the funding
agencies do not seem to work together to facilitate the co-
funding.
Each agency has different requirements for application
packages. Consequently, municipalities are forced to prepare
and submit separate applications packages to each agency which
unreasonably adds costs, and prolongs the application process.
Two, next, each agency interprets the National
Environmental Policy Act [NEPA], requirements differently.
Consequently each agency requires separate NEPA reviews which
differ from other. Rather than confusion, these funding
agencies should, if possible, accept one NEPA standard for all
sources of Federal funding. Why can't you have one simple
standard that all Federal agencies can share and adhere to.
Three, Federal funding agencies often require the
commitment co-funded project. But when a town does not have
that seed money to make a commitment before it is funded, that
makes it difficult to obtain a funding commitment from other
agencies. No one wants to be the first to make a commitment
toward a project.
Funding agencies change their application requirements
frequently, and if their request for information needed to be
submitted, they often make those changes mid-stream and worse
after a municipality has already submitted its application, or
is in the process of tying to prepare one. Frequent changes
that lead to extreme confusion and contribute to delay because
the municipalities have to scramble to assemble all those
additional documents and all that new information required to
satisfy those revised requirements.
For instance, one recent change that was created a lot of
extra work that delayed one application was the requirement
that towns must now provide consumption figures and a head
count of residential and non-residential units within the
town's existing water or sewer districts before we could be
considered for funding. I expect this helps to show
justification for the money to be spent, but the requirement is
just too difficult.
Five, Rural Development has also made a recent change in
the procedures. It eliminated the agency's pre-eligibility
determination PED and the funding package estimate which the
agency would offer when the full application was submitted.
This makes it difficult or even impossible, for towns to
establish water districts when they require the New York State
Comptroller's approval. The State Comptroller's Office will not
take into consideration potential funding from Rural
Development unless that agency provides an upfront written
estimate of its funding package. As a result, the State
comptroller will not approve the formation of those water or
sewer districts. This situation hinders municipalities in their
attempts to create water districts, and it also prevents them
from garnering bonus points for project readiness which can
improve the competitiveness of their project, and improves the
chances of that project being funded sooner.
For me, personally, my Town of Marion has a wastewater
treatment plant problem. The EPA and the DEC are moving toward
stricter limits on discharge water quality which may force us
to build a new treatment plant. All indications are that they
will increase discharge requirements upon small rural
communities, those with 500 users or less and with a discharge
into existing streams of 125,000 gallons per day. This will
result in drastic increases to our cost of compliance, which
then has to be passed through to my community as increased user
fees which they cannot afford. The Town of Marion is one such
community where increased user fees would result from
renovating, upgrading and replacing existing wastewater
treating facilities to meet those higher discharge standards
and requirements, however, those higher standards do not seem
required or justified.
It would be more prudent to study the present impact on
existing water qualities prior to discharge and after discharge
to determine if water quality is actually being adversely
affected by the discharge. If water quality is not being
adversely affected, then the burden placed upon small
communities to meet unnecessary stricter limits appears
unreasonable, especially during these more difficult economic
times. While it is important to strive for and achieve high
water quality, it's also important to consider that the
stricter limits, once imposed, merely result in hardship to my
local community, without a substantial impact upon the water
quality discharged to a local waterway, then why should we do
it?
In closing, anything you can do to address the above type
of issues and concerns and which would assist Marion to
increase its efficiency and effectiveness, will be greatly
appreciated. Thank you.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bender follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. County Executive Brooks.

STATEMENT OF MAGGIE BROOKS

Ms. Brooks. Well, thank you very much for the opportunity,
and certainly there's no issue of greater importance to all of
us in government than to strengthen the local economy and to be
able to create jobs. It's certainly our priority.
Although government doesn't create jobs, we are certainly
at the table working tirelessly to foster the environment that
increases economic development opportunity and certainly allows
business to grow and expand and to create jobs in the private
sector.
There are a number of things that we do locally by
maintaining a stable tax rate, providing affordable financing
and incentives, through our Industrial Development Agency.
Monroe County is certainly at the table each and every day to
assist businesses to improve and expand their operations
locally.
Despite this activity at the local, there are a number of
Federal regulations that when coupled with the cost of unfunded
mandates--and you hear us talk about that all the time--has led
to enormously high property taxes that have threatened our
economic prosperity by driving businesses, jobs and young
talents away from our State in search of greater opportunities
elsewhere.
Certain Federal regulations have grown increasingly
detrimental to the small to mid-sized companies that have
become this region's economic bread and butter. For example,
the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006
and 2008 hinders small businesses looking to become
subcontractors on large Federal contracts, because it's not
cost effective for them. Federal reporting requirements are the
same for a prime contractor who has a multi-million dollar
contract as it is for a small contractor who's doing $25,000
worth of the work. These reporting requirements for small
business include salaries and bonuses of officers, pension
values, specifics on compensation in excess of $10,000. This
rule highly discourages small business from bidding and
securing subcontracts on Federal projects as the cost of
monitoring and reporting outweighs the profit.
Another impediment to local economic development in Monroe
County is a requirement under the U.S. Small Business
Administration 504 Program. The 504 Program is widely used in
this community. It requires that one job be created for every
$65,000 in Federal funds borrowed. The amount should be
increased to one job for every $100,000 borrowed to allow
businesses to focus on investing in the new technology required
to remain competitive in a global economy.
Often times in government too much emphasis is placed on a
company's head count. What often gets neglected is a company's
investment in the economy. Investing in capital equipment is
often a great indicator of positive economic growth.
Federal regulations can also indirectly impact local
economic development efforts by forcing counties to pick up the
cost of unfunded mandates leaving little left over for economic
development initiatives that put people to work and strengthen
the economy.
One example is New York State changing their interpretation
of a current Federal transpiration regulation. The State's new
interpretation requires transportation departments to obtain
temporary easements for right-of-way acquisitions instead of
grading release.
In the past, these projects only required a grading
release, which is, in essence, an unofficial handshake for a
use of a property and only required a grading release that was
inexpensive, yet effective. The new requirements adds thousands
of dollars in cost to project totals and prohibits construction
from moving forward in an efficient manner.
It's critical that New York State use the original
requirements for right-of-way acquisition so costs are not
eventually shifted on to the taxpayer or back to the State and
Federal Governments who often pay a portion of a county's
transportation project costs.
Another Federal transportation regulation that is impacting
counties is the requirement to replace all street signs with
new higher visibility road signs. Monroe County has estimated
that this new mandate will cost $3 million in this community
alone.
A new Federal environmental services regulation will soon
change the way counties are required to clean up storm water
runoff with no long-term funding source to do so. This new
regulation has the potential to add significant cost to the
planning, design and construction of new economic development
projects.
When we get into the question-and-answer phase, I do have
three people here with me: Mike Garland from our Environment
Services Department; Judy Styler, Economic Development
Director; and Terry Rice, our Transportation Director, because
they are the detailed people.
In closing, I will just mention one other thing that we
discovered in a very real way during the distribution of the
stimulus moneys.
A lot of counties like ours were unable to apply those
dollars because the requirements needed to take a property from
idea to shovel-ready status made it impossible for us to ever
have a project ready to receive stimulus fund designed to
create jobs. So certainly when you talk about environmental
regulations and some of the permitting processes that local
governments have to go through to make sites shovel-ready, it's
an impediment to us being able to help business on the local
level.
And Medicaid is my final word. I don't have to say anything
about Medicaid today. You know that is the cost dragger of
property taxes mainly in New York State. So that's a whole
different testimony.
But thank you for the opportunity today.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Brooks follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Sheriff Virts.

STATEMENT OF BARRY VIRTS

Sheriff Virts. Representative Buerkle, Representative
Kelly, thank you for the opportunity to testify before your
subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs Stimulus Oversight and
Government Spending.
My topic is the Prison Rape Elimination Act [PREA]. Several
years ago Congress passed the Prison Rape Elimination Act
[PREA]. I'm sure everyone is in favor of eliminating rape in
prisons, but I'm not sure PREA will accomplish that. What I am
sure it will do is add cost to the operation of county jails
around the country. The act did not spell out how prison rape
was going to be eliminated, but left it to the Attorney General
of the United States to specify regulations that would
accomplish it. The Attorney General proposed standards
implementing PREA were published on the Federal Registry on
February 3, 2011.
The PREA standards apply not only to Federal and State
prisons which are designated to hold long-term prisoners, but
also to the county jails that which are designed for short-term
incarceration of persons awaiting trials and those serving a
sentence of 1 year or less.
Most New York State sheriffs, like their counterparts in
other parts of the country, are the chief law enforcement
officers of their representative counties and the
administrators of the county jail. Sheriffs take seriously
their responsibility to operate the county jail safely and
securely for public safety and for inmates in their care and
custody.
We recognize the critical issues related to the sexual
assaults of inmates while incarcerated and understand the need
to take reasonable steps to prevent any such abuse. Sheriffs
know that sexual misconduct have no place in a professionally
and morally run correctional environment. We also know that
rape, especially inmate-on-inmate rape, is much less of an
occurrence in county jails than in prisons due in part to the
short-term stay of the most county jail inmates, their local
community connections, their opportunity for and ease of
visitation for family and friends.
It is clear that many of the proposed PREA standards,
although perhaps appropriately designed for prisons, will apply
equally but inappropriately to county jails. Prison systems are
generally much larger than county jails and they are intended
for long-term stays. PREA does not really recognize the
difference in the two types of correctional facilities, prison
systems and county jails.
Imposing burdensome standards on county jail facilities
would be impractical even in the best economic times.
The inmate population turnover and county jails is
frequent. In 2010 Wayne County incarcerated 1,719 inmates with
55 percent, or 945 inmates, being released in the first 72
hours of incarceration. Under these conditions, many of the
proposed standards could not be implemented effectively, yet
many of the proposed standards would impose huge costs on our
small county jails to address a problem that occurs primarily
in the large prison systems around the Nation.
For example, PREA would impose stringent rules which many
county jails lack sufficient physical facilities to comply with
those rules. Counties would be faced the with the enormous and
burdensome cost of building appropriate space, or the enormous
and burdensome cost for litigation and sanctions for violating
the standards.
The proposed standards which require each jail to collect
and report detailed data and to hire an independent auditor to
assess a jail's compliance with PREA. Most jails, certainly all
of New York State county jails, already have detailed data
collection and reporting obligations to their State oversight
agency. In our case the New York State Commission of
Corrections. Adding a Federal layer of audit will only add a
financial burden and will create conflicting obligations
between State and Federal mandates.
Again, all sheriffs recognize that inmates should be free
from sexual assault while incarcerated. Washington should not
presume that sheriffs will not do the right thing unless
mandated in minute detail by a Washington rule.
Congress should not leave it to a Federal agency to
determine how a sheriff can best accomplish his or her
obligation to operate a safe, secure and humane county jail
facility. The safety, security and good working order of a
county jail is best determined on a State and county level with
a sheriff administering his or her county jail, not
Washington's one-size-fit-all regulations.
[The prepared statement of Sheriff Virts follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Sheriff Virt, and thank you to all
three panelists.
I will begin by yielding myself 5 minutes, and I have
questions for each one of the panelists.
Ms. Bender, I'd like to start with you. You mentioned the
EPA imposing stricter standards on water quality. How did that
come to be and what is the stricter standard and how will that
impact you?
Ms. Bender. I'm not really sure how it came to be, but
about a year and a half ago the Town of Marion asked engineers
to do a study about our wastewater treatment plant. It's
approximately 30 years old as is most wastewater treatment
plant are in rural upstate New York. So we thought we were
being proactive in asking for an engineering study to see what,
in future, was going to have to be done.
They did the report. The result was we probably were going
to have to invest $5.4 million to make improvements to our
wastewater treatment plant. The problem is we had approximately
500 users to that plant and the cost to those users is going to
be astronomical. We can't afford it. We are a wastewater
treatment plant, little plug, our operator was just named
Operator of the Year, so he knows what he's doing.
And we feel that the water that we're discharging after it
goes through this cycle is as clean as the water coming into
the plant. So we don't understand why the DEC, via the EPA, are
saying that we have to make improvements to our plant to that
extent.
Ms. Buerkle. And so that $5.4 million, that increase in
cost would be because your complying with this standard?
Ms. Bender. Correct. We know probably some improvements
need to be made. We don't believe they need to be made to that
extent. And it is happening across the region that DEC and EPA
are looking at these plants, probably justifiably so, but we
would love to do it, we just can't afford it.
Ms. Buerkle. The other issue I wanted to ask you about was
the co-funding issue.
Can you--that was sort of a generic, the co-funding
problem. Is that a specific issue with you? Is that one
instance where this happened or what were the agencies involved
and what were the problems.
Ms. Bender. First I'd like to say, the agencies we worked
with, the people are wonderful.
A few years ago--well, about 10 years ago Marion seriously
started looking into extension of water districts and
expansions, simply because probably only at that point only a
quarter of our town was covered by municipal water, and people
were, rightfully so, demanding water. So we started looking
into it and got one or two projects done through rural
development. And then maybe 5 or 6 years ago co-funding was
like the thing you were supposed to do. So we would look at co-
funding with rural development and small cities. And they both
expect different information out of us via this dual
applications. And, of course, that would take twice the time
and cost the town twice the money to have the engineers and
administers do all that work.
So we found it very difficult. We were fortunate enough to
get one program funding, but one of the main reasons that was
probably funded is it was a joint municipal project with
another town, and between the co-funding and joint municipal
work, that was very favorable. It was a lot of work.
From the time we look at these projects and the time we
begin getting them into the ground is at least 2 years. People,
you know, on a weekly basis, are calling my office. They want
municipal water; we want to get it to them, but it's a
difficult process.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
County Executive Brooks. There's so many things I could ask
you about from your testimony this morning.
I think you mentioned about expanding and the importance of
the 504 Program where you talk about, it should be raised from
$60,000 to $100,000. Just so you know, the Federal stimulus
bill only created one job for $300,000.
I wanted to talk to you a little bit about this Federal
regulation, the transportation regulation, with the street
signs. Can you expand on that and what's expected of the county
and what drove that change in legislation.
Ms. Brooks. Yeah. And Terry Rice could certainly add what
drove it. I don't have the answer to that, but he can add that
to the testimony.
There is a requirement that communities change all of their
street signs, their existing street signs, from lower case to
capital letters. And there's a deadline in which we have to
comply with that. And for this community it's about a $3.6
million cost and we're just one county, you know, across this
great Nation.
What we propose, as an alternative, is that local
communities manage the condition of their street signs. And as
we go out and make changes to those street signs, as we have to
do, we can certainly comply with the Federal requirement. But
to just say, let's go out and replace signs, some of which are
very new, just doesn't make sense to me. And it really is, I
think, when we look at some of the poster-child examples of,
you know, mandates that don't make sense, to me that's a
glaring one because it's just a waste of money and $3 million
that we could put to good use elsewhere.
I know--and again, Terry could probably add to this--that
there were some thought that, you know, people couldn't see the
signs. You know, as the population ages and our eyesight--you
know, all the reasons that really just don't make sense. It's
kind of an excuse to go out there and replace all these signs
when we don't need to. So we have struggled with how we're
going to pay for it, quite honestly.
Ms. Buerkle. So the county would fund the sign replacement?
Ms. Brooks. We would have to pay for the replacement. And
in Monroe County, we are the traffic department for the city of
Rochester and all 19 towns and villages, so, you know, this is
quite an endeavor.
Ms. Buerkle. And, basically, it's just from lower caps to
capital letters?
Ms. Brooks [continuing]. Capital letters and more
reflectivity requirements as well.
You know, I think within the mandate there's probably some
valuable rationale, but to just say, you have to do it now--let
us figure--you know, say this is what--here's the goal. Let the
local communities figure out how we get there and how we manage
the resources to pay for it.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
While we have the opportunity, I would be interested--I
know Medicaid is such a significant issue for the counties and
what it does to your property taxes. With regards to, and I
digress just a little bit, the block. Does it help or does it
not make a difference, if we talk about Medicaid being a block
grant funding to the State, rather than the way it is now, in
the proposed budget, does that help the county? Does it impact
on you at all.
Ms. Brooks. It depends, again, you know, we're so reliant
on the State and one of our frustrations is, in New York State,
the counties pay for 25 percent of the program. And I believe
there are only two States left where the counties actually have
a financial stake in the Medicaid program. But we are very
reliant, 100 percent reliant, on the State making the
decisions.
I'm a big believer that the cost of a program needs to
reside with the level of government that has the decisionmaking
authority over it. Obviously, we're working with the State to
try and take over Medicaid.
It's, you know, we have property taxes 79 percent above the
national average here. Medicaid is the cost driver. We did a
study, my colleagues across the State, there are nine programs,
Medicaid being the largest, that consumes--nine programs that
consume 90 percent of the county property tax levy statewide.
So take everything we collect, 90 percent of that is paying
for nine programs and Medicaid is the largest, because we don't
know what that would look like. But to the extent that the
counties have to bear such a big portion of that program, it's
certainly of concern to us, and we are always involved in that
conversation.
Here in Monroe County we've spent $315 million on Medicaid
since 2009. So it's a growing problem. I spent 15 months on the
Federal Medicaid Commission. A lot of smart people around that
table, myself excluded, but a lot of smart people working on
how we can rein in a program that's lived well beyond it's
means. And certainly the Federal aspect of it, you know, it's
become a universal health care program, not in just New York
State, but across this country. We have Medicaided everybody
that doesn't have insurance or who is underinsured.
If you want to talk about taxpayer burden, that's probably,
again, a whole different session, but clearly a concern here in
New York State.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
Sheriff Virts, just briefly. I know I've gone over my 5
minutes--Mr. Kelly will yield.
Mr. Kelly. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Buerkle. This PREA, is there a date that the Attorney
General's Office has for compliance?
Sheriff Virts. Not that I have seen for the New York State
Sheriff's Association. We've got a committee statewide. I know
Sheriff O'Flynn here in Monroe County also has a
representative, as I do from my office. But we have not heard
when it would be imposed.
A facility like Monroe County that houses somewhere between
1,200 and 1,400 inmates a day, could possibly have to put two,
three or four employees on. I would be forced to put a full-
time employee on to interview every inmate that came through. I
already have 70 officers and 140 inmates today in the facility.
I think it's burdensome. Because of the programs that we have
built since 2000, also all the audits that we have done, I have
a Federal team that comes in every January that's there for a
week, five people for a week. I have the State Commission of
Corrections that comes in 2 or 3 days twice a year. The
Department of Health comes in and inspects. The Department of
Education comes in because jails have to provide education to
16 to 20 year olds for 3 hours a day. So we basically have
schools in our jails. Plus we are very open in our visitation
of contact with family and friends.
I just think, again, prisons and jails are two completely
different systems. They house two completely different type of
people. Ninety-five percent of inmates in the Wayne County
jail--probably be parallel across the State--are released back
to the same people places and things, their towns and villages.
Only 5 percent go to State prison. In our application that's
only about 80 people out of 1,700 will go to State prison. So
we're talking about a different level of inmate.
Ms. Buerkle. Is there any provision in that regulation that
would allow the county jails to opt out or is there any room,
you know?
Sheriff Virts. It's a one-size-fits-all package. And that's
our whole complaint.
Obviously, if a sheriff or entity is running a jail that's
not up to standard and they are sanctioned, then they should be
under more scrutiny. But us sheriffs that do run good jails and
don't use the walls just to keep the inmates in, but allows the
community to come in to be part of our incarcerating system, to
be part of alternatives to incarceration, we should not be
punished by a one-size-fits-all from Albany.
And, again, I agree with the county executive here. If we
are in charge of the jail, we should have more decisionmaking
power and how we run our jails.
Ms. Buerkle. Have you been able to estimate the cost of
what compliance would mean for your jail?
Sheriff Virts. For my jail alone I am going to say it will
probably be somewhere between probably $90,000 and $150,000.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
With that I'll yield to the gentlemen from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. Bender and Ms. Brooks, I come from a community that has
a similar problem with yours when it comes to the DEP and water
runoff. A lot of the homes that were built in the early part of
the century and beyond. But wastewater and storm water, and in
a lot of cases, we're seeing where when these folks built those
homes a lot of their downspouts were connected to storm sewers
and wastewater was connected. So now when there's a heavy rain,
there's a flooding situation that's caused. I know the DEP has
placed my town in a very difficult position, because we're
talking about a major overhaul of our whole sewage system:
Storm water, wastewater and the implications on that.
If you could, because I understand--and I also had the
privilege of serving on our city council--when you have CEBG
money that's been reduced dramatically because of the wars
we're fighting and other things that are taking our fund, now
we are working with less. But on top of that there's
regulations put into effect that even further limit what you
can do with those funds. I know it's very difficult for small
towns.
If you could just as a matter of, you know, just
enlightening us. The public doesn't understand the effects of
this, especially when you start getting your sewage bills, how
much they're going to go up, and then our inability to fix some
problems that we have either on our sidewalks, streets and
towns because of the, first of all, the reduced of limit of
CEGB funding and then again the restrictions put in place that
really limit what you can do with those funds.
So, just briefly, and I know you can't be brief on this. By
the way, Ms. Brooks, I think you are being kind by thinking
these people mean well. Thank you, though.
Ms. Bender. Well, I can tell you several years ago we
applied for a mitigation grant to alleviate the problem of
storm drainage in our little hamlet. With that, we had to
change the sewer lines; we had to do the storm water drains.
And it probably took us almost 4 years to complete that
project.
I went to a seminar before one of the projects began, and
they said the first thing you need to do is buy a four-drawer
cabinet, because by the time we get this project done, it's
going to be full and that's the paperwork that we have to go
through to complete a project. I mean, it's just unbelievable.
And the cost to our residents, if we have to borrow, or
whatever, the $5.4 million and spread that among 500 users, it
can't be done. It just can't be done.
We have another project that we're going to do that kind of
ties into that. Recently by New York State DOT we were awarded
a millions dollars to remove and replace the sidewalks in our
hamlet. It was a--I think it was a 70/30 grant: 70 percent from
the State, 30 percent from the municipality. We feel that
project is probably going to cost these same homeowners another
$100 on their tax bill every year.
Our sidewalks you cannot use: The elderly can't walk on
them; you can't push a baby buggy on them. They're terrible. We
want those sidewalks put in.
And then the EPA and the DEC came in and said, ``Whoa, wait
a minute. You've got to fix your wastewater treatment plant.''
So we're looking at this $5.4 million. We want a nice place to
live. We want to give our residents a nice place to live. I
don't know how we do it with all the regulations and the
funding we would love to get and have been successful, but we
need more.
Ms. Brooks. I want to make sure you have a great answer to
your question. Would you mind if--Mike Garland is our
Environmental Services Director and is an expert in this. I can
talk about Medicaid all day long. He can talk about storm water
and wastewater.
Mr. Garland. Thank you.
In Monroe County we have the Pure Waters Program to address
wastewater on virtually a county-wide basis. In the city of
Rochester we have a combined sewer system, and so when you talk
about storm water and wastewater flowing in the same pipe, it
creates challenges.
In Monroe County we had the foresight, beginning roughly 40
years ago, to consolidate relatively discrete wastewater
treatment plants, but also to take advantage of Federal dollars
available to mitigate overflows of combined sewers into the
Genesee River and into Irondequoit Bay.
So we have a system in place in our city to deal with that.
Our Pure Waters Program is a special taxing district, so we are
able to raise revenues to address those issues. But as it
relates to our suburban communities where we have elicit
connections between storm water and sanitary sewer under the
Phase Two Storm Water Regulations that County Executive Brooks
technically referred to, that's an unfunded mandate where we
are looking to improve the storm water quality of our
community.
It's a program that came out of the Clean Water Act, the
same act that promulgated regulations associated with
wastewater, is now addressing storm water. While we understand
the environmental merit and benefit of addressing storm water,
it is, once again, an unfunded mandate for our community both
in the public as well as private sector.
Mr. Kelly. And I think that's the part that the public
doesn't often see. Because my understanding is that is the
wastewater was started to really protect the quality of the
ground water.
We've gotten from a situation that was a concern for public
health to a concern of public spending. And I don't know how in
the world we can continue to put mandates on people. The
intentions, I'm sure, are good, but the ability to actually pay
for it is not there. So if I can tell you that you have to do
something, but I don't offer you anyway of doing it, then the
burden then falls on the people that are paying the local
taxes. That's sometimes overburdening. We don't see that down
the road.
Ms. Brooks. And just to emphasize that point, in Monroe
County, 744,000 residents, we have a $1 billion budget, 82
percent of our budget is mandated by the State and Federal
Governments. So when we talk about mandates, imagine running
your business and controlling 18 percent of what you do.
Mr. Kelly. The overall costs, I think, Sheriff, you did
talk about when Ms. Buerkle asked you the cost of it.
That is the thing that we all are concerned with. Because
most of these programs--I'm sure they have some merit at some
level, but it does go down to the same way we run our homes and
our businesses. You can only do what you can afford to do. The
fact that somebody legislates it or regulates it doesn't make
it doable.
So thank you so much for what you're doing, and I know it's
frustrating, but just stick with us. We're going to try to get
this fixed for you.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you all very much for taking the time
out of your busy schedules to be here today. This was very
enlightening, and I'd like to thank all of you for being here
and the committee will stand adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[The prepared statement of Hon. Elijah E. Cummings
follows:]


