- PUSHING THE ENVELOPE: THE LOOMING CRISIS AT USPS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PUSHING THE ENVELOPE: THE LOOMING CRISIS AT USPS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL WORKFORCE,
U.S. POSTAL SERVICE AND LABOR POLICY

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 2, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-9

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

67-366 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Federal Workforce, U.S. Postal Service and Labor Policy

DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida, Chairman
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan, Vice         STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Minority Member
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                     Columbia
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 2, 2011....................................     1
Statement of:
Donahoe, Patrick, postmaster general, U.S. Postal Service;
Ruth Goldway, chairman, Postal Regulatory Commission; and
Phil Herr, Director, Physical Infrastructure Issues,
Government Accountability Office...........................    21
Donahoe, Patrick.........................................    21
Goldway, Ruth............................................    40
Herr, Phil...............................................    51
Sampey, Jim, executive vice president and chief, operation
officer, Valpak; Arthor Sackler, coordinator, Coalition for
a 21st Century Postal Service, Sackler Policy Services,
LLC; and Frederic Rolando, director of legislative and
political affairs, National Association of Letter Carriers
(AFL-CIO)..................................................    85
Rolando, Frederic........................................   126
Sackler, Arthor..........................................   112
Sampey, Jim..............................................    85
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Connolly, Hon. Gerald E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, prepared statement of...............    16
Donahoe, Patrick, postmaster general, U.S. Postal Service,
prepared statement of......................................    24
Goldway, Ruth, chairman, Postal Regulatory Commission:
Letter dated September 16, 2004..........................    76
Prepared statement of....................................    42
Herr, Phil, Director, Physical Infrastructure Issues,
Government Accountability Office, prepared statement of....    53
Issa, Hon. Darrell E., a Representative in Congress from the
State of California:
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Washington Times op-ed...................................     9
Rolando, Frederic, director of legislative and political
affairs, National Association of Letter Carriers (AFL-CIO),
prepared statement of......................................   129
Ross, Hon. Dennis A., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida, prepared statement of....................     4
Sackler, Arthor, coordinator, Coalition for a 21st Century
Postal Service, Sackler Policy Services, LLC, prepared
statement of...............................................   114
Sampey, Jim, executive vice president and chief, operation
officer, Valpak, prepared statement of.....................    87

PUSHING THE ENVELOPE: THE LOOMING CRISIS AT USPS

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 2, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Federal Workforce, U.S. Postal
Service and Labor Policy,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:33 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Dennis A. Ross
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Ross, Amash, Jordan, Chaffetz,
Mack, Walberg, Gowdy, Lynch, Norton, Connolly, and Davis.
Also present: Representatives Issa and Cummings.
Staff present: Ali Ahmad, deputy press secretary; Robert
Borden, general counsel; Molly Boyl, parliamentarian; Lawrence
J. Brady, staff director; Benjamin Stroud Cole, policy advisor
and investigative analyst; Howard A. Denis, senior counsel;
Gwen D'Luzansky, assistant clerk; Adam P. Fromm, director of
Member liaison and floor operations; Linda Good, chief clerk;
Ryan Little, manager of floor operations; Justin LoFranco,
press assistant; Jeffrey Post and James Robertson, professional
staff members; Laura L. Rush, deputy chief clerk; Peter Warren,
policy director; Kevin Corbin, minority staff assistant; Jill
Crissman and William Miles, minority professional staff
members; Carla Hultberg, minority chief clerk; and Mark
Stephenson, minority senior policy advisor/legislative
director.
Mr. Ross. Good afternoon. I would like to welcome everybody
to the inaugural subcommittee meeting of the Federal Workforce,
U.S. Postal Service and Labor Policy.
I will ask the committee to come to order and, as we have
done in the Oversight Committee and its subcommittees, I will
start by reading our mission statement. We exist to secure two
fundamental principles: first, Americans have a right to know
that the money Washington takes from them is well spent; and
second, Americans deserve an efficient and effective government
that works for them. Our duty on the Oversight and Government
Reform Committee is to protect these. Our solemn responsibility
is to hold government responsible to taxpayers, because
taxpayers have a right to know what they get from their
government. We will work tirelessly in partnership with citizen
watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American people and bring
genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy. This is the mission
of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee.
I will start off. We will do opening statements from the
chair, from the ranking member, then the chair of the whole
committee and the ranking member of the whole committee I think
may be here. We may have to adjourn for votes in the middle. If
we do, I just ask for your patience. It will take about a half
hour or so, and then we will be back and continue on.
With that, I will start off with my opening statement.
We are here today to discuss the looming crisis at the U.S.
Postal Service. Today, the demand for traditional first class
mail continues to decline. Postal Service deficits continue to
rise, and competition and benefit costs continue to account for
approximately 80 percent of the Postal Service's operating
expenses.
The Postal Service has said it will lack the necessary
funds to make a required payment to pre-fund its retiree health
care benefits that is due at the end of September. The
continued imbalance between revenues and expenses means the
taxpayers could ultimately be asked to bail out the Postal
Service.
This hearing presents an opportunity for lawmakers to hear
important testimony from the front lines of the postal industry
on how best to strengthen the Postal Service.
For many years the Postal Service has delivered mail 6 days
a week to virtually every home in America, including over 170
billion pieces of mail in 2010 alone. But the Postal Service
suffered from an operating deficit of $8\1/2\ billion in 2010
and projects further losses into the future.
The ever-increasing reach of the Internet and digital
media, and the deep economic recession are the primary drivers
of a rapid recent decline in mail volume. It is now clear that
the need for work force reductions and other cost-cutting
measures must be the primary focus of the Postal Service, its
labor unions, and this Congress in order to improve the
financial stability of this venerable institution.
Everyone that has a stake in the viability of the Postal
Service must work together to find solutions. Postmaster
General Patrick Donahoe recently outlined the Postal Service
vision for a return to profitability. I commend you, sir, on
that report and your commitment to reducing costs by
undertaking major organizational restructuring, reviewing how
best to provide retail postal services and implementing
automation to improve delivery efficiency.
Today, the Postal Service is negotiating labor contracts
with two union groups representing postal employees. While some
postal employee unions have cooperated on efforts to reduce the
work force through attrition and incentives for early
retirement, those efforts simply have not resulted in the
changes necessary to maintain a self-funding Postal Service.
Realigning the postal work force by reexamining labor
agreements must be part of the strategy to improve the Postal
Service fiscal foundation.
Congress has an obligation to make statutory changes, if
necessary, which will allow the Postal Service to address its
own budget imbalance. We need to empower you. However,
proposals for providing short-term fiscal relief, such as
modifying retiree health benefits, pre-funding payments, or
refunding so-called overpayments over the Civil Service
Retirement System and the Federal Employee Retirement System do
not address the long-term systemic problem and solvency issues
that must be tackled in order to address the Postal Service
will achieve long-term financial stability.
Without a thorough reform of all aspects of the Postal
Service's business model, there could be little hope that it
will return to profitability in the near- or long-term future.
The looming fiscal crisis of the Postal Service can no longer
be ignored; we have kicked that can far enough. I have the
responsibility, no, we have the responsibility to change course
and must consider all possible solutions.
I thank the witnesses for appearing here today and I look
forward to their testimony.
I now would like to recognize the distinguished ranking
member from Massachusetts, Congressman Lynch, for his opening
statement.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Dennis A. Ross follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me begin by
congratulating you, Chairman Ross, on your selection as the
chairman of this important subcommittee, and I want to thank
you for holding today's hearing, which shows your keen
awareness of the critical state of affairs currently
confronting the U.S. Postal Service.
While we have recently seen a moderate uptick in the
economy and there are some indicators that suggest that
standard mail or advertising mail is rebounding, our Nation's
most trusted and prominent public institution continues to fall
upon very difficult times. It is no secret that as more
Americans use the Internet and email to conduct business and
communicate, the less they use hard copy mail.
Yet, even in light of declining mail volume, I am sure
there are scores of people that would agree with me that there
is still great value in the traditional mail system. The Postal
Service generated over $67 billion in annual revenue in fiscal
year 2010 and employed roughly 58,000 workers in the delivery
of 170.6 billion pieces of mail to some 150 million residences,
businesses, and post boxes 6 days a week. Overall, the Postal
Service is the cornerstone of a trillion dollar industry and
supports over 7\1/2\ million private sector American jobs,
which highlights the vital role that the Postal Service plays
in our overall economy.
Given the extraordinary financial challenges the Postal
Service presently faces, it is absolutely necessary, and I
agree, that we collectively, and by collectively I am referring
to postal management, workers, mailers, as well as the
administration and this Congress, come to the realization that
there will have to be some difficult decisions made rather
quickly in order to address the Postal Service's current
financial situation.
However, before we tackle issues such as changing delivery
frequency and cutting services, laying off hardworking
Americans, there are certainly some more palatable actions we
should consider first. For example, we need to revisit the
Postal Service's arbitrary and fixed retiree health benefit
payment schedule, which prevents the organization from
accounting for the dramatic shifts in demand of work force size
that it has experienced in recent years. Simply requiring the
Postal Service to tackle the obligations at such an aggressive
pace is unheard of in the private sector and continues to be a
driving force behind the Postal Service's dismal fiscal
performance.
Additionally, questions continue to remain regarding both
the Postal Service's actual Civil Service Retirement System and
its Federal Employee Retirement System obligations. For this
reason, I intend to reintroduce legislation in the coming days
similar to what I offered last Congress on these issues, as
well as on a couple of other substantive postal-related policy
matters. However, in the meantime, I expect the Postal Service
to continue to use its existing authorities to lower
expenditures, raise revenues, and put forth fresh innovation in
terms of both its competitive and its market dominant products
and services.
Further, the Government Accountability Office has recently
competed work on a report that I had requested last Congress on
the modernization of foreign posts and lessons learned, which I
hope will also provide some useful information and novel ideas
as we work on the Postal Service's long-term viability.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing from today's
witnesses about their tangible and pragmatic suggestions or
solutions for how best to return the Postal Service to
financial solvency. After 4 years of operating deficits
amounting to a cumulative loss in its 4 years of $20 billion
and a nearly tapped out borrowing authority, we can no longer
afford to kick this can down the road on this issue. Again, I
thank you for holding this hearing and I again congratulate you
on your chairmanship, and I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Lynch, and I too look forward to
working with you in this regard.
Now I would like to recognize the distinguished gentleman
from California, Chairman of the Oversight and Government
Reform Committee, Mr. Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you for holding this
important hearing.
Above all else, the Government Oversight and Reform
Committee is in fact the legacy committee of the Postal
Committee. We take that seriously, that it is a primary piece
of legislative authority and responsibility.
Since 1970, this committee has overseen an independent
agency responsible for its own balance sheet and profitability.
There have been good years and bad years in that time, but no
decade has been harder on the Post Office than the last decade.
There has been a 20 percent drop in postal volume over that
period. The Post Office has lost $20 billion, going from having
a relatively handsome surplus to being up against its borrowing
limit.
We are here today to begin a process with the postmaster
and other stakeholders in finding a way to maintain certain
prerequisites that this committee and the American people have
counted on for over 200 years. First of all, the delivery of
mail to every point in America. Second of all, the delivery of
a level of service that Americans have come to expect. If at
all possible, we want that to include all categories of mail,
all types, and all delivery dates, meaning 6 days a week is a
goal if we can achieve it.
We also have an obligation to the American people to
deliver value. The cost of mail is a cost to American commerce
and to the American people, so every time there is an increase
in postal rates, it is to the detriment of American efficiency
and disposable income to the American people.
Last, and most importantly, this committee is dedicated to
sustainability. The Post Office is not an organization you can
have 1 day, not have the next, and put back up again. It has
been there since our founding. It is a mandate of Congress, in
my opinion, since our founding, and it is memorialized in the
Constitution. No Congress has ever suggested that we don't need
a Post Office, and this will not ever be one in this committee.
Postmaster general, I appreciate the fact that you have
come in and re-looked anew at your predecessor's initial ideas,
and I have seen some innovative and, I think, very worthwhile
suggestions you have made, and some of them are tough. As we
were talking before we came out here, the good news is there
are at least two post offices that need to be closed in every
congressional district in America. Let's hope there is not one
or three in mine. [Laughter.]
I want to commend the Post Office legacy of finding ways to
pare down over 200,000 positions through attrition and buyouts.
I might note, though, that today there are examples the
American people, if aware of, would be surprised. There are
over 15,000 postal workers 65 years old who are on disability
and not expected to return, and yet they are paid a full
salary. That is an area that we expect will be addressed during
our negotiations.
It is an area in which we want to be fair to these long-
working and longstanding employees, but at the same time, if
you can no longer do the job and you are over 65, there is a
reasonable expectation that your status will change and you
will not be counted among the active members of the postal
system. I think this is particularly good in union negotiations
because, in fact, what we want are workers who can be
productively put to work, and those who cannot we want to be
fair to in any transition, whether they are over or under 65.
Mr. Chairman, I would ask unanimous consent that my
Washington Times op-ed of last year be included in the record.
Mr. Ross. No objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Issa. I thank you.
In closing, this is not easy. Most of government needs are
growing; yours is not. Most of government has found new places
in order to find authority and services; your has not and has
not been offered the opportunity. This committee is willing to
hear, though, about new services that create a value for the
American people, opportunities for the Post Office to have
further authority to find nexus in savings with other agencies
or even the private sector. I believe that we can be
entrepreneurial on both sides of the aisle for the betterment
of the American people.
I look forward to your testimony. I appreciate all of you
here testifying and the many stakeholders that are also in the
audience today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Darrell E. Issa follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would now like to recognize the gentlewoman from the
District of Columbia, Congresswoman Norton, for her opening
statement.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I will be
pleased to be working with you as a member of the committee,
and I am particularly pleased to welcome our new postmaster,
Postmaster Donahoe.
Mr. Chairman, it was interesting to hear you, I know you
read this, the mission, and that mission applies most of the
time, but it was really interesting to hear you say that you
wanted to make sure that the money that comes from Washington
is well spent. Well, of course, the Post Office hasn't gotten
any money from Washington for decades now, and won't get any.
Indeed, we told the Post Office that it should run like a
business, but the problem is that they report right here to the
Congress, and they have never been given the kinds of latitude
that a business indeed has, and probably doesn't feel that it
could do what a business could do.
For example, let's take something that under Chairman Lynch
we discussed over and over again, and that was whether or not
to reduce the 6-day week to a 5-day. Now, that would cause some
hardship in some parts of the country, of course. Of course, if
it is a private business, they have to take that into account
and do what they have to do. I know in large parts of the
country people, according to the polls, no longer say that they
need a 6-day delivery and appear to be ready to give that up.
We haven't even discussed whether or not, OK, at least for the
parts of the country that are willing, that don't need it,
which looks like most of the country, why not at least then
have a 5-day work week.
What is really frustrating to me as a member of this
committee is that the steps, even the baby steps, which
wouldn't solve the problem, seem to be very difficult to take,
and the case of the 6-day work week is difficult to take for no
reason except one reason, and that is the Members of the
Congress of the United States. No business would have to bother
with that.
I will be very interested in this testimony and what you
expect to be doing, Postmaster Donahoe, because this notion of
a looming crisis, which is what this hearing is called, is also
an interesting title. Ever since I have been on this committee,
and I have been here since I have been a Member of Congress, it
has been a looming crisis. I am not sure what we are waiting
for. If the Post Office truly collapses, you will have people
rushing to the floor to say let's pick up the Post Office one
way or the other; I can't go home and tell people that there is
going to be no postal delivery. I don't know whether excess
payments to the trust funds, even if used for operational
purposes, and we know that is very unlikely to occur, would be
anything but a stopgap measure. I have always felt that somehow
one has to pull back altogether and redesign entirely what we
mean by Postal Service of the United States of America.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ross. Thank you very much.
Congressman Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I also want to
welcome you as chairman of the committee.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. I would ask at this point unanimous consent
to insert in the record my opening statement describing a new
business model legislation I will be introducing in this
Congress, an excerpt from the April 15, 2010 hearings we had
last year, and a copy of the testimony of the National Rural
Letter Carriers Association.
Mr. Ross. Well, without objection, it is so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Gerald E. Connolly
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Connolly. I thank the Chair.
Mr. Ross. Also, Members will have 7 days from today to
submit opening statements and extraneous material for the
record.
Now I would like to get into our hearing for today. We do
have two panels. For those of you who are following spring
training, I like to refer to it as a double header today. So,
without further ado, I would like to introduce our first panel.
To my immediate right is Mr. Patrick Donahoe, the
postmaster general and chief executive officer of the U.S.
Postal Service. In the middle is Ms. Ruth Goldway, the chairman
of the Postal Regulatory Commission. Welcome. And Mr. Herr, to
my left, is the Director of Physical Infrastructure Issues at
the U.S. Government Accountability Office.
We have your written statements before us, but what I would
like to do first is to swear everyone in, and if I could ask
you all to rise and raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
Let the record reflect that all witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
Please be seated.
In order to allow time for discussion and questions, please
limit your testimony to 5 minutes. As you know, your entire
written testimony will be made part of the record.
Now I will recognize, first, Mr. Donahoe. Thank you for
being here.

STATEMENTS OF PATRICK DONAHOE, POSTMASTER GENERAL, U.S. POSTAL
SERVICE; RUTH GOLDWAY, CHAIRMAN, POSTAL REGULATORY COMMISSION;
AND PHIL HERR, DIRECTOR, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES,
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

STATEMENT OF PATRICK DONAHOE

Mr. Donahoe. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of
the subcommittee. I am honored to be testifying before you for
the first time as the postmaster general and chief executive
office of the U.S. Postal Service. I appreciate the opportunity
to testify and thank you for the invitation. Today I would like
to discuss our financial challenges, steps we are taking to
improve our competitive position, and improvements to our
business model that require changes in the law. My view is that
many of our challenges today can be recast as opportunities to
create a profitable and more market responsive Postal Service
that competes for and wins customers, and that propels American
commerce.
The Postal Service remains at the heart of a crucial
segment of our economy. If the Postal Service was a private
sector company, it would rank 29th in the Fortune 500. We
provide the platform for a mailing industry that pumps $1
trillion into the economy every year and employs 7\1/2\ million
Americans. We are not taxpayer funded; we generate our revenue
through the sale of postage. And so, if we are to be successful
at our core function of delivering to the American public, we
must operate by having a strong business model and effective
business strategies.
For its part, the Postal Service is focused on managing
what it controls. In 2010, we trimmed $3 billion in costs, on
top of $6 billion in savings in 2009, and our plan this year is
to take another $2 billion out, further reducing work hours by
40 million. Our achievements in the work force reduction have
been accomplished through attrition. We are unsurpassed in
public and private sectors in that manner. We have reduced our
work force by almost 230,000 employees since the year 2000, and
have dramatically increased total productivity.
We have accomplished this all without sacrificing service.
Performance levels are at the highest level ever, and those
results lie squarely with our dedicated, knowledgeable, and
committed employees, and I could not be any more proud of them.
We are aligning every aspect of the Postal Service around
four key strategies: one, strengthening the business consumer
channel; two, improving the customer experience by making every
transaction a positive transaction; three, competing for the
package business; and, four, continuing to become leaner,
faster, and smarter. We are committed to ensuring that we will
be successful in these business strategies and that we will be
able to serve the American public better as a result.
While we are being very aggressive within the constraints
of our current business model, the fact is without some
important changes to the law that shape our business model, we
cannot survive as a self-financing entity. Mr. Chairman, the
losses experienced by the Postal Service last year alone are a
staggering $8\1/2\ billion. This year we are projected to lose
another $6.4 billion. Certainly, these results reflect the
migration to electronic communication and shifting customer
habits. But upon closer examinations, our losses are a result
of an inflexible business model due to the laws that govern the
Postal Service.
The most serious challenge is to our unique obligation to
pre-fund retiree health benefits. This pre-funding requirement,
borne by no other entity, public or private, places an
incredible burden on Postal Service. To understand the full
effects, you just have to look at the last few years before and
after the enactment of the Postal Accountability and
Enhancement Act. In the 4-years before, the PAEA, the Postal
Service showed a positive net income every year.
In the 4-years since, we have seen billion dollars in
losses every year. Even during the two worst years of the
recession, 2007 and 2008, had it not been for the pre-funding
requirement, the Postal Service would have realized a net
profit of $3.3 billion and $2.8 billion, respectively. The
effects of the retiree health benefit pre-funding are profound.
This trend continues into 2011. Our first quarter results
showed a loss of $329 million. Excluding retiree health
benefits, pre-funding costs, and along with worker's
compensation adjustments, we would have a net income of $226
million.
In addition to the retiree health benefit obligations,
overpayments into the Civil Service Retirement System and
Federal Employee Retirement System have taken a significant
toll on our finances. Restoring these funds to the Postal
Service would obviously benefit our financial position. This
year, the Postal Service will reach statutory debt limit.
Liquidity concerns are looming because of a $5\1/2\ billion
payment for retiree health benefits due on September 30th of
this year. The Postal Service will not have the cash available
to make these payments. We need legislation this year to
address that fact.
I also encourage the subcommittee to provide greater
flexibility to the Postal Service regarding our proposed
transition to a 5-day delivery schedule, enabling greater
latitude in the way that we provide access to postal products
and services. Several bills were introduced in the 111th
Congress that did just that. We would appreciate those efforts
and are looking forward to working with each of you in the
112th Congress.
I believe strongly that the path forward requires that we
embrace fundamental change and that our employees, our labor
unions, management associations, the mailing industry, all of
our customers and business partners play a constructive role in
shaping our future. I am committed to this approach.
The next few years will bring significant change, but I am
confident that we will be able to look back and say that,
working together, we took advantage of a challenging time to
create a stronger organization and a stronger industry,
developing a true 21st century Postal Service.
Thank you for your continued efforts on behalf of the
Postal Service. I look forward to working with each of you and
will be happy to answer your questions today. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Donahoe follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Donahoe.
Ms. Goldway, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF RUTH GOLDWAY

Ms. Goldway. Thank you Chairman Ross and Ranking Member
Lynch and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting
me to testify on the record of the PAEA and Postal Service
finances. I look forward to your views and your leadership on
postal issues.
On the whole, we can say that the PAEA has been a positive
force for changing, keeping postage rates low and service at
acceptable levels, while providing stakeholders with
information and the opportunity to participate in the process.
The price cap serves as a powerful incentive for the Postal
Service to add efficiency and reduce costs, including $11
billion in the last 3 years.
At the same time, the requirement to measure service and
report the results publicly ensured that the Postal Service
improved service quality. Seasonal pricing incentives for
standard and first class mail, five experimental product market
tests, and the expanding use of NSAs, 127 in 2010 and 56 to
date in 2011, show that the Service is taking advantage of the
law's pricing flexibilities.
Along with some others, I have been concerned that there
are some potentially irreconcilable legislative requirements in
the law, such as that all products must cover attributable
costs, but no class of mail can have rate increases greater
than the CPI cap. But, to date, the Commission has been able to
justify reasonable exceptions and to encourage the Postal
Service to address others.
In the recent exigency case, the Commission carefully
reviewed the Postal Service's current financial predicament and
found it to be structural, related to the pre-funding of health
benefit premiums for future retirees. In the past 4 years, the
Postal Service has paid nearly $21 billion into the Retiree
Health Benefit Fund, while incurring a cumulative net loss of
$20 billion. Bottom line: without the RHBF, the Postal Service
would have broken even, despite the impact of the recession and
declining mail volume.
Of course, when the PAEA was enacted in 2006, the economy
was strong and the Postal Service had record profits. It was in
this climate that the Congress mandated the Postal Service to
make an ambitious fixed 10-year series of payments at about
$5\1/2\ billion. But, in retrospect, the RHBF payments have
brought the Postal Service deep into debt and close to
insolvency. Now, even with a brightening economy and continued
cost cutting, the Postal Service cannot surmount its financial
crisis without congressional action.
In 2009, at the request of Congress, our expert review of
the OPM's computation of the RHBF liability found that a
recalculation could lower the Postal Service's liability by
nearly $35 billion, still meet the funding goals of the act,
and allow the required annual payments to be lowered. This
could significantly address the Postal Service's financial
shortfall.
Last year, at the request of the Postal Service, we
undertook expert actuarial studies to review whether the Postal
Service CSRS pension obligations had been properly calculated
in relation to wages of employees of the Post Office Department
who later retired from the Postal Service. We found that the
Postal Service had been overcharged by an estimated $50 to $55
billion. The surplus, which came from postal revenues, not
taxes, should be made available in some fashion for the benefit
of the postal ratepayers and customers, perhaps to fund the
RHBF.
The Commission believes that given the Postal Service's
record of cost cutting over the last decade, and recognizing
the price cap restrictions and competition from electronic
alternatives, significant cost cuttings will continue. The
Commission will serve to guard against any ill-considered cuts,
because any reduction in service could be viewed as an
equivalent of a defacto rate increase.
Last year, the Commission issued its advisory opinion on
Postal Service's proposals to shutter up to 3,200 stations and
branches. We affirmed the Postal Service's authority to adjust
its retail network, but we made several recommendations to
ensure consistency and enhance due process for every citizen.
Over the last year the Commission has conducted an
extensive review of another Postal Service proposal, that to go
from 6- to 5-day delivery. In my 13 years serving on the
Commission, this has been the most difficult and multifaceted
issue I have been asked to address. The Postal Service proposal
to end Saturday delivery is a serious effort to improve its
bottom line, but cutting 17 percent of service in order to save
what the Postal Service estimates to be $3 billion must be
carefully considered within our obligation to hold prices down,
maintain service standards, and ensure efficient postal
operations.
We are working overtime to resolve the complex and
technical policy aspects of this case, and expect to complete
our opinion shortly. We hope the opinion provides the Congress
with the information you need to decide whether or not to lift
the current 6-day delivery directive.
The Commission is now conducting its first 5-year review of
the PAEA, required under Section 701 of the act, to provide
recommendations to improve the effectiveness of current postal
laws. Certainly, the historic view that the postal system
itself is of enduring value to the Nation still stands strong.
We look forward to working with Congress, the Postal
Service, and all who depend on the mail to chart a course that
keeps the mail affordable, efficient, and relevant for
generations to come.
Thank you. That concludes my testimony. I would like to ask
that the statement I made with regard to the exigency rate
case, which further defines the finances of the Postal Service,
be included in the record as well.
Mr. Ross. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. Goldway. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Goldway follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ross. Thank you, Ms. Goldway.
Mr. Herr, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF PHIL HERR

Mr. Herr. Thank you. Chairman Ross, Chairman Issa, Ranking
Member Lynch, and members of the committee, I am pleased to be
here today to participate in this hearing. Today I will discuss
the Postal Service's financial condition and outlook, and the
actions needed to modernize and restructure it.
The Postal Service's financial condition has declined
significantly since fiscal year 2006 and it remains on GAO's
high risk list. As discussed, the challenges facing the Postal
Service are linked to decreases in mail volumes as customers
have shifted to electronic communications and payment
alternatives. More specifically, profitable first class mail
has been declining relatively quickly.
While mail use has been declining, the Postal Service has
large fixed costs associated with delivering to 150 million
addresses. It also has a large physical network spanning over
500 mail processing facilities and more than 32,000 post
offices. It has 670,000 employees, about 80 percent of whom
work full-time. And compensation benefits, as you noted,
comprise 80 percent of its costs. The Postal Service expects to
reach its $15 billion statutory debt limit this year, while
still facing a cash shortfall. Unfunded obligations and
liabilities, detailed in a table in my statement, for such
things as worker's compensation and expenses in retiree health
care are now estimated to total $105 billion.
These figures strongly suggest the Postal Service's
financial condition has reached a tipping point, and key
stakeholders need to reach agreement on actions to address its
structural problems. We believe that action is needed in five
areas.
First, realign service with customers' changing use of the
mail. The Postal Service has sought to reduce delivery by 1 day
and provide retail services outside of post offices. It
estimates that dropping a day of delivery could reduce its
costs by about $3 billion annually. This raises questions about
what aspects of universal's Postal Service are appropriate
given declines in mail use.
Second, postal operations, networks, and its work force
need to be realigned to reduce excess capacity. Key questions
include: How quickly can these networks be realigned? The pace
of change has simply been too slow. And should some post
offices move to alternate locations to better serve customers
and reduce costs?
Third, compensation and benefit costs need to be addressed.
Wages and benefits represent 80 percent of postal costs, about
$60 billion in fiscal year 2010. Congress may wish to consider
revisiting the statutory framework for collective bargaining to
ensure that binding arbitration takes the Postal Service's
financial condition into account. Other options include
implementing a two-tier pay system, outsourcing if it results
in cost savings, or revising employees' share of health and
life insurance premiums.
Fourth, generating revenue through new or enhanced products
and services. The Postal Service has asked Congress to allow it
to diversity into non-postal areas and sought additional
pricing flexibility. Questions about this include: Are there
opportunities to introduce profitable new postal products and
enhance existing ones? Should it be allowed to enter non-postal
areas to compete with private sector providers?
Finally, the funding structure for postal retiree health
benefits needs to be addressed. The roughly $5 billion-plus
payments through 2016 are steep, and we believe that Congress
should consider modifying them in a fiscally responsible
manner. However, we also believe the Postal Service should pre-
fund these obligations to the maximum extent its finances
permit because thousands of individuals rely on and expect this
benefit.
Making changes to the Postal Service will not be easy. In a
recent report requested by Ranking Member Lynch, we discussed
how foreign posts have modernized their operations. Key aspects
of these changes included strategic outreach and coordination
with stakeholders about the nature, scope, and need for
changes. An employee transition strategy was also crucial.
Foreign posts experience suggests the Postal Service needs to
clarify its modernization plans, including over what period it
will implement them, and explain improvements in customer
service and cost savings it expects, while ensuring that
alternatives are available.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, modernizing and restructuring
the Postal Service so that it can be viable is imperative given
its financial condition. This will not be easy and changes,
some difficult, are needed to ensure that postal services
remain available.
I am pleased to answer any questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Herr follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Herr.
We will now move into the questions and I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
I want to jump right into what I think is really the heart
of the first issue that we are facing, and that is the PAEA and
its aftermath today.
Ms. Goldway, I know you have acknowledged that the
Commission is doing a study on that. Specifically, at the time
the PAEA was passed in 2006, we had certain assumptions that I
think may have been taken into consideration to go ad
infinitum. For example, 800,000 employees at the time. Now we
are down to 575,000. A decline in first class mail.
My question, and I will go to Mr. Donahoe first, is with
this pre-funding of the pension benefit, are there not
assumptions that today may not exist, or have changed
dramatically, that in and of itself, if actuarially identified,
could reduce the obligation of the Postal Service that is being
imposed by the PAEA?
Mr. Donahoe. We believe so, Mr. Chairman. We think that if
you take a look at the intentions behind the law that was
passed in 2006, they were very good intentions. The expectation
was that the Postal Service, having a base volume of 213
billion pieces of mail, along with no debt at the time, could
carry that burden of the health benefits going forward. It was
a responsible idea. We still think it is a responsible idea to
account for our retiring health benefits going forward, but we
think there are a number of things we have to take into
consideration.
No. 1, we have had a substantial drop in volume. That has
to be considered. No. 2, to your point, we have reduced
headcount. I think back in 2006, when the law was passed, it
was based on the assumption of 757,000 employees. Today we have
about 570,000 employees, and we think that, moving forward, we
will eventually break into the 400,000 range. We know, going
forward, we will not have those same burdens, so we would ask
that Congress take a look, ask the GAO to examine what the
actual liability is going forward.
We also think there are some solutions as far as how to
fund that. We think that the funds that are existing in the
Civil Service Retirement funds that we have overpaid, by our
estimates, $75 billion, the Postal Regulatory Commission's
estimate is $55 billion, could be used to make that payment.
If that is not available, we think that we can also look at
some other options. Our own IG has suggested that we take a
look forward around the option of taking a private sector model
or you fund at 30 percent versus the 100 percent that we are
required to now. So there are many options on the table, and we
would be more than happy to explore any of those with you.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
Ms. Goldway, would you have any estimate based on new
assumptions as to what the reduction could be or potentially
be?
Ms. Goldway. What we did in 2009, working with consultants,
the Mercer and the Hay Group, is to look at the OPM projections
and factor in lower levels of employees and to adjust the
expectations of health care cost increases that the OPM had in
their formula, and we estimated that in order to fund 100
percent of what would be the health care retiree benefit
problem, you could do it with $35 billion less money than the
OPM had estimated in 2006. I would suspect that number might
even be lower today than it was in 2009 when we did it and
that, therefore, the target for what the Postal Service needs
to pay into a health care retiree benefit fund is lower and the
annual payments that they make into it could be adjusted
downward and reduce their burden.
Mr. Ross. Any idea how much?
Ms. Goldway. Well, we have estimated about $2 billion a
year.
Mr. Ross. Reduction?
Ms. Goldway. Reduction.
Mr. Ross. OK.
Ms. Goldway. So instead of $5 billion, it would be $2
billion. But that was an estimate and, again, it would need the
assistance of OPM and perhaps GAO to clarify those numbers.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
Mr. Donahoe, of course, one side of the issue is the
ongoing liability for the pre-funding. But the other side is a
systemic change. And what we have to do, and this is what I
would ask your opinion on, is how do we go about competing in
the 21st century? How do we go about now adapting to the
digital age? And I think that if we are able to do something
and empower the Postal Service to take care of the immediate
need, but how does it go on from hereafter so that it is
existing for another 235 years without any subsidies?
Mr. Donahoe. Well, first of all, Mr. Chairman, we think
that there is a tremendous upside on the top line on our
revenue in the Postal Service and the entire industry. We think
there is plenty of growth available in the area of standard
mail. Standard mail is the most direct way to get in front of a
customer's eyes; better than the Internet, better than TV,
better than radio. So we know there is growth there.
We also know there is growth in the package market, and we
have been exploring that. We have been working with a number of
new products. You have seen our flat rate products come out. We
have introduced a number of others coming forward. Matter of
fact, Ms. Goldway showed me, we brought along a copy of our
free sample box they have just approved over at the Regulatory
Commission. We think there is a ton of value in that. We think
that this is an opportunity on a monthly basis for people to
get in to the sample business in a very affordable way. So we
know there is an upside.
Now, on the first class mail, as you mentioned, it is
declining, but we think that by using NSAs contracts with many
of our customers, we can actually slow down the pace of change
with the drop-off in first class.
Congressman Lynch mentioned some opportunities in digital,
and we are exploring that too. We have had some really good
ideas come back from an innovation summit, along with a number
of other ideas that we have been exploring with partners;
digital to hard copy, hard copy to digital, and even digital to
digital. We know that the Postal Service provides tremendous
opportunities and security in that entire market, and we think
there is plenty of opportunity for growth there too.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Donahoe. My time is up.
I now recognize the distinguished gentleman--are we going
in for a vote? Have they called us? If no objection, the
ranking member, Mr. Lynch, for questions.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the witnesses for your help.
Mr. Donahoe, let me push back on that a little bit. I know
I have spoken with Pitney Bowes and a number of other firms
that operate in Europe as well, and they have some systems
where you can actually pull up on your laptop or on your iPad
and actually click on your mail before it is delivered, and you
can click off the stuff that you don't want to have delivered
and click on the stuff you would like to have delivered. But
that tells me that, with technology, there will be a further
reduction in volume as people are given that option. So I am
not so sure I buy into the idea that we are actually going to
be able to increase volume.
But that much being said, let's go back to where the
chairman was considering PAEA. What does it look like right
now? And, Mr. Herr, you might be able to jump; actually, Ms.
Goldway as well. If we are overfunding future retiree health
benefits, what is the measurement of that overpayment? Do we
have a sense of that? I know they are making you full fund it
in advance, and no one else is required to operate under that
standard, but I am just wondering what the overpayment is in
there right now.
Ms. Goldway. Well, I don't think there is--there is no
overpayment in the health care retiree benefit fund at the
moment; there is about $42 billion----
Mr. Lynch. But it is pre-funded. I mean if--what I am
trying to----
Ms. Goldway. In the Civil Service Retirement Benefit Fund,
there is. In the Civil Service Retirement Fund----
Mr. Lynch. No, no, I know that. I know that. OK, look, you
have ordinary health benefit plans----
Ms. Goldway. Right.
Mr. Lynch [continuing]. That are required to pay in
annually. They are not required to pre-fund, OK?
Ms. Goldway. Right.
Mr. Lynch. So if you compare the pre-funding requirement to
a ``normal'' health care benefit requirement, what excess do we
have in there that if we were required to meet normal health
care fund obligations, what would be in there that would not be
required under a standard system?
Ms. Goldway. I am not sure I understand, but I think what
you are talking about is that the Postal Service currently pays
out of its existing revenues the money it needs to pay for
retirees' health care benefits, and that is about $2\1/2\
billion a year. And there are $42 billion in a fund. So one
could either take some of that money to pay the existing health
care retiree benefit retirees' funds or at least take some
income from that to help pay that off. I think that is what you
are referring to.
Mr. Donahoe. Another way to look at it is potentially,
Congressman, the estimate for the prepayment that was needed
back in 2006 was $90 billion. Our IG has done a study looking
at regular businesses, private firms and what their
requirements are to pay. The average prepays is at about 30
percent. So their recommendation has been you would owe
somewhere around $30 billion. We have paid $42 billion to it
already, so theoretically we are overfunded at that rate.
Mr. Lynch. OK. That probably answers the question.
Mr. Herr. Mr. Lynch, if I may?
Mr. Lynch. Yes, Mr. Herr, go ahead.
Mr. Herr. In my statement we actually report the data that
the Postal Service had in its annual financial report, and
there is, as was stated, there is about $42 billion in that
fund. But the unfunded liability is $48.6 billion, as
calculated by OPM using Postal Service numbers, and as reported
in the annual financial report.
Ms. Goldway. And that is the part that our consultants
thought could be lowered.
Mr. Lynch. And that is for all future employees who are not
necessarily going to tap into the fund in 1 year, right?
Mr. Herr. Correct.
Ms. Goldway. At some point.
Mr. Lynch. Let me ask you this, then. I know you are
running out of money, Mr. Donahoe, this year. With the
obligations you have for the health benefit and other
obligations, you have a workmen's compensation payment for $1.3
billion, I think. When does that happen and what do you do when
you run out of money?
Mr. Donahoe. Here is the thing. September 30th we finish
the fiscal year. I will owe the Federal Government $5\1/2\
billion for the pre-funding. In November I will owe another
$1.3 billion for worker's comp. At the end of the fiscal year I
am out of cash.
Mr. Lynch. You are also up against your debt limit.
Mr. Donahoe. I am up against the debt limit, so there is no
breathing room. We will deliver mail. We will pay the employees
and deliver mail. We will make sure that we pay our suppliers.
They are providing contract transportation, etc. The thing we
will not do is be able to pay the Federal Government. That will
have to be negotiated. We will talk with the Board of
Governors, come back to the Treasury and figure out what we
will have to do. That is why it is so important that we address
this.
Mr. Lynch. OK. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield
back.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Lynch.
The subcommittee will now stand in recess until probably 5
minutes after the last vote. I expect it will probably be about
30 minutes. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Ross. Good afternoon. I will call the subcommittee back
to order and will recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Mack, for questions.
Mr. Mack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I begin, I want
to congratulate you for being the chair of this subcommittee
and for being here in Washington.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
Mr. Mack. For people who don't know, we served in the
legislature together in Florida, and he is a great friend and
the committee is lucky to have you as the chair, so thank you.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
Mr. Mack. Before we left, something kind of struck me. We
keep asking, well, how can we kind of help get the Postal
Service in the right direction, and part of me is thinking
government just doesn't know how to run a business. So, first
of all, the idea that the government is going to fix a business
model I think has been proven over and over and over again it
can't do it.
So I think what we are really talking about here is time.
At some point some drastic changes are going to have to be made
to the Postal Service. If this committee is going to--and no
disrespect to anybody on this committee, but the idea that
somehow government is going to fix this, I am not sure that
government has a great track record when it comes to business.
So I just thought I would put that out there.
The Office of the Inspector General recently released a
study in which it looked at shifting costs from ratepayers to
taxpayers, and I think the study was pretty clear about that
may be a way that it has to go to be solvent. Mr. Donahoe, are
you ready to admit that the only way to stay afloat is through
a bailout by the taxpayers?
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you, Congressman. First of all, I think
I would take umbrage with the fact that we can't get our
finances together and right the ship in the Postal Service. We,
as a government entity providing universal service to the
American public, have done a pretty good job especially over
the last 10 years, from a standpoint of cost improvement,
service improvement. Granted, we have some constraints around
some of the revenue generation that we see, but we also think
we have a good plan going forward, and with a little freedom
and flexibility we think we can get there. The major issue that
we've got, again, is the issue with the prepayment of the
retiree health benefits.
Mr. Mack. I understand.
Mr. Donahoe. And I think there is an opportunity to resolve
that.
Now, I have to ask you a question On your statement, is
that from our IG or is that from a different IG? I am not 100
percent sure.
Mr. Mack. It is a recent released study from the Office of
Inspector General.
Mr. Donahoe. That is probably the OPM. That is the OPM's
IG.
Mr. Mack. OK, you are right. But let me just ask you this.
Mr. Donahoe. OK.
Mr. Mack. OK? Forget about the study.
Mr. Donahoe. OK.
Mr. Mack. I mean, you have already admitted that there are
big problems, right?
Mr. Donahoe. Absolutely.
Mr. Mack. So are you prepared to admit that you are going
to need a bailout to stay afloat?
Mr. Donahoe. We will not need a bailout. Here is the way we
look at this. There are a couple solutions. No. 1, we have an
overpayment into the retirement systems, whether the Civil
Service or----
Mr. Mack. OK, I only have a few minutes, so----
Mr. Donahoe. OK.
Mr. Mack. So the answer is, you think, no.
Mr. Donahoe. I think no.
Mr. Mack. Are there any modifications to a postal
employee's pay or benefit schedule that would help insolvency?
Mr. Donahoe. Absolutely. We are working with our unions
right now. We have a union contract discussion going on with
the American Postal Workers Union Rural Carriers. We are having
some very good discussions about flexibility.
Mr. Mack. And what are they offering right now?
Mr. Donahoe. We are talking about changes in flexibility
and compensation going forward.
Mr. Mack. Now, is there talk about coming down to the rest
of the Federal work force, the pay schedule and benefits?
Mr. Donahoe. The only pay that the Postal Service has that
is in excess of the rest of the Federal Government is in terms
of the health care contribution. That is a very small portion
of what we pay our people. We are, through negotiations,
working to come to the same level. That is minimal. The big
opportunities are work----
Mr. Mack. Do you think that can be achieved? Do you think
the unions will agree to come to----
Mr. Donahoe. Absolutely.
Mr. Mack [continuing]. The rest of the Federal work force?
Mr. Donahoe. The unions are already coming to that level.
We have seen progress in the last contract. We have moved 1
percent per year in the last contract, and what is being
discussed right now will get us to that level in the next 4
years.
Mr. Mack. In the next 4 years.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Mack. So of the rest of the Federal work force.
Mr. Donahoe. That is a small----
Mr. Mack. The pay and the benefit?
Mr. Donahoe. No, no, no, no. That is a small portion. That
is the compensation that we give our people in terms of health
benefit contribution. Our people pay, right now, about 81
percent toward their--we pay 81 percent toward their health
benefits.
Mr. Mack. I have 25 seconds, so let me just ask one more
question.
Mr. Donahoe. OK.
Mr. Mack. Do you believe the U.S. Postal Service is too big
to fail?
Mr. Donahoe. We are too big to fail. We are an important
part of the American economy, important part of American
society. We will deliver 171 billion pieces of mail this year.
Mr. Mack. And you are going to do that without a bailout?
Mr. Donahoe. We are not going to have a bailout. There is a
solution to this. There are a number of things that we can do
working with Congress to get a resolution, and it is not a
bailout.
Mr. Mack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Mack.
I now recognize the gentlewoman from the District of
Columbia, Ms. Norton, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you again, Mr. Postmaster, for the
improvements in delivery that you have personally made in this
region some years ago. I love that. You did something good then
and look where you are now.
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Norton. I would like to know where we are headed. We
have been talking about the Postal Service model for some time,
yet we have seen no alteration in the model, and many of us, I
think on both sides, can't believe that this model is meant for
all time. If you look at the assumptions of the statute when
the U.S. Congress set up the Postal Service, essentially it was
that you would be a profit-making business, is that not true?
Mr. Donahoe. At least to break even.
Ms. Norton. So a profitable business at least.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Norton. On page 1 of your testimony you say ``Our core
business will always be delivery. There is one customer need
that will not change and it is the very essence of what we do,
day in and day out.''
Now, I must ask you if we make the kinds of assumptions
that we are making at this hearing, that perhaps you will pay,
but not overpay, into the trust fund; and you have calculated
that to be 55 or 75 million, give or take however millions you
want to. Let's say you pay or not overpay. Let's assume that
you are delivering mail 5 days a week.
Can you say to us this afternoon that this model, which
requires you to be a profitable enterprise, delivering the mail
as you are delivering it now, is a model, the model in the
statute is a model, the model of a profitable enterprise, is a
model we can expect to survive; that you will be a profitable
enterprise under the assumptions of the statute that you are
now held to now? And remember I am saying you would not overpay
into the trust fund.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes, ma'am. I think that we can be profitable.
I think that there are a number of things that have to happen.
No. 1, the Postal Service has undertaken a number of issues,
revenue generation, cost reductions on our own that we feel
responsible toward and will work toward that point. As I
mentioned before, we are also working with the unions going
forward. We have very responsible leadership there; they
understand what we have to do for a strong Postal Service. So
we will take care of what we need to take care of.
The key for us is this: we are being required to prepay a
health benefit rate $5\1/2\ billion. This year we will lose
$6.4 billion.
Ms. Norton. And that is why I say if we assume that is no
longer a problem----
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Ms. Norton [continuing]. Then we will be back to a
profitable enterprise under the assumptions of the statute in
1970.
Mr. Donahoe. This year, if we were not required to make
that payment, we would break even, and that is with a volume
loss----
Ms. Norton. If you were required not to overpay.
Mr. Donahoe. Right. And that is with a volume loss of 22
percent. So our people have done a great job taking substantial
cost----
Ms. Norton. Well, that is very important to know, if you
say that but for this overpayment. Normally if you overpay
something, you are due a refund, so I am hearing you.
I would like to ask one more question, and I don't want
false hopes here, but I noted on page 2 of your testimony
something I have not heard before in a very long time. I don't
think I have heard it before, period. The first quarter showed
a modest increase of 1\1/2\ percent. Is that because people
quit writing their tax forms? To what do you attribute an
increase? In your testimony you say that the Christmas season
was not very good. Why is this first quarter showing a modest
increase in first class mail?
Mr. Donahoe. Well, the increase is total volume, and we
have seen a 9.6 percent increase in standard mail, advertising
mail; an increase in our package business. But we have had a
decrease of 5.9 percent in first class. First class pays the
freight, and that is why we have been asking, also, for the
consideration before Congress to go from 6 to 5 days.
Ms. Norton. And you think that, then, would have what
effect?
Mr. Donahoe. I will tell you this. If we can get a
resolution around the health benefits, if we can get a
resolution around the first payment--the President has made
that recommendation in his budget--if we can get a resolution
around the 6 to 5 day--these are things that are not in our
control--I know that we can get this organization profitable
and strong going into the future.
Ms. Norton. We are marking that down, Mr. Postmaster.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes, ma'am, you can. Thank you.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
I would now like to recognize the gentleman from Michigan
and our subcommittee vice chairman, Mr. Amash, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Amash. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the panel
for being here.
Mr. Donahoe, I really enjoyed meeting you the other day and
chatting with you.
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you.
Mr. Amash. You just said, I think, that you guys would
break even if you didn't have to make the pre-funding.
Mr. Donahoe. This year, yes.
Mr. Amash. But I think your own plans shows that you would
have an operating income loss.
Mr. Donahoe. Our plan shows an operating income loss of
about $900 million, but we will continue to cut. We have a plan
in place right now where we are addressing administrative cost
reductions, $750 million. We will get some of that this year.
We have some other changes going. Our goal would be to make
$100 million this year if we were able to be forgiven from the
prepayment plan this year.
Mr. Amash. OK. I have a copy of the letter from the Office
of Personnel Management to former Postmaster General John
Potter. It is from September 2004 and it rejects the claim that
USPS has overpaid the Civil Service Retirement System. OPM
explains that the Postal Service's request for a return of $75
billion in overpayment to the CSRS is unfounded and should not
be granted by the Congress. Furthermore, the letter includes a
statement from the CSRS Board of Actuaries, in which it
declares that OPM has appropriately and accurately determined
the financial obligations for the Postal Service.
Mr. Chair, I ask unanimous consent to submit this letter
for the record.
Mr. Donahoe, what is your response to the letter?
Mr. Donahoe. Here is my response: we have differing
opinions here. Our IG in the Postal Service has estimated with
external actuaries that we have overpaid $75 billion. The
Postal Regulatory Commission has looked at the same information
and their outside actuaries have estimated that we have paid
somewhere between 50 and 55. So there is a meeting of the minds
necessary to sit down and get this resolved once and for all.
Mr. Amash. So you do disagree with the letter.
Mr. Donahoe. I disagree with the letter.
Ms. Goldway. If I could add that the PAEA actually has a
provision so that the Postal Service can ask us to review the
OPM analysis, and the Postal Regulatory Commission did what we
believe is an objective analysis, bringing in a highly
respected third-party expert to review the situation. So one
could say you have the self-interest of the Postal Service and
the self-interest of the Office of Personnel Management, each
one wanting to protect its funds, but I want to assure you that
the Postal Regulatory Commission had no preconceptions, gave
this study no prior directions, and we came up with what we
believe is a fair and objective assessment that there is in
fact a $50 billion overpayment there.
Mr. Ross. And, without objection, the letter so referenced
is entered into the record.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Amash. I have a question for Mr. Herr as well. In your
testimony you recognize that a significant financial issue for
the Postal Service is the fact that 80 percent of its costs go
toward employees' salaries and benefits. Do you believe that
the USPS should be able to renegotiate collective bargaining
agreements?
Mr. Herr. One area that we suggested the Congress
reconsider is whether contracts that go to binding arbitration,
if there is an impasse, that there be a consideration given to
the Postal Service's ability to pay, given its financial
situation. So that is an area that we have highlighted in prior
work and I highlighted again today in my statement.
Mr. Amash. And the President has suggested giving USPS some
breathing room. Will that actually make the problem worse by
delaying it?
Mr. Herr. I would say that one of the things that we have
been on the record as saying the Postal Service needed some
short-term relief for this retiree health care benefit payment.
We have been saying that for 2 years; this would be a third
year. I think this is really the time, we are the statutory
debt limit, to make some hard decisions about what this
organization is going to look like going forward. The overall
liabilities and obligations outlined in my statement are over
$100 billion now, so it is time to take into consideration the
changing use of the mail, what kind of footprint the Postal
Service needs, and to really think about how that is all going
to be paid for, including retiree benefits, which employees are
expecting too.
Mr. Amash. Thank you all for your testimony. I yield back.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
The distinguished gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, and, again,
congratulations on your elevation as chairman of the
subcommittee. And I thank my good friend and colleague, Mr.
Lynch, for his leadership in the past on these issues and some
very thoughtful and groundbreaking hearings we have had in the
past, this being another contribution. And welcome to the
panelists.
Mr. Herr, let's start with that last point, the issue of
whether the President brought some breathing room. I believe in
his budget he recommended, was it, $4 billion of relief?
Mr. Herr. That is my understanding, yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. And that $4 billion, is it not predicated on
the same assumption Ms. Goldway makes and, for that matter, the
postmaster general makes, that in fact there have been
overpayments?
Mr. Herr. I think that is actually predicated on the fact
that there would be other efforts underway to restructure as
well.
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Mr. Herr. This would be a deferment, it is not a--my
understanding of the proposal the President made----
Mr. Connolly. I understand that, Mr. Herr, but is it not,
by implication, a recognition that in fact this is an issue,
that there have been overpayments in the past?
Mr. Herr. I guess you would have to--I would have to look
at the fine print.
Mr. Connolly. All right. Well, certainly the President,
hopefully, in his budget wasn't trying to add to the
postmaster's woes fiscally. He wasn't trying to add to that
debt.
Mr. Herr. Well----
Mr. Connolly. He was trying to provide relief.
Mr. Herr. Right. It is a short-term relief----
Mr. Connolly. Does the GAO have an opinion about this issue
of whether there is $50 to $75 billion of overpayments?
Mr. Herr. We have not looked at----
Mr. Connolly. You have not looked at it.
Mr. Herr. I can assure you we have read the reports,
though.
Mr. Connolly. You would agree, however, that if anywhere
between $50 and $75 billion were verified, that alone,
amortized over some period of time, could provide significant
relief to what is currently a significant imbalance in the
operational revenues of the Postal Service?
Mr. Herr. Given the numbers that are being discussed, yes,
that would be a significant----
Mr. Connolly. You would agree. OK, as the GAO, do you have
any plans to look at this?
Mr. Herr. If requested by Congress, we would certainly--
both today----
Mr. Connolly. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would hope that this
subcommittee would in fact make such a request. That is not a
trivial number. And if we are going to talk about dire futures
for the Postal Service, surely we want to look into a $50 to
$75 billion item that could provide relief fairly quickly over
an amortized basis. And I know, Mr. Chairman, you share my
concern about the options in front of us, and I would urge the
subcommittee to consider making a formal request to GAO for
just such a study.
Let me ask you another question, Mr. Herr, and maybe Ms.
Goldway or Mr. Postmaster General Donahoe, you as well. Between
1990 and 2007, did overall mail volume for the Postal Service
go up or down?
Ms. Goldway. It went up.
Mr. Connolly. It went up. At precisely the time the
Internet was coming in full play in the United States, is that
correct?
Ms. Goldway. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. So the relationship between the Internet and
mail volume is not necessarily always inevitably a negative
one. Might one conclude that, given that statistic, Ms.
Goldway?
Ms. Goldway. Oh, I think--my theory is that human beings
have an insatiable appetite for communication and everything
will grow, but it grows in different stages, just like radio
has adjusted----
Mr. Connolly. My time is limited, but----
Ms. Goldway. Oh.
Mr. Connolly. That is all right.
Ms. Goldway. But I do think that----
Mr. Connolly. But it went up?
Ms. Goldway. It went up.
Mr. Connolly. Did it go up last year? Did mail volume go up
or down last year?
Mr. Donahoe. Mail volume went down.
Mr. Connolly. It went down over the previous year?
Mr. Donahoe. Yes. Slightly.
Mr. Connolly. Slightly. When we look at--because you talked
a little bit, I think you made reference, Mr. Donahoe, to the
impact of the Internet on your business. But the Internet can
also generate business, can it not? For example, if I order a
book from Amazon, not only is that business for the Postal
Service, but it is actually lucrative business for the Postal
Service, is that not correct?
Mr. Donahoe. Absolutely.
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Goldway, because my time is limited, have
you had a chance to look at the draft legislation we have been
working on and do you, by and large, find that it is consistent
with many of the findings the Postal Regulatory Commission has
brought before this subcommittee over the years?
Ms. Goldway. I certainly think that many of the suggestions
that have been discussed by other legislators to address the
financial issues are included, and I am very pleased. In
addition, there are some specific items that you and I have
addressed that we think will really improve the revenues for
the Postal Service in the future and position it as a more
modern agency with the rest of the government. So I certainly
appreciate your efforts there and I am sure it will be a
valuable contribution to the conversations for legislation.
Mr. Connolly. We can only hope. And I am going to run out
of time; I have 20 seconds. But real quickly, don't we have a
problem, on top of everything else, with the aging and costly
vehicular fleet of the Postal Service?
Mr. Donahoe. I will take that one. Yes, we do. We have a
fleet of 185,000 delivery vehicles that are about 22 years old,
on average.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, I have run out of time, but if
I had a lot of time we would talk about this issue, because I
think it is another burden they have to face. Thank you very
much.
Mr. Ross. Thank you. And just for the record, as part of
that conversation, we did invite the Office of Management and
Budget to attend here that I think could have addressed some of
these questions; they declined the invitation, but I think it
would have been healthy to have them here as well.
I would now like to recognize the distinguished gentleman
from Illinois, Mr. Davis, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and let me
congratulate you on your elevation. As a matter of fact, we had
a young fellow here yesterday testifying, and he mentioned the
colleges that he wanted to attend, and he railed off about 10,
and all of them were in Florida, so there must be something
good about Florida.
Mr. Ross. Well, as an Auburn graduate, I have to take some
difference with that.
Mr. Davis. Let me welcome the witnesses. It is a pleasure
to see you and to have you here with us, Mr. Donahoe.
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you.
Mr. Davis. Ms. Goldway, Mr. Herr, it is good to see you
again.
I have listened to the testimony and I have listened to the
questioning, and, of course, I am not one of these individuals
who believe that government cannot get it right. I don't
subscribe to that school of thought. I think that government
can in fact get it right. And I guess as one of the persons who
helped put together the Postal Enhancement and Accountability
Act, we thought we were getting it right, or at least moving in
the direction of getting it right. We thought that we were
providing the kind of flexibilities that the Postal Service
needed; we thought we were providing opportunities for new
products and new approaches; and we thought we were providing
opportunity to make use of all the resources that the Postal
Service should have at its disposal.
You attempted a moment ago to talk about your vision in
terms of how we can get it right and how we can have the Postal
Service be self-sufficient; how we can make sure that we
interact a certain way with our stakeholders and our unions.
Could you share that direction for us again?
Mr. Donahoe. Sure. Thank you very much. I do believe the
Postal Service is and will be a very viable part of the
American economy and American society. There are definitely
changes going on, but we do provide that kind of contact that
people are looking for. If you look at what we offer from a
standpoint of the ability of a person to get in front of a
customer's eyes, we are the most direct way, the most direct;
and there is plenty of opportunity there. You talk about the
Internet. There are oftentimes no way you will find a Web site
unless you get a postcard in the mail that says come to my Web
site; and we know we provide value there.
We know we provide value for small business in the package
shipping business. When they can go down to the local post
office and put three or four or five packages in at a flat rate
of a fish and chips with guaranteed delivery within 2 to 3
days, there is tremendous value there. And we know that people
will continue to mail packages. We know we have some very
valuable partnerships; UPS and FedEx. We deliver the last mile
for a lot of their packages. This holiday season we delivered
16 percent more than we did last year, so we know there is
definitely opportunity in that area.
We also realize that there are costs that we need to
address. I think, as I said before, we have very responsible
leadership from our unions. They understand this. They can hear
the waterfall. They understand that we have to make some
changes. We are having very good discussions with the APWU. The
Rural Carriers have kept the contracts open, so we think there
are some opportunities to move in the right direction there.
With our management associations we have seen progress in a
lot of the changes we have made there. They have been very
supportive in big changes that we have had to make within the
administrative staff to reduce costs due to the mail volume
drop.
Congressman, I am 100 percent positive that there is a ton
of value in the Postal Service. I think from a government
perspective the Postal Service is pretty proud of the fact that
we do a good job. Excellent service. We have taken more costs
out of this organization than any private firm, and we know we
can continue to do that in the future. We need the aid of
Congress on a couple issues.
Mr. Davis. Let me just ask you. I know that we have been
talking about loss projections, and we hear $900 million. Have
we ever had any projections that were higher than that?
Mr. Donahoe. Higher in terms of losses?
Mr. Davis. Yes.
Mr. Donahoe. Oh yes, absolutely.
Mr. Davis. So that means that we are actually making some
progress.
Mr. Donahoe. Sure. If we can get some resolution on a
couple of these fixed costs, we definitely can. And the other
thing that is important is with the uncertainty of all this
discussion about year after year the Postal Service loses
money, that starts to make customers fearful of doing business
with us. We need to get that behind us. We are the lynchpin of
a $1 trillion industry. That needs to be resolved.
Mr. Davis. Well, I was always told that wherever there was
a will, there was a way.
Mr. Donahoe. That is right.
Mr. Davis. It seems to me that you have both the will and
you are searching for the way, and I think you are refreshing,
and I look forward to working with you.
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Davis.
At this time I want to thank our panel for taking the time
and now take just a brief recess while we get ready for our
second panel. We are probably going to have another vote series
a little bit after 4, so hopefully we can accomplish all we
need to accomplish before that vote series.
Again, thank you all for being here and we will let the
clerk set up for the next panel.
[Recess.]
Mr. Ross. We will call the subcommittee back to order.
I now recognize our second panel. Mr. Sampey, seated to my
left, is the executive vice president and chief operating
officer of Valpak; Mr. Sackler is the coordinator of the
Coalition for a 21st Century Postal Service; and Mr. Frederick
Rolando is the president of the National Association of Letter
Carriers.
Gentlemen, I will ask you to stand to be sworn in. Please
raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Ross. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Please be seated.
Again, in order to allow time for discussion and questions,
please limit your testimony to 5 minutes. Of course, your
written testimony has been submitted and entered into the
record.
With that, I will start with Mr. Sampey. You are
recognized.

STATEMENTS OF JIM SAMPEY, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF,
OPERATION OFFICER, VALPAK; ARTHOR SACKLER, COORDINATOR,
COALITION FOR A 21ST CENTURY POSTAL SERVICE, SACKLER POLICY
SERVICES, LLC; AND FREDERIC ROLANDO, DIRECTOR OF LEGISLATIVE
AND POLITICAL AFFAIRS, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF LETTER CARRIERS
(AFL-CIO)

STATEMENT OF JIM SAMPEY

Mr. Sampey. Chairman Ross, Ranking Member Lynch, and
members of the subcommittee, my name is Jim Sampey. I am the
executive vice president and chief operating officer for Cox
Target Media, headquarters in Largo, FL. We own Valpak Direct
Marketing Systems and we are one of the largest direct mail
firms in North America. Thank you for this opportunity to
testify on what we agree is a looming crisis for the USPS.
Valpak has been in the business for over 42 years. We
pioneered the concept of local cooperative direct mail in the
United States. Valpak is owned by Cox Enterprises, based in
Atlanta, which is one of the largest media conglomerates in the
United States.
Valpak is a franchise organization, with locations in every
State. Valpak represents more than 2,000 direct and franchised
employees. Each year we assist more than 54,000 small
businesses, from local mom and pops to large national
companies. Today Valpak delivers savings and values to about 40
million households each month, and each year our familiar blue
envelope carries some 20 billion money-saving offers in 500
million envelopes.
Just 3 years ago we opened a $220 million facility in St.
Petersburg, Florida to accommodate our growth for the future.
Our company is also aggressively entering the digital space in
the online and mobile couponing business. This will allow us to
reach new customers with our products and continue to serve as
a leader in our industry. Our digital strategies will continue
to complement our mail volume.
The nature of our business means that we watch the USPS and
its issues very closely. We believe that the Post Office, under
Jack Potter and now Pat Donahoe, have done a remarkable job in
downsizing the Post Office to adjust for plummeting mail
volumes, while maintaining high service levels. If you were to
set aside the $5\1/2\ billion artificial financial burden to
prepay future retiring health costs, which Congress imposed in
the PAEA, the Post Office actually had an operating profit of
$601 million over the last 4 years. We believe the Post
Office's March 2, 2010 Action Plan: Envisioning America's
Future Postal Service, was well designed, and except for its
proposal to reduce the role of the Postal Regulatory
Commission, we support it in all respects.
It seems to us that the Post Office is constantly getting
caught up in the political machinations of Congress. It may not
be popular to tell Congress that the bill was ill conceived,
but look at what the PAEA did. It imposed a CPI-based cap on
prices; it gave the Post Office virtually no new powers to cut
costs; and at the last minute we were told that it was
necessary to get the bill scored properly, Congress needed to
impose a $5\1/2\ billion annual financial burden to prepay
future retiring health costs, a burden imposed on no other
agency or company.
Valpak, along with all mailers, urges Congress and the
Commission to address the financial issue by removing the $5\1/
2\ million artificial annual burdens on mailers to pre-fund the
postal retirement health benefits and require the Office of
Personnel Management to recalculate the CSRS and FERS
obligations using overpayments made by mailers toward these
retirement expenses to help pay ordinary health benefit
expenses.
On the cost-cutting items, we urge Congress and the
Commission to allow the USPS to move to 5 day delivery. By
recent polls, at least two-thirds of the people don't care that
much about Saturday delivery, and it would allow the Post
Office to save what should be about $3 billion annually and,
second, allow the Post Office to close standalone money-losing
post offices and replace them with retail facilities in place
with high foot traffic.
This is not to say that we support all the Postal Service
does. We are deeply frustrated with some of the pricing
policies which have allowed it to lose $5 billion over the last
4 years on underwater products. As a prosperous company would
not choose to offer products which lose money, and it is
completely unacceptable that one that is on the brink of
insolvency would continue to do so.
Last, we do oppose the Post Office's efforts to go into
competition with existing customers. One example of this is the
recently passed market test called Marketing Mail Made Easy.
Easy for that to say. This proposal has generated a lot of
opposition from the mail community. We don't think that
cannibalizing the mail that is already in the system is the
right strategy for growth.
I look forward to answering any of your questions you may
have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sampey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Sampey.
Mr. Sackler, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ARTHOR SACKLER

Mr. Sackler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon to
you, to Ranking Member Lynch, and the members of the
subcommittee.
The Coalition for a 21st Century Postal Service is pleased
to present our views on what we also agree is a looming crisis
for USPS. The Coalition's 33 trade associations and companies
represent a major swath of a nearly $1 trillion industry that
employs more than 7\1/2\ million people. It runs the gamut of
paper communications; from forestry and paper companies,
printers and technology providers to companies which create
every type of mail.
There is far more at stake in how the Postal Service fares
than the Postal Service itself: the future of an industry
roughly 15 times the size of postal revenues, the huge number
of jobs it supports, and the substantial impact that industry
has on the economy. And we believe postal insolvency, which
could happen by the end of this fiscal year without action,
will have consequences not only for the Postal Service, but
quite possibly for the Nation.
Given the state of the industry and potential postal
insolvency, the Coalition believes it imperative for Congress
this year to correct a core element of the financial imbalance,
by eliminating a hidden tax assessed on postal ratepayers that
was used to reduce the deficit and effectively subsidize
retirements of non-postal Federal retirees, and repatriating
that money over time to underwrite the pre-funding of retiree
health benefits required by Congress. The $50 billion or more
in overpayments to CSRS and the nearly $7 billion more to FERS
constitute a vast hidden tax that would, if redirected,
dramatically improve the position of the Service and,
consequently, the industry and the public generally which it
serves.
Some believe repatriating this money would constitute a
bailout. With great respect, we strongly disagree. While these
overpayments were caused by a good faith actuarial
misinterpretation, they were nonetheless paid not by the
American taxpayer, but by postal ratepayers. As the postmaster
general pointed out, USPS's money comes almost exclusively from
user fees, postage, and 90 percent of that comes from
businesses. Having collectively funded the bulk of these
overpayments, we believe the right outcome is to use the money
to benefit the Postal Service and thereby those who depend upon
it.
The alternative is insolvency. On September 30th, facing
the choice of paying $5\1/2\ billion to pre-fund retirees'
health benefits or paying its employees and keeping the lights
on, as the postmaster general put it before, they will sensibly
opt for the latter. There will be no legal or other
consequences for the Postal Service or its managers, but it
will be in default of an obligation.
Questions about its reliability will arise for those who do
business with it. And will overseas holders of U.S. securities
treat this as the first loose thread in unraveling the Nation's
financial ball of yarn? What would that do to interest rates
and yields for treasuries? After all, it remains the U.S.
Postal Service. Insolvency must be avoided.
And if it isn't, the obligations won't simply go away. To
the extent that the financial shortfalls for USPS overtake it,
those obligations will fall to Congress. Then there will be the
need for an actual taxpayer-funded bailout.
In our written statement we offer other recommendations we
believe would help the Service and the industry grapple with
the interrelated financial, structural, and innovative elements
of this looming crisis. These include addressing the high cost
of compliance with mailing rules, giving the Postal Service
more flexibility to close facilities or offer certain non-
postal products, more flexibility on negotiated service
agreements, and more.
Without structural changes as well, financial transfers
will only kick the proverbial can down the road, as has been
noted several times during this hearing.
Mail remains an important communications channel. Even in
its current fragile state, the postal system remains pervasive
and effective. Yet, despite these attributes, challenged by
disruptive technology and retrenching resulting from the
recession, our system is struggling. Mailers and suppliers have
undergone dramatic changes the past 2 years, collectively
enduring hundreds of thousands of layoffs, the shuttering of
numerous businesses, and other dislocations. The result has
been unprecedented budgetary pressure on mailers to reduce
their costs of distribution.
No one can force anyone to mail. Mailers have choices.
Because of the Internet, first class, the cash cow of the
system, is effectively no longer a monopoly and continues to
sink like a stone. Each account going online is costing a dozen
bills, a dozen payments, and several promotional pieces each
year. The decline in first class threatens the system's
financial stability.
Similarly, when prices rise, there is more pressure on
catalogers, other advertisers, and periodicals to use
alternatives, decrease the weight and size of their mailing,
otherwise reduce their mail exposure. Like first class mailers,
they have choices via the Internet and other marketing
channels. The concomitant effect on suppliers is just as
significant. Less mail means less paper, printing, and
technology business.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We believe that all of this
financial pressure on mailers puts a premium on holding prices
down while maintaining service. The Coalition is prepared to
work with you and your colleagues to stave off a decline of the
Postal Service. It need not be inevitable. I would be happy to
respond to any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sackler follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Sackler.
Mr. Rolando, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF FREDERIC ROLANDO

Mr. Rolando. Good afternoon, Chairman Ross. Congratulations
again on your chairmanship. And good afternoon, Ranking Member
Lynch. Welcome back from Afghanistan. And greetings to the
other members of the subcommittee.
I am pleased to be here today on behalf of the nearly
290,000 members of the National Association of Letter Carriers.
We are honored to be the public face of the U.S. Postal
Service, an agency mandated by the U.S. Constitution and one of
America's oldest, proudest, and most essential institutions.
I have submitted a written statement, but in my few minutes
here I would like to leave you with five points to consider,
some of which counter the conventional wisdom.
It is worth nothing that the figures I will cite are from
official sources. We can all form our own opinions about public
policy, but we should start from shared facts.
First, the Postal Service remains a vital part of our
society and our economy; it provides the only truly universal
delivery and communications network in the United States,
serving every corner of this country, from the most rural areas
of Montana to every city block of Manhattan, 6 days a week. For
several years in a row the public has named the Postal Service
the most trusted Federal agency in America, in large part
because of its dedicated and professional work force.
The Postal Service is a vital infrastructure service that
is not only an essential element of the country's financial
payment system, but also a key facilitator of business and
communications for the 150 million homes and businesses it
serves. According to a 2009 study by the Postal Service, the
annual value of transactions moving through the mail exceeds
$30 trillion, underlining its importance to the health of our
Nation's economy.
Second, there is indeed a financial crisis at the Postal
Service, one we must address for the sake of the economy and
the millions of workers employed by the mailing industry. But
it isn't the crisis you might think it is. Let me explain.
With the Nation still suffering from the worst recession
since The Great Depression, mail volume has fallen, a trend
exacerbated by Internet diversion. And yet the Postal Service
has been running an operational profit. You heard that
correctly, postal and profit in the same sentence.
In the most recent quarter alone, postal operations had a
profit of $226 million, taking in more than a quarter billion
dollars over operating expenses. That brings to $837 billion
the net operational profits over the past 4 years. And this has
been achieved by increased productivity, labor-management
partnership, fair and flexible work adjustments, and
performance and quality that have lifted customer satisfaction,
all while maintaining the most affordable postal rates in the
world.
But while the Postal Service is operating more smartly than
ever, it faces a huge burden unrelated to its daily work. The
2006 congressional mandate to pre-fund future retiree health
benefits for the next 75 years, and to do so within 10 years,
and obligation faced by no public agency or private firm in
America, imperils the Postal Service. In the past 4 years, the
Postal Service has made $20.9 billion in pre-funding payments.
It is that unique obligation during a recession that has
plunged the Postal Service into a financial crisis.
Point three, fortunately, there is a good solution. The
Postal Service has a surplus of between $50 and $75 billion in
its pension funds, according to two independent audits, because
of overpayments made since 1971. Congressional approval to let
the Postal Service make an internal transfer of its own money
derived from the sale of products and services would leave both
the pension and retiree funds in far better shape than
virtually all such accounts in this country.
Why? Because not only have daily Postal Service operations
been carried out efficiently, the agency has been highly
responsible with future obligations, all this, let me
emphasize, without using any taxpayer money for over a quarter
century. We are simply asking that the Postal Service be
allowed to use its own money, as any responsible business
would.
Bipartisan agreement is forming on this crucial reform.
Senators Tom Carper and Susan Collins have endorsed this
solution and drafted legislation to implement. I am happy to
learn that Representative Connolly of this subcommittee has
prepared a bill addressing this issue, one that builds on prior
work by Ranking Member Lynch.
Chairman Ross, we hope you and your colleagues will embrace
this bipartisan consensus on pre-funding reform.
Fourth, while this proposal, backed by the Postal Service,
has no downside, that is not the case with some of the other
USPS ideas. Eliminating Saturday service, for example, would be
disastrous. It would save about 5 percent of the postal budget
by sacrificing 17 percent of service; it would inconvenience
millions of small business owners who transact business on
Saturdays and Americans who need medicines on the weekend; it
would add 80,000 postal employees to the jobless rolls; it
would imperil the Postal Service's future by forcing customers
to turn elsewhere. And as competitors fill the vacuum, future
revenue would decline. All this to save an amount barely half
the annual pre-funding payments. No business would choose this
option over an internal transfer of its own funds, and neither
should we.
Finally, the Postal Service has a bright future. The
current challenges aren't the first since Benjamin Franklin
served as the first postmaster general, nor will they be the
last. As realists, we know we must adapt to society's evolving
needs. The mail mix, for example, is shifting, with too little
first class mail these days. As the economy improves, we have
to watch the mail flow and adapt as needed. Even as we speak,
the overall mail volume is rising for the first time in 4
years.
We have lots of ideas on new services to offer the growing
number of home-based businesses, on expanding our work with UPS
and FedEx as their most economical option for last mile
delivery, and on adding to what letter carriers already do to
protect community and national security.
I would like to conclude by congratulating all the new
members of the subcommittee. We believe these are nonpartisan
issues in the tradition of bipartisan cooperation that has
characterized this subcommittee as worth nurturing. We look
forward to working with all of you on postal issues and to find
bipartisan solutions to the challenge before us. NELC has
demonstrated repeatedly in recent years that it is prepared to
do its part to help preserve the long-time viability of the
Postal Service by serving the American people and helping the
businesses that rely on universal service to grow and prosper,
and we remain every bit as committed to that goal today.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rolando follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Rolando.
We have been called for votes. We have about 11\1/2\
minutes to go. Mr. Lynch and I have agreed that we are going to
try to do 5 minutes each, and then we will recess and come back
right afterwards and finish then. So those who need to go, go
ahead and go. I will start with a series of questions.
Mr. Rolando, one of the things that was pointed out in the
GAO report, Mr. Herr who was here in the first panel, indicated
that, USPS now has costly excess capacity. Is that something
that you can comment on? Are you aware of excess capacity,
whether it be in distribution or wherever?
Mr. Rolando. I don't know what he was referring to, no.
Mr. Ross. OK. With regard to also another recommendation
the GAO had in terms of collective bargaining and binding
arbitration, his recommendation was that the financial
condition of the U.S. Postal Service should be taken into
consideration in the binding arbitration procedures. How do you
feel about that?
Mr. Rolando. His wish is granted because the financial
condition of the Postal Service has been considered in every
arbitration that we have had. The arbitrators are required to
consider the arguments of both parties, and in every interest
arbitration we have had that issue has come up and been
considered by the arbitrators.
Mr. Ross. I appreciate that perspective.
To all three of you, you all recognize, I think, that the
recession has had an impact on mail. I mean, there was an
increase in volume from 1990 to 2007, when we have seen a
decrease. I will start with you, Mr. Rolando. Do you think that
the U.S. Postal Service has done enough aggressively to cut
costs? And, if not, what would you recommend that they further
do?
Mr. Rolando. I think they should continue what they are
doing, to work with the unions on win-win solutions. I know my
union has worked with them aggressively for the last few years
on adjusting routes to the change in volumes, which, by their
own numbers, has saved them over $1 billion, and I think we
need to continue to work together through negotiations and in
between those negotiations on these win-win solutions.
Mr. Ross. Mr. Sackler.
Mr. Sackler. Well, Mr. Chairman, the Postal Service and its
employees have indeed cut a lot of costs out of the system, but
by definition, looking at the situation that it is in, it
hasn't been enough. We think that, to get to your previous
question, our understanding is that the system is overbuilt by
almost a factor of two and that there needs to be a drastic
realignment and restructuring, closing and consolidation of
facilities, and for that there will need to be some change in
the law and there will have to be support from Congress
because----
Mr. Ross. So you agree that there is excess capacity.
Mr. Sackler. Yes, we do.
Mr. Ross. OK.
And Mr. Sampey, with regard to costs.
Mr. Sampey. Yes, I would say that they have done a great
job between the unions and the administration in the Post
Office. They have done a fantastic job to manage the costs. And
I think there is more that they can do if some legislative
activities are taken to give them a little more room to work on
the cost side of the house. We are very supportive of the
Postal Regulatory Commission, especially on the pricing side,
to give some oversight, but I think the management and the
union have a lot of opportunities to take additional dollars
out of the business if we give them a little bit of latitude
with legislative activities.
Mr. Ross. Mr. Sackler, back to you. You touched on this in
your opening remarks, about if the Postal Service defaulted on
its obligation to the Treasury. Could you expound on what
impact you think that would have? I mean, assuming we did
nothing and they couldn't meet their obligation, they have
exceeded their $15 billion borrowing limit, or met it at least,
what is the outcome?
Mr. Sackler. As we understand it, there are no legal
operational or practical consequences for USPS or its managers.
But the implications in terms of how people look at the Service
and the fact that whether or not it is functioning largely
independently, it is still an arm of the U.S. Government. And
to have an arm of the U.S. Government default on an obligation,
even if the actual impact is only technical, you have to think,
well, what are those who are holding our bonds and have the
future of our finances in their hands thinking? It is all a
psychological game.
Mr. Ross. It could affect our credit rating.
Mr. Sackler. Exactly.
Mr. Ross. OK.
Last, Mr. Sampey, you want to comment on that?
Mr. Sampey. Just one comment on that. I think Pat brought
it up in his statement. I think the industry confidence in the
Post Office, and some of the challenges that they are having
right now, you know, there are a lot of folks out in the
industry that are saying should we move to digital, should we
move to something else, for fear of where the Post Office is
going to end up. I think whatever we do, we need to do it
quickly. I think we need to move on this as a cohesive group
and work together and figure out how do we get the confidence
back. The Post Office has done a great job and the quality of
service has been fantastic.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to make a
couple of clarifications. I know that my dear friend from
Florida, Mr. Mack, commented that government doesn't have the
ability to help business make the necessary reforms.
I just want to remind the gentleman that the U.S. Postal
Service is a unique business; it was actually created by the
U.S. Congress and it is one of the few institutions that is
explicitly provided for in the U.S. Constitution. Government
has done a pretty good job over the past 236 years in guiding
the Post Office in providing universal service 6 days a week
and has done a pretty good job, as some of the polling out
there has indicated, that our postal employees are the most
trusted public employees in the United States today.
I would also like to point out with respect to the
suggestion that OPM is correct in their assertion that the
overpayment does not exist, for the benefit of the new Members
especially, I just want to sort of lay out the history here of
OPM denying obligations and what the results have been.
Going back to 2002, the Postal Service pension fund was
found to be overfunded by OPM by $78 billion, and we in
Congress had to go back in 2003 and tell OPM you have to
straighten this out. So there was an overpayment there of $78
billion.
Then in 2003 OPM attempted to make the Postal Service pick
up the responsibilities for military service pensions,
obligations for Postal Service employees. So if they are in the
service, they wanted the Post Office to pick up their pension
credits that were due because of the military service, and we
said that would not be right. So Congress rejected that
attempt.
In 2009 we found that OPM used an exaggerated 7 percent
health care appreciation inflation forecast instead of the 5
percent that is the industry standard, and that resulted in an
overpayment of $13.2 by 2016. So we had to go back and we
ordered OPM cut that out, use the industry standard. So OPM
then went back and changed it.
Now the Postal Service has been overcharged by $75 billion
for its share of CSRS pensions for folks for their pension
credits before they became USPS employees. People have to
understand that. These are pension credits for folks before
they went to work for the Post Office, but they have been
overcharged and the Post Office is picking up the inflation for
those costs.
So there is a whole history here of the OPM. And, look,
anybody can make a mistake, but in every single case OPM
overcharged the Post Office by tens of billions of dollars. So
that is the record we have here. Those are the facts, and there
does seem to be a--oh, and by the way, OPM wrote a rather
gratuitous letter that they thought, by God, the Post Office
should have to pre-fund their health care obligations 100
percent, pre-fund it by 100 percent. But if you look at what
OPM is doing, they pre-fund their obligations at 40 percent. So
you would think what is good for the goose is good for the
gander, but that is not the case.
So I just wanted to make those clarifications just for some
of the newer Members that are onboard here.
Mr. Rolando, in my remaining time, before I run up the
Hill, I want to ask with respect to going from 6-day delivery
to 5-day delivery, that affects your membership, the letter
carriers, and the mail handlers dramatically. Is there any
information that you would like Congress to have before, or do
you think the Post Office should provide to Congress before we
make that decision?
Mr. Rolando. Well, I think it is important that it not only
affects my members, it affects thousands and thousands of
businesses across America who have contacted the NALC directly
have responded to the NALC in terms of their objections to 5-
day delivery and how it would affect them, and we----
Mr. Lynch. I don't mean to interrupt you, but, in fairness,
I have to tell you I heard loud and clear from the folks that
have catalogs and magazines that apparently they use Saturday
as their delivery day because they want folks to, on their day
off, actually read the product that they deliver. So you are
right, it is not solely in your interest. But go ahead.
Mr. Rolando. That was what I wanted to say, the effect on
the businesses, not to mention the public and the customers.
Mr. Lynch. All right, thank you.
Mr. Ross. We are going to recess to go take our votes, and
we will return after this first vote, and then we should be
able to finish up. Thank you for your patience. We will be
back.
[Recess.]
Mr. Ross. I would like to call us back into order and I
would now like to recognize the gentlewoman from the District
of Columbia, Ms. Norton, for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, particularly, Mr. Chairman, for
rushing back, because I know you have to go to the floor again.
I wish I did.
Let me say how helpful all of your testimony has been. You
have reinforced a lot of what the Postal Service itself has
said. And I want to say to you, Mr. Rolando, I have walked with
my letter carrier. He is an indispensable party to the American
people, far beyond delivering the mail. There are people who
have nobody but a letter carrier to speak to every day,
particularly the elderly. They greet him at the door even if
they've got a walker. Thank you for all you do. You are
wonderful. Your letter carriers are the best.
I want to just straighten two things out for my own
thinking, certainly. I am well aware of what collective
bargaining does for those in trouble. There is nothing more
valuable than to have the cooperation of level-headed unions
when you have to manage a downsizing of any kind. Everybody
ought to know that the reason the Postal Service has been able
to do what it does is because its collective bargaining
partners understand the business as well as the business with
whom they are dealing, so I congratulate you. I know the
sacrifices you have made. And you don't see the postal workers
out here screaming and hollering because they believe fairness
has been accorded because it has been bargained. So I agree
with your testimony; don't tamper with collective bargaining.
If you really want to mess up this situation, just mess with
collective bargaining.
Now, Saturday delivery. I read your testimony on Saturday
delivery. I want to know is it subject to collective
bargaining.
Mr. Rolando. Saturday delivery?
Ms. Norton. Is that bargained over?
Mr. Rolando. No, it is not.
Ms. Norton. Now, you make a pretty compelling case that
there would be very little savings. The thing that has made me
interested in Saturday delivery is this overwhelming number of
Americans, 75, 80 percent say, OK, if that is what you have to
do, that is what you can do. But you make a pretty compelling
case not simply about inconvenience to people. I understand
that; people, of course, in hard times, have to take that. But
loss of business, that bothers me. What do you mean about the
loss of business? Who will get that business if Saturday
delivery in those locations--and let's assume we had, in my
hypothetical, no Saturday delivery in just some locations, but
some you did have it. In any case, where would the business go
to and what would that mean for future business for the Postal
Service?
Mr. Rolando. First, if I could, I would like to just
comment on the 75 to 80 percent that you just alluded to.
Ms. Norton. Yes.
Mr. Rolando. You have to understand it really depends on
what you ask people as to how they are going to respond. If you
ask people if they would rather have an increase in postal
rates or lose a day of delivery, you are going to get one set
of answers. If you are truthful with people and give them the
real options, would you rather the Postal Service be allowed to
transfer their own money from a surplus in their pension fund
or lose a day of delivery, I think you get a completely
different answer.
Ms. Norton. And, of course, Mr. Sampey's testimony, and I
think the testimony of the first panel, was that it did not
include Saturday delivery; they just said if you dealt with
these overpayments that you would have a profitable enterprise.
So go ahead. So that takes care of the question.
Now, what about the loss of business? Who would get the
business?
Mr. Rolando. Well, there is always going to be a need for
delivery on Saturday. We talked about prescription drugs and
other things that the American people are going to need.
Somebody is going to fill that vacuum.
Ms. Norton. And you think that would have an effect on
future business for the Post Office or that would carry over
into your Monday through Friday business?
Mr. Rolando. Absolutely. It would affect the current
business; it would affect the growing part of the business,
which is people shopping online and parcel delivery when people
are home on Saturday. It is just not a good idea where there
are a lot of innovative things.
Ms. Norton. Let me ask you one more question, then, because
you have made me understand that. We had some testimony here
about thousands of postal workers that are on worker's
compensation that could be on retirement. Would you clarify
that? Why don't they just retire?
Mr. Rolando. I am not real sure what the gentleman was
referring to, but I know there have been proposals with regard
to worker's compensation which we certainly are willing to look
at. The important thing is that we don't punish our employees
who are injured on the job and that we treat them fairly.
Ms. Norton. And there was some concern that these workers
had no intention of coming back to work. Now, I know the
retirement age is 55, but somebody 55 these days better come
back to work if you possibly can.
Mr. Rolando. Sure.
Ms. Norton. I wonder if the union will take a close look at
that, because it will not sound good to the American people if
you are carrying people who could then be carried on their
earned retirement benefits.
Mr. Rolando. Again, it is all how it is characterized. That
is why I would have to take issue with the comment that was
made. We would have to look behind it, because we certainly
want to look for a way to treat these people and not punish
them.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Ms. Norton.
In light of no other Members here to inquire and us about
ready to go in for another vote here, we are going to adjourn.
I want to thank the gentlemen of our second panel and
appreciate you all being here, taking time out of your
schedule. We have just scratched the surface and look forward
to working with you all on this issue. Thank you all very much
and have a good day.
[Whereupon, at 4:20 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


