- THE FUTURE OF CAPITAL FORMATION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FUTURE OF CAPITAL FORMATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 10, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-46

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-517 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 10, 2011.....................................     1
Statement of:
Silbert, Barry E., CEO, Secondmarket; Eric Koester, co-
founder, Zaarly, Inc.; Richard W. Rahn, senior fellow, the
Cato Institute; Jonathan R. Macey, Sam Harris professor of
corporate law, Securities and Corporate Finance, Yale Law
School, professor, Yale School of Management; and Roel C.
Campos, esq., Locke Lord Bissell & Liddell, former
Commissioner of the Securities Exchange Commission.........    43
Campos, Roel C...........................................   100
Koester, Eric............................................    61
Macey, Jonathan R........................................    81
Rahn, Richard W..........................................    72
Silbert, Barry E.........................................    43
Schapiro, Mary, chairman, U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission; and Meredith Cross, Director of the Division of
Corporation Finance, U.S. Securities and Exchange Committee     4
Cross, Meredith..........................................    19
Schapiro, Mary...........................................     4
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Campos, Roel C., esq., Locke Lord Bissell & Liddell, former
Commissioner of the Securities Exchange Commission,
prepared statement of......................................   102
Koester, Eric, co-founder, Zaarly, Inc., prepared statement
of.........................................................    63
Macey, Jonathan R., Sam Harris professor of corporate law,
Securities and Corporate Finance, Yale Law School,
professor, Yale School of Management, prepared statement of    83
Rahn, Richard W., senior fellow, the Cato Institute, prepared
statement of...............................................    74
Schapiro, Mary, chairman, U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission, prepared statement of..........................     7
Silbert, Barry E., CEO, Secondmarket, prepared statement of..    46

THE FUTURE OF CAPITAL FORMATION

----------

TUESDAY, MAY 10, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 12:30 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Darrell E. Issa
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, McHenry, Lankford, Amash,
Buerkle, Gosar, Meehan, Gowdy, Farenthold, Cummings, Towns,
Maloney, Norton, Tierney, Cooper, and Connolly.
Staff present: Robert Borden, general counsel; Will L.
Boyington and Drew Colliatie, staff assistants; Molly Boyl,
parliamentarian; Lawrence J. Brady, staff director; Katelyn E.
Christ, research analyst; Benjamin Stroud Cole, policy advisor
and investigative analyst; John Cuaderes, deputy staff
director; Adan P. Fromm, director of Member liaison and floor
operations; Linda Good, chief clerk; Peter Haller, senior
counsel; Frederick Hill, director of communications and senior
policy advisor; Christopher Hixon, deputy chief counsel,
oversight; Hudson T. Hollister, counsel; Ryan Little, manager
of floor operations; Justin LoFranco, press assistant; Mark D.
Marian, senior professional staff member; Laura L. Rush, deputy
chief clerk; Ashley Etienne, minority director of
communications; Jennifer Hoffman, minority press secretary;
Carla Hultberg, minority chief clerk; Lucinda Lessley, minority
policy director; Brian Quinn, minority counsel; Steven Rangel,
minority senior counsel; Dave Rapallo, minority staff director;
and Susanne Grooms Sachsman, minority chief counsel.
Chairman Issa. I want to make a couple of brief
announcements. First of all, it will not be a breach of decorum
with the current temperature if people remove their jackets. I
apologize, but when they turn from air conditioning to heat,
they do it with a vengeance in this building.
I understand the chairman has to leave at 1:30 so we will
be respectful of time. As Members show up, they may or may not
get to ask questions.
Madam Chair, I understand you are the only one that is
going to be making an opening statement, correct? And that Ms.
Cross, I understand we get to keep you for all of the followup
questions.
Very good.
I am going to waive the normal mission statement and be
very brief in my opening statement.
Today's hearing is in fact about the issue of capital
formation. As the chart behind me indicates, the historic
public market, the market we think of as the Nasdaq, the New
York Stock Exchange, and so on, is no longer producing the
number of initial public offerings as it once did. Since 1991,
we have seen that avenue for capital formation reduced. Doesn't
mean that there aren't plenty of companies who still suit that.
But today we are asking the question of can America
continue to build companies of the future if there is not an
additional access to capital for those companies of the future?
Particularly, we will be asking the question of whether or not
a 499 limit of investors on private companies is appropriate or
whether there can be administrative or legislative fixes to
that.
As a member of a board of a small public company, I am well
aware of the cost and difficulties of being public. We are not
the Financial Oversight Committee, and we will not assume that
we can micromanage what happens in Sarbanes-Oxley, Dodd-Frank,
or any of the other legislation that is well known here on the
Hill.
Rather, we are thrilled to be in the presence of a
distinguished first and second panel that are going to help us
understand, in the broad sense of the word, where America is
going and what the great stories of tomorrow are.
Many people have looked at the Facebook situation and said,
Ha, that is the impetus for this. Nothing could be further from
the truth, although it is a high-profile company who only
recently went past their 500 investors, it is very clear that
is not the model for which we have a concern.
We on the committee are concerned for the small- and
medium-sized companies, for companies in which a family or an
extended family wish to make sensible plans for the future,
allowing diversification and at the same time opportunity for
investors.
Additionally, we would like to understand better from
Chairman Schapiro what the real future of a qualified investor
is versus the investment public as a whole. As all of us know,
the SEC has a dual mandate. One of them, of course, is notably
the protection of the public. The other is, in fact, what this
is about here today, which is capital formation. We hope to
come into this and go out of it with the idea that America has
an obligation and Congress has an obligation to participate in
capital formation that leads to greater employment. And with 9
percent unemployment still lingering with us for over 2 years
on and off now, we understand and realize that this is but a
small element of it, but it is an important element.
With that, I yield to the ranking member.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Today's
hearing will examine ways to help small and emerging businesses
gain access to additional capital, help them grow and hopefully
succeed.
This issue is critical to the continuing economic recovery
and the future success of our great Nation. If U.S. firms
cannot grow, they simply cannot create jobs. Our examination
must begin with the simple concept that permits our markets to
function effectively, and that is investor confidence. If
people or institutions do not have confidence that our market
is safe and sound, they simply will not invest. And this lack
of confidence will impede the ability of growing companies to
access much-needed capital.
This was a key lesson of the 1929 market crash. As a
result, Congress created the Securities and Exchange Commission
to enforce security laws in a way that enabled firms to access
capital while providing investors with sufficient information
to have a basic level of confidence in the system.
We learned this lesson again in 2008 as inadequate
financial oversight led to recklessness, fraud, and
unscrupulous behavior resulting in the greatest financial
crisis since the Great Depression. We must never forget that.
The SEC has now charged 66 entities and individuals with
securities violations leading to or arising from the recent
financial crisis. For example, Goldman Sachs paid a record
penalty of $550 million after the SEC charged the firm with,
``defrauding investors, defrauding investors by misstating and
omitting key facts about a financial product tied to subprime
mortgages.''
Charles Schwab paid $118 million to settle charges
regarding misleading statements the firm made to market a
mutual fund ``invested in mortgage-backed and other risky
securities.'' As a result, Congress passed the Dodd-Frank Act
last year, making critical changes to the U.S. financial
regulatory system to enhance accountability for banks and Wall
Street firms that caused the financial crisis.
Some people now feel we should repeal these protections in
their entirety, as if the crisis that crippled our great Nation
and our economy in 2008 never happened. In my opinion, that is
exactly the wrong approach and, as a matter of fact, it is
shocking to the conscience.
We will not restore lost confidence by removing protections
that safeguard investors. Instead, we must find an effective
balance--and I thank Commissioner Schapiro for constantly
talking about balance--one that ensures investors that they
will be protected in the future while carefully examining ways
to optimize growth. I fully support helping U.S. firms access
additional capital, but I also believe that this must be done
without sacrificing critical protections that assure our fellow
citizens that our markets are fundamentally sound.
It is important to remember that the investors we are
trying to protect are everyday Americans. They are our
constituents. In fact, according to an April survey by Gallup,
a majority of Americans, 54 percent, reported owning some form
of stock.
I am encouraged by the fact that since she has begun her
tenure, Chairman Shapiro has taken an active role in guiding
her staff to conduct comprehensive reviews over a range of
issues concerning capital market formations, including many of
the issues that we will discuss here today.
The 25-page letter she sent to the committee on April 6,
2011, demonstrates that she is serious about exploring
innovative and new ideas to assist market participants while
implementing robust consumer protections that will help
investors retain confidence in our markets.
In that letter, she said the following: Cost effective
access to capital for companies of all sizes plays a critical
role in our national economy. Regardless of the form or size of
the offering, companies seeking access to capital in U.S.
markets should not be overburdened by unnecessary or
superfluous regulations. At the same time, all offerings must,
of course, provide the necessary information and protections to
give investors the confidence they need to invest in our
markets.
Striking the right balance between facilitating access to
capital by companies and protecting investors in our rules and
orders is a critical goal of the SEC.
And with that, I look forward to hearing from the chairlady
and our other panelists.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Issa. All Members will have 7 days to submit
opening statements and extraneous material for the record.
We now go to our distinguished panel.
The Honorable Mary Schapiro is chairman of the Securities
and Exchange Commission and Ms. Meredith Cross is the director
of the SEC's division of corporate finance.
Pursuant to the rules of the committee, I would ask that
you both rise to take the oath.
Would the record indicate both witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
Again, Chairman Shapiro, we appreciate you making time for
this hearing and you're recognized.

STATEMENTS OF MARY SCHAPIRO, CHAIRMAN, U.S. SECURITIES AND
EXCHANGE COMMISSION; AND MEREDITH CROSS, DIRECTOR OF THE
DIVISION OF CORPORATION FINANCE, U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMITTEE

STATEMENT OF MARY SCHAPIRO

Ms. Schapiro. Thank you. Chairman Issa, Ranking Member
Cummings, and members of the committee. Thank you for inviting
me to testify today on the topic of capital formations. As the
chairman has said, I am joined by Meredith Cross, director of
the SEC's Division of Corporation Finance, and I regret that a
change in the committee schedule for this hearing means that I
do have to leave at 1:30 for a longstanding prior engagement.
However, Ms. Cross will stay to address any questions the
committee might have.
Facilitating capital formation, protecting investors, and
maintaining fair, orderly, and efficient markets is the mission
of the SEC. Cost-effective access to capital for companies of
all sizes plays a critical role in our national economy, and
companies seeking access to capital should not be overburdened
by unnecessary or superfluous regulations.
At the same time, while we have an important responsibility
to facilitate growing companies' access to America's investment
capital, we must balance that responsibility with our
obligation to protect investors in our markets.
Too often, investors are the targets of fraudulent schemes
disguised as investment opportunities. In fiscal year 2010,
offering frauds--cases where promoters, issuers, or others
defraud investors in the offer of securities--comprised 22
percent of the Commission's cases. Investor confidence and the
fairness and honesty of our markets is critical to the
formation of capital, and the protections provided by the
securities laws are critical to large and small company
investors alike.
Over the years, the SEC has taken significant steps
consistent with investor protection to facilitate capital
raising by companies of all sizes and to reduce burdens on
companies in making offerings. From the introduction of shelf
registration in the 1980's to the reduction of the eligibility
threshold for shelf in the early 1990's to modernizing
communications and the offering process in 2005, the SEC
regularly considers and, when appropriate, implements changes
to our rules to reduce regulatory burdens while maintaining the
important investor protections provided under the Securities
Act.
The SEC also has undertaken errors specifically designed to
facilitate capital formation for smaller companies by
simplifying the regulatory environment for them. Most recently
in 2007, the SEC adopted a variety of rules impacting small
business capital raising and private offerings, a number of
which were based on the recommendations of the SEC's then-
serving Advisory Committee on Smaller Public Companies.
Among the rules adopted by the Commission were those that
simplified the disclosure and reporting requirements for
smaller companies and expanded the ability to use less
burdensome scale disclosure to more companies, allowed a
company to grant stock options to more than 500 employees
without triggering the requirements to become a reporting
company, and liberalized the eligibility requirements for
certain short-form registration statements and some shelf
registration to allow eligible smaller public companies to
benefit from greater flexibility and efficiency in accessing
the public securities market.
Recently I instructed our staff to take a fresh look at our
offering rules and to develop ideas for the Commission to
consider that would reduce the regulatory burdens on small
business capital formation in a manner consistent with investor
protection. Areas of focus for the staff will include the
restrictions on communications in initial public offerings;
whether the general solicitation ban should be revisited in
light of current technologies; capital raising trends and our
mandates to protect investors and facilitate capital formation;
the number of shareholders that trigger public reporting,
including questions surrounding the use of special-purpose
vehicles that hold securities of a private company for groups
of investors; and the regulatory questions posed by new capital
raising strategies.
In conducting this review, we will solicit input and data
from multiple sources including small businesses, investor
groups, and the public at large. The review will include
evaluating recommendations of our annual SEC Government
Business Forum on Small Business Capital Formation and as well
as suggestions we receive and have already received through an
e-mail box we recently created on our Web site.
In addition, I expect our efforts to benefit from the input
of the new Advisory Committee on Small and Emerging Companies
that the Commission is in the process of forming, which will
provide a formal mechanism for the Commission to receive advice
and recommendations about regulatory programs that affect
privately held businesses and small publicly traded companies.
Any rule proposals that result from this, review will, of
course be subject to a public comment period in advance of any
rule changes being adopted.
We look forward to working closely with Congress, the
investing public, and members of the business community as we
explore the possibilities and challenges in these areas and
work to fulfill our mandate to protect investors, maintain
fair, orderly, and efficient markets, and facilitate capital
formation.
We would be happy to answer any questions the committee
might have. Thank you.
Mr. ISSA. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schapiro follows:]

Chairman Issa. I'll begin by a round of questioning.
Madam Chair, the chart behind me, which indicates a peak in
the note of a pretty large dropoff to where 100, 150 of IPOs is
considered a good year, does that indicate to you that the
market for large companies, those who are mostly over 200
million that are doing IPOs, is in fact a market of the past;
or is it a recognition that it simply costs more to play in
that market and those companies are choosing other
alternatives?
Ms. Schapiro. Mr. Chairman, I think the numbers reflect the
number of different factors that actually go into the decision
the companies have to make about doing an initial public
offering. Certainly economic conditions are very prominent in
that decisionmaking process. There are also issues about
whether founders want to give up their decisionmaking control
that they exercise as a private company, whether they want to
have dilution of their ownership interests. There is a
potential disclosure of vital business information when you go
public.
Chairman Issa. I don't want to interrupt you unfairly. But
all of those existed in this 1980's and 1990's, so the change
can't be those factors. It could be consideration of those
factors. But the real change in small companies going public
since the 1980's seems to be the cost of going public.
Ms. Schapiro. I think costs of going public are certainly a
factor. As I started to say, and I would be happy to supplement
the record further, there are lots of factors I think that go
into that decision for public companies, and including some of
our earlier IPOs up there, I suspect foreign companies going
public in the U.S. markets.
And one of the things we've seen, particularly in the last
several years is a real maturation of foreign markets that give
those foreign-based companies a viable alternative to going
public in the United States, which I think is a perfectly
rational decision for them to make these markets that we are in
now. Liquid have good listing standards, have sophisticated
shareholder bases that they may not have had 10 and 20 years
ago, as represented by that chart.
The other thing I think that is important when companies,
foreign companies make a decision about whether to access the
U.S. IPO market is that it's much less expensive in terms of
underwriter fees in Europe than it is in the United States.
It's about 4 percent gross spread in Europe, whereas it's 7
percent in the United States. So I think there are lots of
factors.
Chairman Issa. Isn't it also true that you have U.S.
companies choosing to go public overseas in many cases, thus
leaving a lot of your oversight behind? It is not just
companies that are truly based overseas but also companies who
want to be global, whose CEO is living here, who decides that a
foreign market in Canada or in Europe makes more sense for them
to do.
Ms. Cross. I think I can take this.

STATEMENT OF MEREDITH CROSS

Ms. Cross. I think there are some companies in that
situation, but I think our data, which we are happy to
supplement for the record, doesn't suggest there is a
significant number of U.S. companies going offshore for their
IPOs.
I think other factors that are relevant--certainly we
understand that costs are important, and we are committed to
looking at those costs. But I think that, for example, the
alternative of a sale increased significantly in recent years
and has more certainty. So if people are trying to get out of
their investment, the private equity market became quite huge
in the last decade and that also provided an alternative.
But this isn't to suggest we don't think the costs are
important. I just think there are--people have told us there
are a number of reasons why companies choose not to go public
now.
Chairman Issa. Let me take a slightly different line, and I
know we want to talk about small businesses and the 500 cap and
so on. Let me just ask a question.
When people want to float, if you will, public debt, senior
debt, and they go through a process of registering debt, it's
really a one-time event. You register the debt, it's floated,
it's bought up. And then after that, the company that borrows
150 million in senior debt, in fact it views itself as separate
from the debt that it repays.
To a great extent, don't we have a disconnect in that a
company can say, Look, I'd like to take on investors. I am
willing to tell them this, but I'd like to be able to have the
ability to run my company with those investors understanding at
the time they bought in will not be reported.
So to a certain extent, haven't we lost that middle ground
in the public market? You're either all public and you have
several million dollars cost to go public and several million a
year to be public, or you are private and you find yourself not
availing yourself to, if you will, a broad range of investors.
Ms. Schapiro. I guess I would ask Meredith if she wants to
add to this. But I think that is basically right. If you choose
to become a public company you need to follow the reporting and
disclosure requirements of the Federal securities laws. You've
taken investors' money. That is part of the bargain that you
have struck with investors is that they'll have the opportunity
both for board members to participate in a meaningful way, and
that they will have access to information on an ongoing basis
that will allow them to make decisions about whether to
continue to hold that stock or to sell it in the market.
Chairman Issa. And the reason I asked that question is
since we are not getting the IPOs here in the United States,
people are choosing not to go into that market. At least for
institutional qualified investors, why in the world would we
have a 499 cap on how many of them can participate in a
company? If you are a sophisticated investor, why couldn't you
choose to be involved in what today is available to these
leverage organizations and angel capital and other investors
who choose to buy a bigger piece rather than one 500?
Ms. Schapiro. Mr. Chairman, that is exactly what our review
is really looking at is whether a threshold of 499 or 500 is
still appropriate, as well as a review of the threshold at
which a company can cease being a reporting company because of
the change in the number of its shareholders. And we will, as
you know, do a very rigorous study and gather the kind of
analysis and data that is necessary for us to analyze whether
those thresholds are still appropriate given how markets are
operating today.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
I recognize the ranking member.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
Chairman Shapiro, I want to thank you for your
responsiveness to this committee. It has been extensive. I want
to thank you and your staff, and it's been forthright, and I
really do appreciate it, and I think all of us appreciate it.
There has been a lot of discussion about rolling back the
protections Congress put in place to safeguard investors in the
public. We hear that they are too burdensome, too costly and
that they hurt corporate profits. I'd like to return to the
fundamental reason we need these safeguards to begin with.
On January 25th there was an article in the Atlantic and it
described in detail how executives from Bear Stearns took
extreme measures to defraud clients, cheating investors out of
billions of dollars through a corrupt ``double dipping''
scheme. Amazingly, the article also reported that many of the
same executives, those responsible for these abuses, are now in
top positions at other firms.
Here is what the article said: ``Former Bear Stearns
mortgage executives who now run mortgage divisions of Goldman
Sachs, Bank of America, Allied Financial, have been accused of
cheating and defrauding investors through the mortgage
securities they created and sold while at Bear.''
Chairwoman Shapiro, how can this be? How can the same
executives responsible, allegedly responsible for these abuses,
now be making millions of dollars running different companies?
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman, as you know, we have a very
aggressive enforcement division at the SEC that has under
investigation many issues arising out of the financial crisis,
and indeed we brought about two dozen cases or so coming out of
the financial crisis. You mentioned the Goldman Sachs case. But
there are many others that name both firms and individuals,
officers, chief financial officers, and others, and we'll
continue to investigate those very aggressively.
Wherever the facts and the laws will take us, we will go.
And if there are appropriate actions to be brought against
particular individuals, we won't hesitate to bring those cases.
Mr. Cummings. The Atlantic article also said this. It said,
``Last week, a lawsuit filed in 2008 by mortgage insurer Amback
Insurance Co. against Bear Stearns and JP Morgan was unsealed.
The lawsuit supporting e-mails going back as far as 2005
highlight Bear traders telling their superiors they were
selling investors like Amback a `sack of shit.' ''
Chairman Shapiro, are you aware of those e-mails?
Ms. Schapiro. I am not specifically aware of those e-mails,
although I would imagine that our enforcement division is. And
I should add that it is not just the SEC that is stepping up
here. It's the other financial regulators through the mortgage
fraud task force and through efforts in conjunction with the
Department of Justice and others to try to bring as many of
these cases as we can.
Mr. Cummings. This is astonishing, and, if accurate, they
indicate that some of the same executives knew exactly what
they were doing and simply didn't care. As I understand it,
Bear Stearns was acquired by JP Morgan 3 years ago. On May 7,
2011, The Atlantic reported that the SEC has now subpoenaed JP
Morgan in connection with these allegations.
Chairman Shapiro, or perhaps you, Ms. Cross, without going
into any sensitive information, what can you tell us about
these allegations, about your investigation, or about your
concerns about these abuses? And can you tell us what
subpoenas--the subpoenas seek from JP Morgan?
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman, as a matter of policy and
fairness, we generally don't comment on specific ongoing
enforcement matters. I can see if there is more information we
can provide for the record that wouldn't jeopardize any ongoing
investigation, and if that is possible, we'll provide that.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Note.--The information referred to was not provided to the
committee.]
Mr. Cummings. As an officer of the court, I understand.
I still think that this whole--you know, the reason why I
raise these issues is because we must never forget what we just
went through, are still going through. We must never forget our
constituents who have suffered and continue to suffer, many of
them having lost everything. And I just thank you again for the
balance that you seek to--the balance that you bring to the
table in seeking to address these issues.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Issa. Thank the gentleman.
I recognize the member of the Financial Services Committee
and subcommittee chairman here, the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. McHenry.
Mr. McHenry. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Schapiro, thank
you for your service to our government. We appreciate you being
back.
I do have a question. The SEC has a 499 shareholder cap.
Can you explain what that is?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, I'd be happy to. One of the ways in
which a company becomes a reporting company under the SEC's
reporting regime--and there are five different ways--but one is
if the company has total assets of more than $10 million and
500 record shareholders, you become a reporting company and you
have to file an Exchange Act registration statement and then
ongoing disclosure.
Mr. McHenry. Who are those investors limited to? What types
of investors? Accredited investors? Institutional investors and
employees, right?
Ms. Schapiro. It's all investors. All investors in the
company.
Mr. McHenry. No, no. Those that sought to, for instance, to
invest in Facebook.
Ms. Schapiro. Right.
Mr. McHenry. In order to be an accredited investor, you
have to have a million dollars net worth, right?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mr. McHenry. Or you have to be an institutional investor
and an institutional investor is, what, $100 million in your
fund; is that correct? OK. Or employees of the company, right?
Those are the three classes of people that cap is--they can
participate under that cap, correct?
Ms. Schapiro. There may be other investors as well.
Ms. Cross. The 500 number includes anyone who is an
investor. There aren't any, under the current rules, that are
excluded from the count. So employees count, accredited
investors count, qualified institutional buyers count. That is
one of the questions we would be looking at, whether we should
count them.
Mr. McHenry. Right. So why 500?
Ms. Schapiro. Five hundred was originally put in the
statute in the 1960's, I think.
Mr. McHenry. My understanding was that this is not statute;
that the SEC wrote this, right? Is that not the case?
Ms. Schapiro. Correct me if I go wrong. It is in the
statute, although we do have the authority to write rules that
would change that. After the statute was passed, the Commission
did write rules that went to how those 500 counted. So, for
example, there may actually be thousands of investors under
that 500 threshold, because we count holders of record. So if a
broker-dealer is holding thousands and thousands, stock for
thousands of institutional other customers, that counts as one
because the broker dealer is the holder of record?
Mr. McHenry. So, why? Why 500?
Ms. Schapiro. The view I believe at the time----
Mr. McHenry. What's the view now, because you have the
authority to change it?
Ms. Schapiro. It's an issue, obviously, that we are looking
at very closely in our study. The view is that when a company
has sufficient following--perhaps 500 is a bit of an arbitrary
number--that those investors ought to have access to
information on an ongoing basis about the company; that it has
sufficient following that there ought to be public disclosure.
Mr. McHenry. OK. Really, you are talking about protecting
people that have a million dollars' net worth, are
institutional investors, or employees of the company. So the
threshold's here. So it seems to me that the SEC policy is
restricting access, because small businesses are the ones that
we are really talking about here trying to access private
capital with these investors. So it seems to me that really the
SEC policy is that you are trying to protect the very people
that this President says should pay more in taxes, higher
taxes, or these sophisticated investors at the expense of small
businesses accessing credit. Do you see it that way or not?
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman, we see it as an absolutely
legitimate thing for us to be inquiring about is whether that
500 number does continue to make sense; whether, as some have
proposed, qualified institutional investors ought to be
excluded from it; whether employees ought to be excluded from
it. Although I will say, they are no less deserving of the
protections of the securities laws than anybody else.
Mr. McHenry. My point is if you are a sophisticated
institutional investor, I don't think the SEC is going to
protect you from Bernie Madoff, which clearly the SEC didn't
do. And these folks are very sophisticated and know the
decisions they're making. And for heaven's sakes, if you look
at these substantial institutional players, to get better
research and better information than the SEC or the Federal
Government does.
Ms. Schapiro. This is exactly the issue we are looking at.
And of course they're not all sophisticated institutions. I
take your point.
Mr. McHenry. You are talking about someone with a million
dollar net worth as an accredited investor. Not only do you
have to have a million dollar net worth, but then you have to
be accredited, saying that you are sharp enough to do this
stuff. It seems to me--I am sort of dismayed that the SEC
didn't protect the grandmothers that had their life's savings
taken from Bernie Madoff, but are trying to protect these
people with a million-dollar net worth in the name of really
starving small businesses from capital.
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman, I would say we are receiving a
wide range of proposals in this area. We are absolutely
committed to looking at whether this threshold makes any sense;
whether the threshold numbers for firms to stop reporting once
they've been reporting, even though they may have thousands of
shareholders, is are appropriate, too. And we intend to do a
very thorough and rigorous analysis.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. When do you think you'll have a
decision?
Ms. Schapiro. Well, we've got multiple work streams, as you
can see from my testimony. This is the one work stream that is
going to require economic data and analysis because we need to
understand the characteristics of these companies and how they
hold--their shareholders hold, whether in record name or in the
name of the beneficial owner. And the staff has already begun
to develop the work plan for this particular work stream. And
I'd love to come back to you with a more concrete timeframe,
but I can assure you that it is front and center on our agenda.
Chairman Issa. The gentlelady from New York, Mrs. Maloney.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank the chairman for yielding. Welcome,
Chairwoman Shapiro.
We have heard repeatedly that the IPO market in the United
States has declined significantly in recent years and I would
like to examine this claim.
Experts from the SEC and the Federal Reserve analyzed a
survey of 18,000 IPOs from 90 different countries between 1995
and 2007. And they issued a paper entitled Going Public Abroad.
And the paper makes the conclusion and it says, ``The U.S.
domestic market has, by a wide margin, the largest proceeds of
any of the markets worldwide.'' For example, the paper finds
that the U.K. Saw a decline in the average proceeds generated
by domestic and global IPOs during this period, but the United
States did not. And the paper says that we did not in the
United States see a significant change. And basically the paper
says that we need to look beyond the number of IPOs and examine
the question of the amount of revenue generated.
It looked at IPOs, 57 deals in the United States that
raised over $27 billion in the fourth quarter of 2010, and
further says that the United States achieved the highest IPO
revenue total in the fourth quarter of 2010 since the fourth
quarter of 1999.
So my question to you is basically on the fact that the
article says, when excluding the 17 billion Visa IPO in 2008.
Which was the largest, as you know, IPO in our country, the
first quarter 2011 generated the highest first quarter proceeds
since 2000.
So Chairman Shapiro, these indicators suggest that the U.S.
IPOs are in their strongest in years. And I'd like the
unanimous consent to put these papers in the record. And I'd
like to ask you, Chairman Shapiro, whether or not you agree. Is
this correct?
Chairman Issa. Without objection, so ordered.
Ms. Schapiro. I think there is no question that the IPO
market is rebounding and we can see the numbers starting to
change. And as you point out, the fourth quarter of 2010 we saw
60 IPOs, and this year, last year overall, we saw something
like 153 percent increase. We are not back to historic levels,
and there are lots of reasons for that. But we do have fewer
small IPOs. We still have many very large IPOs, I think, that
contribute to the number of many billions of dollars raised in
the IPO market.
But I don't think there is any question but that we are
starting to see this market come back, and you need only pick
up the newspaper virtually every day now to see at least
anecdotally evidence of that. But again our numbers would also
bear out that this market is rebounding.
Mrs. Maloney. And certainly we lead the world in volume.
Ms. Schapiro. In dollars raised.
Mrs. Maloney. I'd like to ask about the IPOs in the global
marketplace.
And according to Ernst and Young that 60 percent of the
global volume of IPOs in 2010 originated in so-called emerging
markets. And I'd like to particularly look at activity in
China. And China made the largest IPO ever in the financial
sector with a 22 billion offering. But it was of a State-owned
commercial bank, the Agricultural Bank of China, and Ernst and
Young reported in their report that China's IPO and
infrastructure and clean tech was boosted dramatically by
government stimulus funding. You obviously have a huge IPO if
the government is funding it.
And it goes on to point out that it far outweighed U.S.
stimulus and that China spent over $586 billion in
infrastructure and transportation projects and $735 billion in
renewable energy. But as we know in our $778 billion stimulus
package, it only had $48 billion in transportation and $16
billion in--$21 billion in renewable energy.
So my question to you, Madam Chairman, is how has the SEC
analyzed the extent to which the IPO growth in China relates to
extensive State spending?
Ms. Schapiro. Congresswoman, we have not specifically
looked at the issue of the extent to which governmental
spending is influencing foreign IPO markets. I will say that
generally we are seeing much more mature markets abroad than we
have historically, making them more hospitable and more
credible places for companies to do IPOs that might have years
ago come to the U.S. market.
Mrs. Maloney. The Renaissance Capital Research wrote in an
article entitled ``U.S. IPOs on Top of Game,'' and this article
finds there's been a lack of U.S.-listed Chinese IPOs because
U.S. investors have balked at the poor quality of IPOs in
China.
Chairman Issa. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mrs. Maloney. Can I just throw one little question to her?
Chairman Issa. If you can be very brief.
Mrs. Maloney. Does the SEC find that foreign markets may
not impose the same high standards imposed on U.S. firms
issuing IPOs domestically?
Ms. Schapiro. One of the interesting phenomenons--and I
know Mr. McHenry is very interested in this as well--is this
phenomenon of companies that are not necessarily incorporated
in China but have a large part of their operations in China
actually doing reverse mergers as opposed to IPOs, and coming
into the U.S. market to list on U.S. exchanges. And there are a
number of issues there about which we are quite concerned and
working through with the Chinese regulators.
Chairman Issa. The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Gowdy.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Madam Chairwoman. Is the general solicitation ban
constitutional, and can you cite me to specific published
opinions that support your opinion?
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman, I think that you raise a very
good question with respect to the general solicitation ban, and
the chairman has raised that as well in some of his
correspondence. And we absolutely recognize that the general
solicitation ban does limit speech to some extent, so it's one
of the issues we are looking at in our study. And a First
Amendment analysis will be part of that.
I think the issue for us is whether the general
solicitation ban passes First Amendment amendment muster, but
in addition, whether it's protection of investors is
appropriately balanced with the needs for companies to
effectively communicate in order to raise capital. And so that
is one of the issues that we will be looking at closely.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, given the fact that it implicates a
fundamental right, you have the strictest level of
constitutional scrutiny and it has to be as narrowly drawn as
it possibly can be. If you conclude in your own independent
analysis that it is not constitutional, will you do what there
is some precedent in the executive branch for doing, which is
not enforcing laws that you don't think are constitutional?
Will you abandon the ban if you conclude that it doesn't pass
constitutional muster?
Ms. Schapiro. I believe I obviously can't predict where we
will come out on this issue, but we would--rather than not
enforce a law that is not on the books, we would seek to change
it.
Mr. Gowdy. There is some precedent for not enforcing laws
that are not on the books. I think you would agree with me.
Ms. Schapiro. There is precedent. But I have a sworn duty
to uphold the law and the Constitution, and so I would be a bit
uncomfortable with just ignoring a provision of the law. But
that said, this is an area we will be looking at very
carefully.
Mr. Gowdy. With respect to 2008, do you know or can you
tell me the number of defendants who received active prison
sentences--not fines, not promises not to do it again--but
active prison sentences?
Ms. Schapiro. I really can't speak--we don't have criminal
authority and we don't prosecute cases in the criminal justice
system. I can tell you that for the Securities and Exchange
Commission, we brought more than 670 cases with disgorgement of
ill-gotten gains and penalties that were ordered of over a
billion dollars, and a billion dollars returned to investors
who had been harmed by securities fraud.
Mr. Gowdy. And those are very big, laudable numbers. Of
those cases, how many did you refer for criminal prosecution to
a respective U.S. attorney's office?
Ms. Schapiro. I would guess a healthy number, and I'd be
happy to provide that exact number to you.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Note.--The information referred to was not provided to the
committee.]
Mr. Gowdy. I would be interested because I am asked quite
often in South Carolina why nobody goes to jail if you are
rich, and all you do is steal money and you don't go to jail. I
am very interested. And I am also interested in whether or not
the SEC would have appeared and asked for an enhanced sentence
or an upward departure given the erosion of public trust that
was manifested in 2008.
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman, I think if you look at the
sanctions that the SEC has leveled over the past several years
for violations, again civil violations of the Federal
securities laws, you will see that they have ramped up rather
significantly. I gave you the number of 2008, but in 2010 our
disgorgement of ill-gotten gains and penalties reached $2.85
billion and we returned $2 billion to harmed investors.
Mr. Gowdy. I am not giving short shrift to your
disgorgement. That is wonderful. But you can criminally
prosecute and disgorge someone of their ill-gotten gains at the
same time. And nothing gets people's attention quite like an
active sentence.
Ms. Schapiro. There is no question about that. And we make
many referrals to the Justice Department. And we bring many
cases jointly with local U.S. attorneys and district attorneys
around the country and try to interest them in bringing more
securities fraud cases whenever we can.
Mr. Gowdy. Ma'am, would you be gracious enough to get me--
obviously, I don't want pending investigations, but cases that
are concluded that were referred to various U.S. attorneys
offices and what the outcome was?
Ms. Schapiro. I'd be happy to.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Note.--The information referred to was not provided to the
committee.]
Chairman Issa. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Gowdy. Yes, sir.
Chairman Issa. Madam Chair, just one quick question. I know
you can't always answer hypotheticals. But as you're aware, we
allow, and have for a decade or more allowed prescription drugs
of all classes, but we will just take, for example, sleeping
aids that are prescription-only to be advertised with a
basically a ``must see a doctor'' to get the appropriate
advice.
In a sense, as Mr. Gowdy said, if there is an inherent bias
toward free speech, isn't it most likely that you're going to
end up looking at that model and saying, Wait a second. If we
limit the purchase of these companies to qualified investors,
other, you know, institutions and so on, if we are limiting who
can buy, if any advertising were to explain that you cannot buy
it unless you fit in this category, what would be the harm any
more in a general solicitation than there is in making people
aware about a prescription drug, knowing that they must go to a
doctor before they can have it prescribed?
Ms. Schapiro. I think you raise exactly the right issue. I
will say there is a concern that the general solicitation ban
is designed to make it more difficult for those who would
defraud others by casting a very wide net even in the private
placement market and have an easier way to defraud people
because of the general solicitation, the general advertisement,
the way to bring more people into a fraudulent scheme. That
said, as you know, we are going to look at this very carefully.
Chairman Issa. I recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Towns, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much. Thank you and the ranking
member for holding this hearing and let me thank you, Chairman
Shapiro, for the outstanding job that you're doing.
In your written statement, you indicated that 22 percent of
the SEC cases in fiscal year 2010 were offering fraud. Chairman
Shapiro, can you give us an example of an offering fraud?
Ms. Schapiro. I would be happy to. And I will say that
every Thursday, the Commission meets in a closed session to
consider a dozen or more enforcement cases. And so it's very
much on my mind as we go through this process to ensure that we
don't lose sight of--even though I think there's flexibility,
there are things we need to look at, there are maybe things
that we can do quite differently--we do not lose sight of the
fact that there are investors who need the protections provided
by the Federal securities laws.
But what we see are offerings by promoters or others of
stock in a company where the disclosure has been false or
misleading, the information has been manufactured, where there
are unregistered offerings and they're sold to people who are
not accredited investors or who are appropriately qualified to
buy that particular offering.
Ms. Cross. Another type we see significant numbers are
affinity frauds where they target particular categories of
people like the elderly. So you see a broad range. It is not
the kinds of companies that we all think of as appropriately
using our exemptions, but they drive through those exemptions
and go after people who are not able to fend for themselves.
One of the things that worries me a great deal as we look
at the question of loosening the ban, which I think is a very
important thing to consider, is how we then make sure that the
people who buy really are the accredited investors who don't
need the protections, because they do target those people. The
fraudsters do target those people.
Mr. Towns. If they go in court, what is the effect of these
frauds on investments and the market if they go in court?
Ms. Schapiro. The frauds can be devastating to investors,
and that is true really of any kind of securities fraud, that
people have been convinced in many of these schemes to invest
their life savings and are left with nothing at the end of the
process.
Mr. Towns. Chairman Shapiro, what are some of the examples
of some of the things that the SEC has done to facilitate
communications connected with public offerings?
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman, over the years, the SEC has
engaged in a number of efforts to make it increasingly possible
for companies to communicate during the quiet period, which is
when they are generally not communicating. For example, we've
created a research report safe harbor to encourage the
publication of research reports during the quiet period. We
allow free-riding prospectuses which permit offers outside the
statutory prospective. We allow the media to publish stories
about companies or their registered offerings, so long as the
media is unpaid or not affiliated with the issuer. We have done
a number of offerings related communication safe harbors,
again, that allow issuers to communicate more details about
transactions to potential investors during the quiet period.
So we've taken a number of steps, primarily starting in
2005, to try to relax some of the restrictions on issuers
during the quiet period.
Mr. Towns. Thank you. Do you give--do you view the general
solicitation ban as an impediment for capital raising for small
businesses?
Ms. Schapiro. We have heard from some small businesses that
the general solicitation ban makes it harder for them to reach
investors and to raise capital. That is one of the things that
we will be looking at as we do our study of the general
solicitation ban. We want to understand the extent to which it
is an impediment or an unnecessary hurdle to capital formation.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much.
Mr. Cummings. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Towns. I'd be delighted to yield to the ranking member.
Mr. Cummings. Just following up on what you just said. When
you go into trying to figure that out, whether it's harming and
folks--I mean, what kind of factors would you likely be looking
at? I am not trying to get into your head for you to tell us
everything you're going to do. What kinds of things will you be
looking at to come up with a reasonable answer to that?
Ms. Schapiro. I think with respect to that point in
particular, we will probably do interviews with businesses that
are pre-IPO businesses or their advisers. We'll also ask
investors and the general public. We might put out a concept
release and seek information and detail that way, and hopefully
we will use our new Advisory Committee on Small Business
Activities.
We have multiple areas we want to explore here. And there
will be different approaches for each one. For example, with
respect to the 500 shareholder threshold, there we want data
and analysis of the characteristics of these companies--which
will be hard to get, because they're private companies--and
understand how their stock, how their holders hold their
securities, whether they hold them in street name or in direct
name or so forth.
So for each of the work streams that we are going to be
exploring, we've started to lay out the data and the
information we think will be most useful for us in trying to
strike that appropriate balance.
Chairman Issa. The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Gosar.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me ask you a question. How many regulations are there
out there, that a small company that wants to go public, that
they have to apply to? How many apply?
Ms. Cross. I can try with that. For a company that is going
to conduct an IPO, there is a registration form, form S-1, that
is the main place they have to look. And then there is a series
of regulations that govern what you're allowed to do in the way
of communications in the offering. So there's probably, I would
say, in the SEC's books probably 50 rules, something around
like that. We could certainly supplement for the record.
It's a pretty tried and true path. So for the companies
that go through an IPO, the advisers to them--I used to do this
before I came to work at the SEC. There is a pretty clear path.
There is a handbook that people hand out to their companies as
they're thinking about going public. So it's not as daunting as
you might think.
Mr. Gosar. So you would say it's adequate if there's not
too many, not too few?
Ms. Cross. I think that the balance is manageable. I think
there are definitely a lot of rules. But the goal here is to
make sure that as companies are accessing the public markets
for money, that they--that investors are protected enough so
that they feel confident going in and investing.
Mr. Gosar. And are they nimble with the times?
Ms. Cross. I think that we can certainly think about that.
We revised the offering rules very significantly in 2005. It
was called securities offering reform and it was a huge
overhaul. It's what, for the first time, let companies have
free writing prospectuses, let them keep talking during quiet
periods, let them have electronic road shows on line. So it was
a pretty big change. And I think it has really helped. That
doesn't mean we can't do more to help. So we always are looking
at our rules to see whether we're doing what we can to
facilitate capital formation consistent with investor
protection.
Mr. Gosar. So when you are looking at fraud, going back to
Mr. Gowdy here, being a dentist and bringing a private sector
aspect and looking at the regulations of the State, when
there's an IPO that's foreign-based versus a U.S. predominately
based, do you see a problem or predilection within those groups
of where you have to have more enforcement?
Ms. Cross. I'm sorry, sir.
Mr. Gosar. Taking an IPO that is foreign-based
predominately versus an IPO that is U.S. based predominately,
do you see much more enforcement issues from one of those
segments?
Ms. Schapiro. I guess I would say that I think it depends
on what markets you're looking at. There's quite a range of
requirements around the world with respect to the process of
accessing the public markets. I mean there's no question but
that the SEC in the United States has one of the best developed
enforcement programs and polices the markets--we think there's
always more to do--but pretty effectively. But I think other
markets now are stepping up and doing very much the same thing
because what they understand is that to be a credible location
for an IPO, and for people to feel comfortable investing in new
companies, there has to be a credible enforcement regime around
that so that fraud is stopped and people can have confidence in
the integrity of the financial statements and the disclosures
that the companies are making. So I actually think there's kind
of a rising tide around the world in this regard.
Mr. Gosar. I'm worried more about right here in the United
States. Do you see more a problem with IPOs that are
predominately foreign based or U.S. based?
Ms. Schapiro. I'm sorry, I misunderstood your question but
clearly we've had some issues recently and you, I'm sure, read
about them in the paper with respect to reverse mergers of
companies whose primary operations are in China, although they
may not be registered and generally they aren't registered in
China and they aren't subject to the jurisdiction of the
Chinese SEC, and our ability to deal with the disclosure
shortcomings of some of those companies. So we have had a very
active program at the SEC, including suspending--revoking the
registrations of eight Chinese companies in the last month or
so and suspending the trading in just the last couple of weeks
of three more of those.
I had the opportunity yesterday to meet with the chairman
of the China Securities Regulatory Commission and talk about
how we can establish a framework for our enforcement and
examination staff to have better access to information about
these companies who are not incorporated in China but whose
primary operations are in China and whose auditors are in
China, so we can understand the quality and the truthfulness of
their disclosures.
Mr. Gosar. One more real quick question. Is there one part
of the marketplace for these particular investments? I'm
looking at medical devices that are having some problems in
which there are public offerings. Do you see any recourse or
any aspect so that you're looking at one segment of the
population of investors?
Ms. Schapiro. It's been interesting to me over the years to
see that we often have fraud in whatever industry is hottest at
the moment. So a number of our actions with respect to these
companies with operations in China have been in the energy
space, but they can be in whatever they think investors will be
most taken with at that particular moment.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman and if the chairwoman
can allow a couple of minutes for the gentlelady from the
District of Columbia, who has been waiting here patiently,
you're recognized for up to 5 minutes based on her time.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I thank you
for your indulgence and welcome Chairwoman Schapiro. You have a
very tough, you always have a tough job particularly after the
extraordinary crash after 2008. You had to somehow encourage
continued investment without getting us back into the terrible
hole we were trying to get out of. Now, you can have an
ideological notion of cause and effect that says the government
caused, government regulation, for example, caused this or its
opposite, that the failure of regulation caused this. But
whatever is your notion, and I hope we're not into that kind of
catechism of cause and effect, I'd like to have you discuss the
effect on investors.
I have some figures here that showed some remarkable
actions, which I think was very rational behavior, that
investors pulled more than $272 billion out of the stock
market, and it looks as if when they went to invest they
invested in the bond market which they regarded as more, as
safer, $272 billion out, $650 billion into bond funds. And then
if you look at the middle class, 70 percent of the money in the
401(k)'s were taken out, the proportion failed or lost,
proportion then fell to 49 percent. And it's back up to 57
percent.
So, I would like you to discuss the effect that this
collapse had on investor confidence and how it affected the
availability of capital. In other words, if people were not
putting their money in the stock market, what was the effect on
the availability of capital?
Ms. Schapiro. Congresswoman, I think, and I believe this
very deeply, that the foundation of our markets is absolutely
built on investor confidence, and we can see how portable
capital is and how quickly investors will react to what they
perceive to be failures in the marketplace because of fraud,
because of inadequate information, and an issue I'm most
particularly familiar with is what happened after May 6th when
our equity markets performed in a very aberrational way as a
result of market structure flaws and high frequency trading,
and we saw for months and months after that a steady outflow of
investor funds from equity mutual funds because of concern
about the integrity of the trading mechanism in the
marketplace. So I think for us, instilling and restoring
investor confidence in the integrity of our markets, whether
it's the disclosure regime or the market structure itself is
really paramount to the ability of companies to do IPOs and
raise capital and create jobs and grow our economy which is, at
the end of the day, what all of us want to see happen.
And for us that means getting this balance right between
protecting investors and making access to capital affordable
and efficient, is really sort of job one right now for us to
strike that balance appropriately.
Ms. Norton. So the collapse then decreased the ability of
firms to access the capital markets and to raise money on the
stock exchanges?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Ms. Norton. There are some who suggest that if you rolled
back the investor protections that the impact would be some of
the, some of what we see on this chart would be alleviated.
What do you think would be the impact on the confidence of
American investors if you were to roll back or we were to roll
back the investor protections that have recently been
instituted or established?
Ms. Schapiro. Well, while I think it is very worthwhile or
for us to look at whether our rules can be altered and tweaked
in a way that facilitates capital formation and doesn't harm
investor protection, I think a complete rollback of investor
protections wouldn't serve anybody's interest, not investors
nor companies.
Ms. Norton. How much of a rollback?
Mr. McHenry [presiding]. The gentlelady's time has expired.
If you could finish answering the question. I also know you
have a hard stop time of 5 minutes ago.
Ms. Schapiro. I do. Thank you. It is not a question that
can be answered in generalities. I think it's really a matter
of looking at each and every one of our rules to see where
there might be flexibility that will facilitate capital
formation without doing harm to the investor protections,
because at the end of the day those protections serve the
companies well, as well as investors.
Mr. McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Chairman Schapiro, thank you for appearing before the
committee and thank you for your time, and we certainly hope
that you can make it to your next appointment in time. And with
that, 5 minutes for Mr. Lankford from Oklahoma.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Chairman Schapiro, for being able to be here. We appreciate
your time. I completely understand.
We're going to talk to you a little bit of the XBRL
language shift that's happened a little bit and I want to get a
chance to talk a little bit about that 2009 SEC sort of
collecting the financial statements using that XBRL language
and the plain text. Can you update us on the efforts and in
that transition how is that going at this point? Where are we
in that shift?
Ms. Cross. I appreciate your question. The XBRL
requirements are being rolled out over time based on the
original adoption schedule. So the next phase of companies is
the smallest companies have to start tagging and XBRL the face
of their financials and I think they have to block tag
footnotes, and the rest of the larger companies will be doing
the detail tagging of their footnotes I believe starting at for
quarters ending after June 15th. So it is in the works.
Mr. Lankford. How is that going as far as the rollout? What
has been the response back from companies on that?
Ms. Cross. I think, I will admit, it's mixed. Some
companies are very concerned about the additional time that it
takes and so we hear that they would like there to be, for
example, a time delay between when they have to get the XBRL on
file compared to when the 10Q, for example, the quarterly
report, is due, which is a question we've been thinking about.
We've also been hearing that there are concerns in the smaller
business community about the possible costs of taking on this
new requirement in June, but at the same time I would say that
the usefulness of the information is starting to become more
apparent, so recently our staff was able to do some really good
analysis based on using the tagged information, and I was
really pleased with what you could do comparing, for example,
pension fund rates of return being assumed in the financial
statement. So that it's a new cost and it's a new burden, but
it's also useful information.
Mr. Lankford. How is that going as far as the fraud and
capturing that, what we were just talking about as well from
the SEC side? Is it fulfilling what we had hoped it would
fulfill?
Ms. Cross. I think it's too early to tell. The amounts are
just now starting to show up in the financial statements and
we're just now getting the tools to use it because the key here
is that you have to be able to use it and we've had to spend
the money to be able to buy the tools to use the data so we're
not at that point yet, but it is helping us issue better
comments on the filings of companies when we see aberrational
amounts that show up because of the XBRL.
Mr. Lankford. Are we picking it up faster? I know it has to
be faster than pen, paper reading through it on plain text and
going through it with a pencil.
Ms. Cross. You need both.
Mr. Lankford. So perpetually we're going to have both the
plain text version and the XBRL version you think as far as
submitting it?
Ms. Cross. I think it's going to depend a lot on how the
markets and the investing public develops because unless the
public can use XBRL we need the plain text because the
information at the end of the day is for them, not for us.
Mr. Lankford. Let me ask you on a couple of things, where
are we as far as timeline on the fiduciary rules? That has been
a topic of obvious conversation in trying to figure out when
are these fiduciary rules going to come down dealing with the
brokers and CFEs and all that. How is that all going to balance
out? Not necessarily what the decision is, that's not what I'm
asking. When is the timeline for that decision?
Ms. Cross. I apologize. I'll have to get back to you with
an answer for the record. That's not in my, Corporation Finance
Division, so with Chairman Schapiro not here I don't know the
answer. I believe that it's not right now, but----
Mr. Lankford. That part I knew.
Ms. Cross. So you know more than me. I'm sorry. I will have
to get back to you with the answer for the record.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Note.--The information referred to was not provided to the
committee.]
Mr. Lankford. We will try to followup on that on the record
just to get a feeling on that.
Going back to some of the other information, the prospectus
and such, as it comes out, give me a feel. There is somewhat a
sense that we can solve a problem dealing with fraud based on
adding more text to someone at the beginning. If you go to a
typical constructionsite right now, there are 28 different
posters up on the wall in the constructionsite defining out all
the issues that are there. If you're going to get a home
mortgage, be prepared for reams and reams of paperwork that are
going to be involved in that. The prospectus is rather long for
a lot of things.
Is that fulfilling what we hope it would fulfill by
continuing to add additional text to different prospectuses to
get more information out to it or has it hit a point where no
one is going to read it because it's so protracted now?
Ms. Cross. I think that's an excellent question, and in
fact one of the projects that I have wanted to undertake is a
review of all the disclosure requirements to see if there are
some we could actually get rid of.
Mr. Lankford. That would be very helpful.
Ms. Cross. Because there is a pile-on effect. So I agree
that there can be too much. Investors and analysts in
particular tend to want more information and so to take some
away can take some doing. But we, I think it's very important
that we take a look, and I agree with you that we need to be
careful to not just pile on.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. That would be very helpful. Thank
you. With that, I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Tierney is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tierney. I thank the chair. Thank you, Ms. Cross, for
being here today. I don't have a lot of questioning for you. I
just wanted to touch on Sarbanes-Oxley a little bit. In that
Section 404 that requires that an auditor attest to the
entity's internal financial controls. I know there's been some
discussion the first $75 million is exempted out, companies
over 75 million are in, some people want to raise it to $250
million.
I would like to have your opinion on the effectiveness of
the--first of all, the burden on $75 million as opposed to $250
and whether or not it's outweighed by the benefits on that and
just what the benefits are.
Ms. Cross. I appreciate the question. As you know, in Dodd-
Frank, in the Dodd-Frank Act the companies below $75 million
public float were exempted from the audit requirement under
404(b). That actually takes out of the mix 60 percent of the
public companies, which is quite a significant number. The
staff just posted its study, as required by the act, of the
companies between $75 and $250 and found several important
characteristics of those companies, one of which is that the
companies in that category tend to change a lot. So companies
in the $75 to $250 may not be the same year after year. So
changing the application of 404 to that group is very
complicated and doesn't really help them very much because they
would be moving in and out.
We also found that the companies in that category don't
tend to be particularly different from the companies above 250.
So it's not a discrete category that has characteristics that
lend itself to saying, well, this is the group that should be
out, and the benefit of the audit, certainly it costs money,
the costs have come way down over the years with the addition
of the AS 5, the auditing standard that brought down the cost
of that audit. But I think that the staff's conclusion was that
the benefits of having that second set of eyes at that, at this
point outweighed the costs of the audit.
Mr. Tierney. Ironically, I think one of the findings for
the chief accountant was that when they attested the accuracy
of financial statements, they're more accurate. It's pretty
common sense, but they are finding out that is the case.
Ms. Cross. That's correct. Where there's going to be a
second set of eyes, I guess people are a bit more careful.
Mr. Tierney. What do you think the consequence of
eliminating the safeguards of Sarbanes-Oxley in that respect
would be?
Ms. Cross. I'm sorry, eliminating the----
Mr. Tierney. The 404(b) provision.
Ms. Cross. I think that there would be a significant
concern that the care taken in establishing and testing the
internal controls would go down over time. Not having that
second set of eyes I think is important.
The other thing is that if you don't have the internal
controls audit, then the auditors have to do testing of the
internal controls to see how much they can rely on the
financial statements even without the audit of the internal
controls. So the costs don't necessarily correlate one for one.
Mr. Tierney. Well, thank you for being with us this
morning, Ms. Cross. I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. And with that, Mr. Meehan is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Ms. Cross, for being here today.
I want to step off on an issue that was raised by my
partner to the left, China and the discussion of fraud that
enters our marketplace. As we get into increasing globalization
and more people come to raise capital in the United States but
have significant assets and operations overseas, what kind of
protections do we have in place to assure that if there is a
remedy that needs to be reached that we can get at assets or
individuals or otherwise that are operating in these foreign
countries?
Ms. Cross. That's a very good question, Congressman. We
don't have the same remedies that we do here. And the way the
securities laws are structured, we deal with that through
disclosure. We let companies warn investors that they won't
have the same remedies if there's a problem with the company.
We don't--the SEC doesn't have a merit regulation screen.
We don't have authority to tell companies you can't raise money
here if you provide sufficient disclosure.
What we've tried to do, though, to provide as much investor
protection as we can in light of these concerns is, for
example, Chairman Schapiro met yesterday with the head of the
Chinese Securities Regulatory Commission to discuss better ways
for us to share information to get at our concerns about are
these companies for real? Who are their promoters? And we have
a new initiative to get a better sense of how are the audits
being done. You do have to have an audit. And so are we
appropriately regulating those auditors? Are they going over
and looking at these companies or are they doing it remotely
with people on contract? That would be a concern. These are all
issues that we recognize are very important that we get on and
so we're doing the best we can.
Mr. Meehan. That's right. It's not just, it's not just
those auditors. It's also the ability for sort of the
independent analysts that come. There's already a shortage of
the kind of analysis that we like to be seeing on the market
now. I think there's been a shrinking of the banking
institutions and otherwise commitment to do an analysis.
Are we getting the kind of cooperation to allow analysts to
travel to the foreign countries and be given complete access to
the information that companies here would be giving to
analysts?
Ms. Cross. That's a fair question. I don't know the answer
to that. I think we would be happy to check and get back to you
for the record.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Note.--The information referred to was not provided to the
committee.]
Mr. Meehan. Let me switch my questioning just on the issue
of the cap of the 500. One of the concerns that I have is in
this environment we're seeing a great deal of frustration on
the part of entrepreneurs who are trying to raise capital in
difficult times. Obviously one of the things they are looking
for is access to the markets.
One of the things that inspires people to continue to work
in sort of startup companies is the idea that they can take and
gain some equity stake by being given shares in the company.
Are we doing anything or can you talk a little bit about what
kind of incentives we can give to carve out the counting of
that 500 for individuals who are sweat equity holders in these
startup companies?
Ms. Cross. That's an excellent point. And I appreciate that
is a key way that they can incentivize employees to come work
for them and work hard.
We have done a few things. First off, the options that are
granted to employees don't count against the 500. So we adopted
a rule in 2007 that said you don't have to count the options.
We have, the staff in my division has provided relief also to
companies that they don't have to count restricted stock units
that are provided to employees.
So far, you still have to count stock. They're stockholders
like anyone else. Our review that we're getting ready to
undertake of Section 12(g)'s 500 limit will consider the
question of should employees be counted the same way.
There are concerns. There are certainly frauds that happen
where employees are the ones who lose both their job and their
investment. So you do want to watch out. You don't want
employees to lose everything when there's a fraud at the
company they work for. So we need to balance those.
Mr. Meehan. My concern as well as the inability--or the
ability that has to crowd out the ability for, it sort of
limits the pool of people as well, the 500 that allows us to
raise money if in fact you are including those kinds of
shareholders in your number, then it makes a smaller pool that
effectively you can raise your dollars from which presumably
then sort of has--would you agree that has a chilling effect
then on the ability? Because I would think that it would cause
the cost of that capital to increase for a small business
trying to attract investors.
Ms. Cross. We have heard that the 500 cap is an impediment
to capital raising. And the question we need to look at is 500
the right number? And are we counting correctly? Because
there's a lot of companies that are actually private companies
that trade in the OTC markets that have thousands of holders.
But they are held in street name and so they only count by
broker. And so we need to look at how are we counting and is
the number the right number and are the right people included
in the count? So there's a whole lot of good hard questions we
need to know the answers to.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Ms. Cross. I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Connolly for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Ms. Cross.
Ms. Cross. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Cross, between 1990 and 2000, or between
the 1990's and the 2000's, did SEC issue new regulations
affecting IPOs?
Ms. Cross. Not--I don't believe so.
Mr. Connolly. You did not issue new regulations affecting
IPOs; that is what you just said?
Ms. Cross. In that timeframe I'm not aware that we had
significant new regulations----
Mr. Connolly. Right. And yet we are supposed to buy into an
argument that it was this stifling new regulations or
regulatory environment that, in fact, choked off IPO activity?
So if one were to conclude that, well, you can't cite new
regulations in that time period, one wonders what it might be.
Are you familiar with David Weild?
Ms. Cross. That's a study?
Mr. Connolly. Former vice chairman of NASDAQ?
Ms. Cross. Oh, yes. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. He wrote a paper called ``Market Structure is
Causing the IPO Crisis'' in June of last year, co-authored with
Edward Kim. He writes, the crisis started before Sarbanes-Oxley
in 2002. The IPO crisis was not induced by Sarbanes-Oxley,
regulations, fair disclosure or NSD Rule 2711, separation of
banking and research. Each of these changes occurred well after
the IPO crisis was underway.
That's what he writes. Would you agree with that
assessment.
Ms. Cross. I think there's a whole host of reasons why IPOs
are fewer than they were before, and I think that, I appreciate
that different people attribute it to different reasons. I
think that certainly the market structure has changed. There
used to be a lot of smaller investment banks who did the small
IPOs and those small investment banks are mostly gone.
There used to be research written about little tiny
companies, but the structure of the investment banking industry
no longer supports research about little tiny companies. And so
the little tiny companies are the ones that are not tapping the
public market, and I'm sure cost of regulation is one factor in
that. But I also think that the market structure changes are
also quite important.
Mr. Connolly. Well, he seems, the former vice chairman of
NASDAQ, hardly a gung-ho regulator, he seems to believe that
this IPO crisis predates whatever new regulation occurred post
Sarbanes-Oxley, Sarbanes-Oxley and subsequently, and then as a
matter of fact it can be attributed to a dysfunctional IPO
market itself, that it's a failure of the market itself in
terms of what happened with arbitrage and what happened in
terms of where capital went, sort of switching from
productivity-oriented investment opportunities to sort of quick
turnaround investment opportunities and you see that reflected
in the broad market.
Would you think that's a fair observation on his part.
Ms. Cross. Well, I'm not the expert he is, but I would say
that those are certainly observations that I've heard that many
agree with.
Mr. Connolly. Would there be consequences in your view if
we sort of had a broad brush elimination of regulations
currently governing the IPO market?
Ms. Cross. Yes, I think there would be very significant
negative consequences if that were to occur because then you
wouldn't have sort of a level set of minimum investor
protections that could be expected as a company enters the
public market seeking money. So I think that there would be
significant adverse consequences both to the public and to the
companies because those that are good and honest would be
harmed by the bad actors who would cause investor confidence to
wane, and investor confidence is key to having a robust capital
market.
Mr. Connolly. And have there been some bad actors?
Ms. Cross. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Oh. Against whom the public needs to be
protected?
Ms. Cross. That's right. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. So it's more than caveat emptor. Maybe the
Federal Government has a role here to try to protect the
consuming public and the investing public?
Ms. Cross. Absolutely, yes. We have to calibrate the
regulatory environment and the ability to raise capital and get
it right, and that's a very challenging task that we try very
hard to do.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. My time is up.
Mr. McHenry. Ms. Buerkle for 5 minutes.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have no questions.
Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. Will the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Buerkle. Absolutely. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. I certainly appreciate her yielding. And Ms.
Cross, in terms of independent financial statements, having,
ensuring that there is independent audits of firms, do you
think that is proper and good procedure?
Ms. Cross. Definitely yes, that's important.
Mr. McHenry. I know it's an easy question but, and that
gives the investors some assurance of the legitimacy of the
financial statements?
Ms. Cross. Yes. It does.
Mr. McHenry. So in terms of that step of the process, then
the question about accredited investors, why is there this
class of accredited investors? Why is that important in the
SEC's view?
Ms. Cross. Well, the notion of a accredited investors is,
to be clear, there's no special accreditation. If you have $1
million net worth, then you fit in the definition. If you make
$200,000 a year, you fit in the definition.
Mr. McHenry. Why is that important?
Ms. Cross. Those are the investors that--this test was put
in in the early 80's and in the early 80's it was determined
that those are investors who could fend for themselves and
didn't need the protections of the securities laws and so they
could participate in unregistered private offerings.
Mr. McHenry. So why limit that number if those, if that
class of people doesn't need the level of protection that you
are seeking for me as an average investor?
Ms. Cross. You mean in connection with the 500 holder
limit?
Mr. McHenry. Yes.
Ms. Cross. I think it's a fair question. I think that the,
I will say that since the number was set in the early 80's one
might question whether that is still the right number to
identify the people who can fend for themselves. But assume
that it is, then when Congress put in its test in the early
sixties for the 500, did they have in mind that those were
companies that were trading and did they, for example, you
don't--you have to register if you are trading on the New York
Stock Exchange, it doesn't matter if your investors are
accredited or not. So it's a different test. If securities are
trading in our markets, do we want a certain level of
information available? But it's a fair question for a company
that's not trading in a market today, should we eliminate some
number of investors from that count, whether they be accredited
or qualified institutional investors or some other group? And
it is absolutely something we want to consider.
Mr. McHenry. OK. And that's part of the process that you
are reviewing right now?
Ms. Cross. Absolutely. Absolutely.
Mr. McHenry. Because I think everybody has this question,
what is the proper balance?
Now in terms of general solicitation. I know there's been
an enormous discussion because of what we saw with FaceBook,
that in essence out of concern that it was a public
solicitation because word got out of this private offering of
FaceBook stock, that meant that they could not offer those
securities to American investors. So they offered it to foreign
investors.
Now I understand there are regs on the books, but there is
also litigation associated with that, is there not? A
significant amount of litigation on what qualifies as general
solicitation?
Ms. Cross. I think there is some case law about it. Just to
be clear, as we said in the letter that Chairman Schapiro sent
to Chairman Issa, the staff did not tell Goldman Sachs and
FaceBook that they couldn't conduct their offering in the
United States and in fact there is some SEC guidance that would
have actually suggested they could.
They may have decided not to conduct the offering here
because of concerns about private parties asserting that they
had a rescission right because of potential public offering. So
if that is what your question is about.
Mr. McHenry. Is there a review currently about general
solicitation and those rules?
Ms. Cross. Yes, that is definitely. That's one of our
workstreams is to consider whether the ban on general
solicitation is still appropriate in this day and age.
Mr. McHenry. OK. And what do you think your timeframe is
there?
Ms. Cross. On that particular workstream, that is less
complex than the 12(g) 500 holder workstream. So we've started
already to put together the research that needs to be done. I
think my likely recommendation would be for the Commission to
issue some sort of what's called a concept release where we put
out the general question of it, does the public think this is a
good idea? What dangers would it cause? So that's, I can't
commit to a specific timeframe but it's certainly shorter than
the 12(g).
Mr. McHenry. Next year? Within the next year?
Ms. Cross. I think certainly the process will start in this
year, and then we'll get the feedback.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. And thank you for your candor. With
that, Mr. Cooper is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have no questions,
but I would be delighted to yield my time to my friend and
colleague, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much. Let me just go back to
something I had asked Chairwoman Schapiro about. And I was, I
had asked her about when you gather all the information, what
are the kinds of things that you will be looking at to strike
the balance?
She told me where the information would be coming from but
didn't get into what kind of things you're trying to--what goes
into that process of striking a balance? We've had a wonderful
discussion here about the problems and what have you. But I'm
trying to figure out when you sit down at the table, are there
certain principles that may be guiding, guiding principles so
that you can have a way of weighing what you're doing so that
you come out with--and I'm not asking you for your final
solution, I'm just trying to figure out what are the kinds of
things that you think, that you think that you all would be
looking at. I'm mainly concerned about again those guiding kind
of principles.
Ms. Cross. That's an excellent question, Congressman. I
think that the--starting, for example, with the ban on general
solicitation, if we eliminate the ban so that offerings,
private offerings could be made to accredited investors through
publicity, through advertising and the like, I would want to
know whether we're confident that the group that's getting sold
to is the group that doesn't need protection and that the
people that are getting sold to are in fact accredited
investors. So those are things that I think will be important
in the mix. If they don't need the protections of the
securities laws, then it may make sense to make it easier to
reach them. If they are the group that needs the protections of
the securities laws because either they're not really
accredited and they're getting, they have fraudulent brokers
who are putting them into deals they shouldn't be in. So I'm
very concerned about that factor, so I would like to, and so in
that area those are the, those will be going into our, the
staff's recommendation.
On the 500 holder limit, I would like to know what the
investor makeup is in these companies and I would like to know
what the characteristics are of these companies. Are these
companies that are real companies? Are they more fraudulent
companies that are trading in the sort of dark markets and held
in street name and you don't really have, they have thousands
of investors but they only count as 200 because they're held
through brokers, or are these companies that are the engines of
growth and they have 499 holders and they can't raise another
dime because they can't get one more holder, and those are 499
actual investors. I think those are important points. And if
the answers come out--we may need different answers for
different kinds of companies, different situated companies,
companies who go dark because they are held through street name
might need a different test than companies that are held by
investors directly and are bumping up against the limit and are
in desperate need of capital.
Mr. Cummings. Now with regard to those who need to be
protected, will you be looking at, you said that you would,
you're concerned about them, but then going back to some
questions that Mr. McHenry asked about who it is that is in
need of protection, do you all see that changing? In other
words, is that something that you, is that a definition that
you might want to revisit at some point? I'm just curious.
Ms. Cross. Well, the accredited investor definition amended
in Dodd-Frank to change the net worth test to eliminate the
primary residence. And Dodd-Frank otherwise says that we're not
to revise that definition, I believe it's 4 years. And GAO is
doing a study of the definition in the meantime. So I don't see
that as a definition we're changing on the immediate horizon
but it is a definition that does need to be a living, breathing
definition as investors change. For example, should there be a
special accreditation for people who are chartered financial
analysts who don't happen to have a lot of money for some
reason, things like that; it might make sense to add people to
the list.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Chairman Issa [presiding]. I thank the ranking member.
I have only one question for you as a quick followup.
The current statute envisions that all investors are in one
pool. So if a company has no program for their employees to own
stock, no, any form of stock options, they could have 500
street name investors which could be thousands of actual
investors through their--well, if a company has 1,000 employees
they want to offer they have no choice but to in fact avail
themselves of an alternative because the same 500 applies
regardless, isn't that true?
Ms. Cross. It's correct that the same 500 applies.
I think that for some companies that are traded in the
over-the-counter markets, not on exchanges, they are held in
street name; even though they're not reporting companies, those
companies could also have their employees hold in street name
in theory. Those are not the kinds of companies we're really
talking about at this hearing. I think the companies you're
talking about are the companies that are pre-IPO companies who
are growing----
Chairman Issa. Correct.
Ms. Cross. --dynamically, and for those companies the
employees being counted certainly weighs into a meaningful cap.
Chairman Issa. OK, and that was just the point that I
wanted to make sure we understood, that when we talk about
protections, that it's, in fact, not a fixed protection. It can
be a very large number by comparison if employees are not
offered and a very small one if there were hundreds of
employees in that mix.
Ms. Cross. That's right.
Chairman Issa. Thank you. And with that I thank you for
your participation in this panel and your patience through all
of it.
And we'll take a 5-minute recess to set up the second
panel. Thank you.
Ms. Cross. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Chairman Issa. Thank you all for your patience. I noticed,
I believe, all of you in the audience. So you know our
questions. Now the question of course will be will your answers
be similar to the first panel?
I knew I would get a laugh if I worked hard on it.
We now recognize our second panel.
Mr. Barry Silbert is the CEO of SecondMarket, an
alternative trading system and a young entrepreneur in his own
right.
Mr. Eric Koester is the cofounder of Zaarly, Inc.
Dr. Richard Rahn is Senior Fellow at the Cato Institute.
And Mr. Jonathan Macey is a law professor at Yale
University.
Last but not least, the Honorable Roel Campos is the former
Commissioner of the Securities Exchange Commission.
As you saw in the first panel, our rules require all
witnesses be sworn. So please rise and take the oath.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Issa. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
And as in the first panel, we will take 5 minutes on our
side, and I'll try not to cut anyone off mid-question or--and I
won't cut any of you off mid-answer.
However, there's a lot more of you. So on your opening
statements please limit yourself to 5 minutes, and with that,
Mr. Silbert.

STATEMENTS OF BARRY E. SILBERT, CEO, SECONDMARKET; ERIC
KOESTER, CO-FOUNDER, ZAARLY, INC.; RICHARD W. RAHN, SENIOR
FELLOW, THE CATO INSTITUTE; JONATHAN R. MACEY, SAM HARRIS
PROFESSOR OF CORPORATE LAW, SECURITIES AND CORPORATE FINANCE,
YALE LAW SCHOOL, PROFESSOR, YALE SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT; AND ROEL
C. CAMPOS, ESQ., LOCKE LORD BISSELL & LIDDELL, FORMER
COMMISSIONER OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE COMMISSION

STATEMENT OF BARRY E. SILBERT

Mr. Silbert. Good afternoon, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member
Cummings, and members of the committee. My name is Barry
Silbert, and I'm the founder and CEO of SecondMarket. I'm
grateful for the opportunity to testify this afternoon
regarding the future of capital formation, an important issue
that directly impacts job growth and U.S. global
competitiveness.
I founded SecondMarket in 2004 to create a transparent,
centralized and independent market for alternative investments,
including stock in private companies.
We've grown rapidly and now have 135 employees in New York
and San Francisco and have completed several billions of
dollars in transactions. We're a registered broker-dealer with
FINRA and an SEC-registered alternative trading system.
SecondMarket's unique business model is premised on
transparency and independence. We do not engage in proprietary
trading, meaning we do not use our own balance sheet to
purchase assets that are put up for sale in SecondMarket.
Up until a decade ago, fast-growing startups followed a
very similar capital formation path. They raised venture
capital, a few rounds of venture capital, and went public in
about 5 years. For several decades, these small cap companies
could thrive in the public markets with research coverage,
brokers and market makers driving investor interest in these
companies. The public market allowed companies like Starbucks,
Intel, Genentec, and Dell to grow from small cap companies into
job-creating economic powerhouses.
However, the capital formation process has evolved over the
past decade, and the public markets are no longer receptive to
small companies. It now takes companies twice as long--nearly
10 years--to grow to reach the public market.
A number of factors have contributed to the systemic
problems that exist in the public market. These include a shift
from stockbrokers to online trading, the inability for market
makers to profit for supporting smaller cap stocks, the lack of
research coverage on smaller companies, and finally, the
implementation of Sarbanes-Oxley, which made it cost
prohibitive to be a public small company.
You can read more about these issues in my written
testimony.
One other important systemic change is the emergence of
computer-driven, high frequency trading. Although it brings
liquidity to the public markets, these traders ignore small cap
companies and have contributed to the casino-like trading
atmosphere in the markets. Disturbingly, it is estimated that
nearly 60 percent of public trading volume is being done by
computer algorithms, which has caused the average time that a
public share of stock is held to decline from 5 years in 1970
to less than 3 months today.
The small cap market is a vital part of the capital
formation process, and the failure of the U.S. capital markets
to support these companies inhibits our ability to create jobs,
innovate and grow. Consequently, a new growth market must
emerge to support these companies, and I believe that
SecondMarket is that market.
Chairman Schapiro has said that the SEC is reviewing the
regulatory landscape to lessen the burden on private companies.
President Obama has also ordered a review of government
regulations that place an unnecessary burden on businesses. I
applaud the commitment of the SEC and the administration.
I believe there are two regulatory hurdles in particular
that must be reexamined. First is the so-called 500 shareholder
rule. As discussed previously, pay structure at startup
companies generally involve giving employees below market
salaries coupled with stock options. These options enable
employees to realize the financial upside while enabling the
startup to hire top talent even though they don't have the cash
to pay market salaries.
As a result, this rule has created a disincentive for
private companies to hire new employees or acquire other
businesses for stock as the companies are fearful of taking on
too many shareholders and thus triggering a public filing
requirement.
The second rule that must be reexamined is the prohibition
against general solicitations. Given that only accredited
investors are eligible to purchase unregistered securities,
such as private company stock, we should strive to maximize the
pool of investors that are aware of any offering. In short, let
everyone see, but only let accredited investors invest.
Given the foregoing, I would respectfully propose the
following rule changes: First, a significant increase or
elimination of the 500 shareholder threshold. Second, if a
threshold is increased but not eliminated, an exemption for
accredited investors from that count. The SEC has already
determined that these investors do not require registration
level protection, and therefore this exemption would be
consistent with the SEC's investor protection mandate.
Third, if the threshold is increased but not eliminated, an
exemption for employee owners from the shareholder count. And
finally, an elimination on the prohibition of general
solicitation provided that the ultimate purchaser is, in fact,
an accredited investor.
I believe the problems facing growth stage companies must
be addressed and failure to support a new growth market will
significantly limit access to capital, restrict job growth,
stifle innovation, and weaken the United States globally.
Thank you again for the opportunity to participate in this
important hearing. I would also like to thank the SEC for
considering these important rule changes.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Silbert follows:]

Chairman Issa. Thank you. Mr. Koester.

STATEMENT OF ERIC KOESTER

Mr. Koester. Hello. Thank you, Chairman Issa, Ranking
Member Cummings, and members of the committee. My name is Eric
Koester, and I'm one of the founders of Zaarly, a location-
based, realtime, community-powered marketplace launching--
crossing your fingers--nationwide this month. I greatly
appreciate the time to come before you today.
I am what Mr. Silbert earlier described, a hopeful fast
growing company. And as a former startup lawyer turned
entrepreneur myself, I have had the unique opportunity to
advise, counsel, and educate thousands of entrepreneurs and
early stage businesses as well as live the life of business
owner myself. Therefore, I have seen some of the challenges
affecting today's entrepreneurs and small businesses firsthand.
My testimony today is aimed to highlight specific concerns
from the mouths of entrepreneurs that affect the ability of our
young companies to hire and increase jobs, to innovate, to
compete globally, and to grow our broader economy.
Today I would briefly like to tell the story of why it is
important to act to decrease friction for entrepreneurs and
small businesses, to increase liquidity in our private markets,
and to regain the leadership position to support early stage
businesses.
Others on this panel may be better suited to provide
information such as data, research and analysis on broader
market trends, but my purpose as an entrepreneur here today is
to share how some of these regulations can impact our ability
to fund and grow these emerging small businesses.
Today's economy is very different, and entrepreneurs and
small businesses have unique opportunities. In speaking with
entrepreneurs and myself, I believe there's a few key lessons
that we can learn from the proverbial entrepreneurial field.
First, building a small business today is actually cheaper
and easier than it's ever been before in our Nation's history.
Second, and a big however, building a business is not
cheap, and it still requires substantial resources and
investments to make these businesses thrive.
No. 3, raising funds in itself is difficult, and it has
become more difficult given the decreased liquidity of our
banking system, and identifying prospective investors is
extremely distracting to the task of building and starting a
new growth business.
And fourth, the most important lesson learned from
entrepreneurs today is that removing friction, friction in
business, friction in commerce, friction in human capital and,
important to this economy committee today, regulatory friction
is crucial to be able for these businesses to do more with
less.
I would like to tell a brief story about my current
business, Zaarly, and why I think that removing friction is so
important to the success of other businesses like ours.
My business was just an idea 11 weeks ago. In the last 11
weeks, we've been able to hire a team of nearly a dozen
individuals, nearly 50 contractors, open two offices, deploy
robust technology solution, raise funding and hopefully file
several patents and trademarks to ready a marketing effort to
take the Nation by storm--we hope--this month. Our goal is to
be, with some luck and support of customers, the next Amazon,
eBay or Groupon.
The important lesson to learn about Zaarly is that we've
launched this market in a very short and rapid time, leveraging
the speeds and the trends in industry. But what's also
important to know is that other businesses may not have the
advantages that a Zaarly has by having a reformed corporate
lawyer on their team to navigate some of the difficult legal
issues.
So the story of Zaarly and its rapid growth and hopeful
success from here highlights some several lessons. It
highlights that the regulatory schemes are very complex for
early stage businesses and are distracting to their success.
Sufficient funding resources are crucial to their speed and
there are dozens of ways for these businesses to trip up on the
existing regulatory scheme. So alternative funding schemes are
important to find and to reduce the operational expense of
taking a business from a startup to a successful business
venture.
Therefore, I'd like to propose and encourage the Commission
and this entire committee to look at four important things:
Continue to examine private company fundraising and financing
regulations, including things such as general solicitations and
the ability of private investors to be deemed accredited when
they are sophisticated investors.
Second, to explore more options like private market
regulations, like my colleague Mr. Silbert's SecondMarket,
which can increase liquidity for lower tier businesses in the
chain such as myself.
Third, to explore the options for community funded or
funding organizations where small dollar amounts contributed by
the community can be used to fund businesses like mine.
And finally, while not within the purview of this
committee, I think it's important that the immigration reform
impacting startups, such as the startup visa program, H-1B visa
extensions be explored.
I want to express my gratitude for being here today and
thank you very much for exploring these important issues. Thank
you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Koester follows:]

Chairman Issa. Thank you. Dr. Rahn.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD W. RAHN

Mr. Rahn. Mr. Chairman, ranking member, and other members
of the committee, thank you very much for inviting me to be
with you here today.
I want to take a different tack. I want to challenge the
conventional wisdom. We have a regulatory structure of the SEC
which was basically designed in the 1930's, and the question
is, is that really appropriate for today's Information Age?
If you had to start over again, let's assume we had no SEC,
how would you design it? Would you create one? Would it look
anything like the SEC we have today?
There has been a lot of evidence that the SEC is somewhat
dysfunctional. We've been losing global market share, we've had
the debate about the IPOs and how much that is--the reduction
of IPOs is due to the SEC and so forth.
One thing strikes me. A huge portion of the SEC budget goes
into enforcement. If the other divisions of the SEC were doing
their job, it would seem that we would have very few
enforcement needs. And is this really the way we want to go.
There's a theory in economics, there's a whole public choice
school of economics that looks at the motivations of people
within bureaucracies. In the whole area of cost-benefit
analysis I think is an undermanaged activity within the SEC. We
have a basic conflict. The SEC is an agency primarily driven by
lawyers, relatively few economists. And as an economist, I have
a certain bias here. But when I have been on a board of a
regulatory agency, and I have seen the problem, that the
regulators of course keep their jobs by coming up with more
regulations and rules. I'm not saying they are of evil intent
but it's just the nature of the way people operate, and the job
of really the chief economist role is to say no to rules that
aren't justified. But they have to really be independent from
the rest of the staff in order to do an objective job.
We don't see it at the SEC or most other government
regulatory agencies, and I think we have to rethink the whole
structural model of how we set these agencies up, in particular
the SEC, to give more balance to really looking at the costs
and benefits of every possible regulation, every piece of
paper, everything that comes out.
One example is the whole area of accredited investor. This
started off with the perfectly good intent of trying to keep
the--allowing people who should be able to take care of
themselves to be in without having to be regulated. But we look
at what has happened. Right now, we only have about 2 percent
of the U.S. population that qualifies as an accredited
investor. Does this make any sense? You can have a rock
musician or a sports figure who meets the income and net worth
standards, but a young tax attorney or professor of finance
doesn't. Does that make sense?
I don't think we ought to have a system where we say only 2
percent of the population is so-called smart enough to be able
to be accredited investors. We ought to have at least 50
percent of the population, or I think a lot more. Most people
can make judgments. People make mistakes. We find even the
richest and most sophisticated make mistakes. We all make
mistakes. But that doesn't mean the government ought to
prohibit us from having the opportunities that only the
wealthiest among us have.
Insider trading, everybody has been against insider
trading. It seems logical to oppose insider trading. But
there's a lot of new academic evidence, scholars, law and
economic scholars, who have studied it and say no, this is
actually causing us more problems. We get into the whole area
of what I call vague law with insider trading. The SEC brings
many insider trading actions, but they're unsuccessful in the
vast majority of these. And part is because we can't even
define insider trading. And so I argue that we really need to
go back to square one here, think of how we set up these
organizations to truly protect investors and not get hung up
with the things that we've done in the past which may not be
sensible.
Thank you very much. I do appreciate the opportunity to be
here with you today. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rahn follows:]

Mr. McHenry [presiding]. Thank you, Dr. Rahn.
And Mr. Macey.

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN R. MACEY

Mr. Macey. Thank you. It's a great pleasure to be here and
I enjoyed very much listening to the questions and the answers,
particularly the questions in the first panel which I felt were
extremely well informed, and I wanted to elaborate on some of
the points that were made in light of my own views of some of
the issues that are facing us in terms of capital formation.
First, we have two competing sets of statistics with regard
to initial public offerings in the United States, and I want to
make it clear that both of these sets of statistics are
interesting and important and accurate.
One set of statistics, introduced by the chairman, is the
idea that the number of U.S. public offerings over the last 20
years has been in decline. That statistic becomes more
interesting, I think, it's an interesting statistic, it becomes
even more interesting in light of the article from the Atlantic
Monthly that the ranking minority member mentioned that says
that while the number of initial public offerings may be going
down, the amount of money raised in public offerings, not just
the number of deals, but the actual amount of money has been
going up.
What that means, of course, is that because both of these
sets of statistics are accurate is that we've had fewer public
offerings, but each of the public offerings that we've had has
been raising on average more money than investors have in the
past. What this means, I think uncontrovertibly, is that the
capital formation process has come to be dominated by only the
very largest issuers; that is to say, with respect to the
statistics in the Atlantic about the amount of money raised in
public offerings, one offering of $500 million counts exactly
the same as 100 offerings of $5 million. And I think this
raises an extremely important point about the disproportionate
impact of the regulations that we have.
Regulations have benefits and they have costs. The benefits
are generally the same for all investors and all firms. The
costs, however, fall disproportionately on small and medium
sized firms because they take the form of fixed costs, so the
relative burden on a very large company of going public hasn't
gone up very much, but the burden on small and medium sized
companies has gone up quite a bit. And really if you compare
the industrial structure of the United States with respect to
job formation, with respect to diversity, both in terms of
product lines and in terms of technology and in terms of
geography across the country, the real strength of the U.S.
economy has been that we have a very large number of small and
medium sized firms and relative to European economies and Asian
economies, our economy is much better, the firms in our economy
are much better distributed between small, medium and large
firms rather than having, as we see in other countries, no
middle sized firms, or very few, and firms disproportionately
collected at the small and the large end of the continuum. And
I think that it would be very useful in thinking about the
reform of these SEC rules, particularly the 500 shareholder ban
and the general solicitation ban, to think about the
disproportionate impact of these rules on small and medium
sized companies and to think about the idea that in terms of
job creation we really do not only want to encourage the total
amount of money raised in public offerings, but we also want to
increase the number of companies, the number of entrepreneurs,
the number of businesses that have access to the capital
markets.
So with that, I will spend my last minute talking about a
couple of specific things, one the general solicitation ban and
the 500 shareholder ban.
I don't think that either of these provisions help small or
medium sized businesses. I don't think either of these
provisions protects investors. I also want to point out as a
factual matter that the SEC's justification for the general
solicitation ban has changed quite a bit over time. Now it is
some idea that we need to protect investors. It used to be, the
original justification for the general solicitation ban was
that we needed to stop investors from becoming too enthusiastic
about securities offerings, that if we allowed a general
offering to take place then there would be a kind of a consumer
frenzy that would occur.
So thank you very much for this time. I appreciate it.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Macey follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Thank you for your testimony.
Commissioner Campos.

STATEMENT OF ROEL C. CAMPOS, ESQ.

Mr. Campos. Thank you very much. Good afternoon. I wish to
thank Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Cummings, and the other
distinguished committee members for the invitation to testify
today. My name is Roel Campos. I'm currently a partner with the
national law firm of Locke Lord Bissell & Liddell, where I
practice securities law. I represent businesses and
individuals.
I come before you today not as an expert or an advocate on
a particular regulatory change, in particular ones that the
committee is considering. But instead I testify today from the
perspective of a former SEC Commissioner. Like you and the SEC
currently, during my tenure as an SEC Commissioner, I often
faced the difficult challenge of how best to reform and improve
securities laws and regulations.
I learned firsthand how difficult it can be to balance the
goals mandated by Congress, protecting investors, but also
facilitating capital formation and preserving the integrity of
the markets.
With your permission, my testimony today has two modest
goals: Presenting a very short discussion of factors in
consideration that must be balanced to produce sound
regulations and offering observations and suggestions to assist
the SEC to achieve appropriate reform of current securities
regulation.
First, let me briefly begin by discussing investor
protection. In my experience, this concept, when raised,
regularly produces cynicism and the disbelief that this is a
serious goal in today's complex environment.
Many seem to believe that the concept of investor
protection is archaic and long ago ceased to be useful, that it
is a musty relic of a bygone era, the market crash of 1929.
I respectfully disagree. I submit that investor protection
remains today as important as it was 80 years ago when Congress
made it the fundamental underpinning of the securities laws.
As a commissioner, I was often asked with respect to
investor protection, Well, what investors exactly and do
investors really need much protection? Certainly the term
``investor'' is very broad. Congress and the SEC have never
made a distinction among the categories of investors which
include institutional investors, i.e., pension plans, which can
represent public and private employees, and often include in
professional investors, private asset managers, and hedge
funds.
And finally there is the distinction of retail investors,
the everyday person who holds a brokerage account or who tries
to manage his or her retirement plan. During my tenure at the
SEC, I was privileged to represent the Agency in the
international arena where I learned firsthand that our markets
are unique. Securities markets in Europe and Asia are comprised
almost exclusively of institutional and professional investors.
In the United States, however, retail investors provide a
significant portion of the capital that is invested. Retail
investors, therefore, add a depth of liquidity and offer a
diversification to the investor base, to the U.S. markets that
cannot be found elsewhere in the world. Indeed, the liquidity
and the diversity of the U.S. markets help convince many
foreign investors to invest in the United States.
As a commissioner, I worried most about retail investors,
as the others often have strong associations and lobbyists to
present their views and their needs to the Commission and to
the SEC staff. So the retail investors, however, are the ones
who most quickly can leave the markets when the problems rise.
And as was discussed in the first panel, when there is a crash,
when there is a problem, those particular investors flee the
fastest.
Let me move to some ideas that I have regarding the
situation that we have today.
The SEC has stated in the panel very clearly that they're
willing to look at these particular issues, that they're
willing to consider reform. In fact, they're--Chairman Schapiro
and Meredith Cross were very clear about that. However, there
has always been, and I submit continues today, a deep annoyance
that the SEC takes too long to consider new ideas and
recommendations for improvements. This problem arises from, I
submit, resources, insufficient staff that have other skills
that go beyond being lawyers. So I would submit that's an area
of consideration for this particular committee.
And with that, I see my time is up and I thank you for
permitting me to make these statements.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Campos follows:]

Mr. McHenry. I certainly appreciate the panel's testimony.
It's very informative and helpful for policymakers here in
Congress to hear from you.
We'll lead off with 5 minutes from Mr. Meehan of
Pennsylvania.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for this
distinguished panel, again, in addition to those who came
before us. I am struck by the remarkable amount of willingness
on this panel to be taking creative looks at where we ought to
be going with the SEC.
Mr. Silbert, I had the opportunity to spend a little time
paying some attention to your business model. Very impressive
in terms of what struck me is the idea that you really have
created a market for sophisticated investors, people who take
the time to understand that there's a lot of different kinds of
securities out there that can become able to be liquid, which
both creates liquidity; it also allows people to participate
that may not reach this threshold for sophisticated investors.
Can we expand the definition of ``sophisticated investor''
some way to include the kinds of people that put the sweat
equity in understanding things but may not have the dollars
behind their name to take the risk?
Mr. Silbert. Congressman, it's an interesting idea that I
think has been floated over the past 6 months, 12 months, as
this private company market has grown in value or volume.
The way we operate right now, as you're alluding to, we
only allow accredited investors to participate. And while we
would certainly kind of welcome the expansion of the
addressable universal investors, we have to comply with the
current regulations. The idea of a test I think is a viable
one, but I think it then comes down to who administers the test
and things like that.
Mr. Meehan. Dr. Rahn, you had talked about this 2 percent
factor. What criteria that would be able to be utilized in this
to create a class that would be able to invest without having
the----
Mr. Rahn. Well, the main thing we want to know is, have
people actually paid attention? All of us make all kinds of
investments. We buy houses and automobiles. One can go to Las
Vegas and gamble away your fortune. You don't have any net
worth requirements on that. We have people who are totally
unsophisticated. If we came up with a notion of accredited
gambler, people would look at that as laughable. We have the
State lotteries, which I look as a total financial rip-off.
But I think the main thing, rather than trying to say you
have to have a certain net worth or a certain education. If the
SEC gave a piece of paper to everybody who was going to invest,
or if we had one and it first pointed out the low probability
of new ventures, you know, give whatever statistics we had on
that, warned people against it, like we do lots of other types
of warnings for everything from cigarette labels and everything
else, and say you have to do your own due diligence. Just the
mere existence of the SEC adds risk.
Look at all of the investors in the Madoff Pyramid scheme
who claimed one reason they felt confident is because the SEC
exists, rather than doing their own due diligence. And
obviously we really have to have a way to protect people who
really can't do any kind of evaluation on their own.
But the vast majority of Americans I think have the brains
and the skills to be able to do this and to rule out all but 2
percent of our citizens, because what that does is discriminate
against young people and others who want to get rich. We're
saying now, only the people who are already rich can have the
access to the best opportunities. That seems to me totally un-
American.
Mr. Meehan. Professor Macey, you were precluded from
getting in the full scope of your testimony by the 5 minutes,
but I enjoyed reading your testimony. And I was a little bit--
at some points, I was struck by your notion that tied into one
of the questions I asked about China. The markets have changed
dramatically in the years since World War II. And you made a
comment. You said the SEC needs to make a clean break with the
past relating to the fact that the capital markets aren't the
only ones in the United States now. We're turning into a global
marketplace. There's more than one cop on the beat. Where do we
go?
Mr. Macey. As I think I try to say in my testimony, I think
the people of the SEC are extremely bright and talented and
well meaning, honest, full of integrity. But there are--I think
that we, and when I say ``we'' I mean those of us in academia,
the people, frankly, who oversee, the people in Congress who
oversee what the people at the SEC do kind of inadvertently
give these folks very perverse incentives.
So for example, we heard in the first panel this morning
something that we always hear from the SEC when they're being
questioned. They say, We're doing a really good job. Look at
the dollar amount in fines we fined Goldman Sachs, this huge
amount of money. We've increased every year the amount of
fines, that we returned $2 billion to the U.S. Treasury.
So we've set this up as the criteria by which we judge the
SEC. That means that what they're going to do is go after the
biggest fine they can. That does not help the small or medium-
sized investor. The smaller, medium-sized investor by
definition loses small and medium amounts of money.
So we're giving the SEC preferences.
Another example is not just the SEC but our society
generally is much more kind of, if you will pardon the
expression, ``lawyered up'' than other societies. And a lot of
what the SEC does--because it is much more dominated by lawyers
than any other regulatory agency, either in the United States
or in terms of its counterparts in other countries. If you're
working at the SEC, you really cannot make a career for
yourself by making the securities regulations simpler. No one
wants to hire you to work at a big Wall Street firm to charge
you a lot of money to interpret simple regulations.
The more complex you make it and the fewer people who
understand it, the higher value there is on your time in your
post-SEC world.
So I think we have these challenges that we need to--it is
not just a matter of--I don't think it's at all a matter of the
people at the SEC having a bad--you know, just being in favor
of more regulation for kind of senseless reasons. I think
there's these very deeply kind of impacted structural issues
that no one had to pay any attention to in the postwar period,
because there weren't any other capital markets in the world.
During the Marshall Plan, as you well know, Europe was
being rebuilt; Asia, China had not emerged as a serious
economy; Japan was being completely rebuilt from the ground up.
So nobody who wanted to raise capital in any serious way could
avoid the United States. I think it's very important to
understand that times have changed.
Mr. McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Cummings is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Campos, you heard Dr. Rahn talk about
only 2 percent, and he felt like it should be more like 50
percent of the people investing; is that right, Dr. Rahn?
Mr. Rahn. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. What's your feeling on that? I mean, you seem
to be very concerned about the retail investor. I think what
Dr. Rahn is saying is there are a lot of people who are much
more sophisticated than maybe we think. But what's your feeling
on that? In other words, how much protection do you think is
needed? And he claims that we're basically locking people out.
You talked about the college kids and young people and
whatever.
I am just wondering, I know you're talking about striking a
balance, but do you think we're going too far?
Mr. Campos. I think that is the fundamental question in
regulation. And that's where and why you have such heated
discussions at times, because you're dealing with a broad
concept, investor protection, within the aftermath of the 1929
crash when all of these laws were written. And we have a very
different world and a very different economy today.
So when we talk about investor protection, I think you can
achieve investor protection by finding a way to allow all
categories of people--not necessarily through a financial
test--to be able to participate in particular investments.
The real protection that's necessary is the idea that
investors of whatever category can get taken advantage of and
can be lied to and can be cheated and be misrepresented, or
critical facts can be hidden. So you can achieve this, I
believe.
It may be ironic to some people but I favored, when I was
at the SEC, products that allowed under the Investment Company
Act, mutual funds--that allowed small investors to have a taste
of some of the more complex items if they were placed correctly
in funds and regulated. I felt why should only rich people have
essentially the opportunity to have the more sophisticated
ideas and complexes?
So in summary, in a stimulus summarize, investor protection
goes toward the idea that you need a system that people are not
expecting to be guaranteed making money or profits. That's not
what we have here. You can pick a stock and it may not go up,
it may go down, but the key is in so doing you're not going to
be cheated. This particular company didn't have the cash that
it said it had on hand or something else to lure that
particular investor.
So that's what's important. And I think I would have other
things to say about the SEC if ever anybody is interested in
that.
Mr. Cummings. One of the things you say in your testimony,
you state that after every scandal or malfunction of capital
markets, investor confidence is down and retail investors leave
the market. What can the SEC do to help boost investor
confidence in the U.S. capital market?
Mr. Campos. Great question, and people will disagree on
that one as well. But essentially what we need today, in my
humble view, is we need a market that operates in a way that
doesn't mystify, worry, perplex investors. I submit and I think
all of us would say it's true if the market plunges 80 percent,
you know, stocks go from $40 to $2 in the space of 5 or 10
minutes, something is wrong. And that is a scary event, if you
permit me that term.
So from the get-go, I think that the markets need, you
know, careful study in that particular area.
What does fast trading--what does fast trading, in
nanoseconds, what has that done to the average person whose
broker is somebody he knew of in high school and has his few
hundred thousand dollars, if it's that much in today's world,
for his savings? Can he or she just invest in IBM now, or
whatever the popular stock, Apple or whatever? Something is
going on in these markets. That needs study. That needs help,
in my view.
Mr. Cummings. Somebody asked a question. They said that the
system is so much--things are so much different than back long
ago. Do you think the SEC has kept up with that, the changes
you talk about, the nanoseconds?
Mr. Campos. I agree with what many others are saying. I
think the SEC was established in terms of concept in the
1930's. It's an Agency of lawyers. We need today statisticians,
researchers, economists. The sort of things that the chairman
and you would like to do in terms of getting the SEC to look at
things quickly and efficiently requires those types of skill
sets. It requires resources that the Agency doesn't have.
What they have to do is go out, survey the system, survey
the literature, ask for comments, and then it's essentially a
who pushes the hardest in terms of the players, a very
difficult situation. Imagine a judge in a courthouse having to
take opinions from 40 different sections and reading all the
research themselves. It is a very difficult situation in terms
of figuring out what's best for the markets, in particular when
you don't have the base of expertise.
So I do believe that one great improvement would be that
the Agency get resources to have those types of people
involved.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from North Carolina.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Koester, how important is access to capital to you in
this startup.
Mr. Koester. Thank you very much. It's actually an
excellent question, and I'll address it personally from my
current business as well as from advising startups over time.
I think it's the difference between a nice side of business
that supports your family and a business that really
contributes in a dramatic way to the U.S. economy. The business
that we've started, Zaarly, is a business that we hope will
have a dramatic impact on markets, person-to-person commerce,
and hopefully have an impact on employment. But that's only
accessible to us because of the fact that we had forward-
thinking investors to put capital in early and efficiently.
That allowed us to run very quickly to the point where we took
a business from an idea to 12 weeks later to launching a very
large-scale business.
Mr. McHenry. Now, in terms of getting employees to come in
for a startup, is it important for them to have some method of
sort of long-term payoff?
Mr. Koester. Absolutely. Absolutely. I think equity is an
important thing for people willing to take that kind of risk.
But I think that's the thing that is attractive about startup
companies and early stage business is that risk/reward
opportunity.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Silbert, what function do you provide?
Let's say Mr. Koester is able to hire a hundred whizzes at a
very low cost, but with equity in the company, in the hopes
that this one day goes public.
Mr. Silbert. The issue today is, as I mentioned before, is
it's taking twice as long to go public. So if you're looking at
a process that's going to take 8, 9, 10 years, that doesn't
work for anybody involved in the capital formation process. It
doesn't work for employees. It doesn't work for individual
investors. It doesn't work for investor capitalists.
So we identified a need to create essentially a spring
training to enable companies to get to the point where they
could go public but also not have to subject themselves to a
lot of the negatives of being a public company, whether it's
the Sarbanes-Oxley, or disclosure, that type of thing.
So what we have seen over the past couple of years, there
are a growing number of companies that have come to appreciate
that if you can allow your employees at a certain point in
time, the right time, maybe it's 4 years, 5 years into it,
allow them to taste some of value that they have created, that
money is typically reinvested into other companies as well, and
they're going to stay in it for the long haul and maybe wait
for that 10-year IPO event.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Koester, would that be appealing?
Mr. Koester. Absolutely. I think that it's appealing for
employees to have that liquidity early.
I also think there's also a side benefit that's not often
discussed, besides employees. It's that investors in my
business are venture capitalists who have an obligation to get
a return. And obviously if they can't get that return over
time, they're slow to reinvest that money again into
businesses.
So the fact that they can gain liquidity earlier in the
process, from 10 years down to 5 years potentially, allows them
to have two cracks at the apple and potentially invest multiple
times, reap the rewards, and double-down essentially on early
stage investments.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Silbert, this 500 shareholder rule, as the
chair of the SEC called it, arbitrary number, can you discuss
that?
Mr. Silbert. Well, it was established I guess in the
sixties, and it worked for decades. But if you look at that
chart, you know we're now at a point where it is not working
any more. And what the numbers should become, should there be a
number, I don't know. But what we do know is it's a major
issue.
As I mentioned in my remarks, we certainly support
eliminating the employees from the account, we certainly
support eliminating credit investors from the accounts, but we
would also like to see that analysis that's going to be
prepared.
Mr. McHenry. This limits access to capital for these small
businesses and it limits--Mr. Koester, it eliminates your
ability to access capital and grow your company and grow your
head count too, right?
Mr. Koester. Yes. I think it has a slow down. I think on
the charts not shown up there is the decrease in venture
capital investment, and I think that's also attributable to the
lack of liquidity in the IPO markets. That I think has a
downstream effect that limits the early stage investment rather
than just the late-stage IPO investment. It is a double-edged
sword, decreasing employment levels as well.
Mr. McHenry. It's important--this chart is interesting to
look at in the terms of the number of IPOs.
I think many Americans misunderstand what the IPO is about.
It's in order to get capital injected into your company, right,
and to free up maybe some of the capital you've got invested
in. But long term, it's really about accessing capital for that
company so they can grow jobs and actually grow larger. That's
the reason why you have shareholders who want to participate.
Mr. Macey, we discussed the 500 shareholder caps, your
views on it, and sort of where you'd like to see this thing go.
Mr. Macey. Well, certainly I just want to make two points
about it.
First, I am against the 500 share cap. I think that
particularly with respect to employees, it provides a real curb
on the ability of companies to provide incentives different
than cash compensation.
The point I want to make, though, that hasn't been made yet
is simply to observe that there is a very close correlation
between the 500 shareholder rule and a whole bunch of other
rules. So, for example, we heard this morning something the SEC
is very proud of--and I am not opposed to it--is there's a
reform of a couple of years ago to say that employee stock
options are exempt from this 500 count, so you can give all the
options you want without coming under the 500 count norm.
But what I don't think the SEC fully grasps as it relates
to the 500 shareholder rule is, it doesn't do me very much good
to have an option to buy a share stock if that share stock is
not publicly traded, or if there are big impediments to that
company making an IPO.
Similarly, with respect to the 500 shareholder rule, let's
say we exempt employees, we raise the number to some sensible
level, we need to go beyond that to really help the U.S.
economy create jobs, because we need to--we need to make that
stock grant, just like the Oxley grant, worth something to the
employees. And it becomes worth something the more liquidity it
has, the more access the company has to the public offering
market.
So I think the 500 shareholder rule is a terrific step in
the right direction, but it's almost a cruel joke if you say to
an employee, Here are your options or here are your shares, but
it's too risky for us to go to public, so these shares are
going to be restricted forever. That's not a great deal in my
view.
Chairman Issa. I now recognize the gentleman from
Tennessee, Mr. Cooper.
Mr. Cooper. I am very open to the idea of changing the
general solicitation rules and also the 500-person limit. I do
think, though, that this hearing, as good as it has been, has
only really highlighted two pieces of the puzzle, and it is a
very large puzzle.
Having been an investment banker, I think that the
structure in the investment banking industry is also very
important to this. There have been a few glancing blows dealt
to that topic, but the fact that analysts find it difficult to
make a living following stocks, especially smaller stocks, is a
fundamental problem. That also implies that the retail investor
needs the help of an analyst, and ideally the help of an honest
analyst that won't just lose the stocks that company happens to
be underwriting at the time.
There are many issues in the structure of the investment
banking field. One of them is the fact that proprietary trading
has become so lucrative that it makes pretty much all fee-based
services pale in comparison. And then that sets up a conflict
of interest issue if they're in fact betting against the issue
of their own client.
So that's a whole segment of the problem.
Another problem is many retail investors have the idea that
all IPOs are automatically good. Well, many of them are
disastrous. Many of them are a search for the dumbest dollars
they can find in America. Overly valuing a company and leaving
the poor retail investor holding the bag, perhaps has been
seduced by an overly optimistic analyst report.
So the search for the informed investor is truly a
difficult task. We saw this in one of the least heralded
features of our recent session, money market funds. Most
everybody has a brokerage account, and who knew? Who knew,
whether the investors were accredited or not, the risk of
breaking a buck on those funds? And I think the government had
to step in with--perhaps the chairman can remind me--wasn't it
a $3 trillion seat-of-your-pants guarantee? Which may have one
of the most fundamental features of the bailout. Basically
everybody in America was bailed out and no one wants to talk
about that.
There are other features to that puzzle, but that should
strike the heart of every investor out there. Even, I imagine,
some university endowment funds didn't really know.
So it seems to me that one of the core issues here, since
really money, according to most investment bankers, really
isn't the issue. It is a question of company valuation. And who
wants to acknowledge that? And the phrase in the business is,
``You don't bet on the horse, you bet on the jockey.'' And the
real shortage is not money, it's management talent and
experience. But these are some of the unacknowledged puzzle
pieces that are out there.
So I commend the chairman for holding this hearing. I know
that he's founded a very successful company in his own right.
But getting this right for the whole country is really going to
be a challenge, because financial literacy probably has not
increased over the years. And I am not sure that television
advertising helps us a whole lot in understanding this.
So I shudder at the thought of some of these general
solicitations that could be amazingly appealing but really just
be hiding an investment that's not necessarily going to grow to
the sky.
So I commend the expertise of the panel. This is indeed a
deep issue, and you should be comforted in the fact that this
committee has no legislative jurisdiction. It's really just a
debating society.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Cooper. I'd be delighted.
Chairman Issa. We do have a little bit. We do regulate the
post office and we've got the District of Columbia.
I want to thank the gentleman. As you know, we didn't come
into this hearing with pre-determination. Certainly Chairwoman
Shapiro was very quick to say she knows some of these reforms
have to happen, and it is mostly her mandate, and I think it's
one of the reasons we want to have the encouragement of the SEC
and support, while recognizing that most of it is for her to do
and not in fact for us to do.
With that, we recognize the gentleman from South Carolina,
Mr. Gowdy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This would be for the whole panel. If you care to comment
on the efficacy or constitutionality of the general
solicitation ban, I'd like to hear your perspectives.
Not all at once.
Mr. Rahn. Well, it's easy for me to do, because I am not a
lawyer. But I can read the English----
Mr. Gowdy. Sounds like you're bragging.
Mr. Rahn. Yes, yes. I can read the English language,
however. And the First Amendment to me is very clear, and it
seems to me there is a definite conflict there; and given the
conflict, I prefer to go with the Constitution.
Mr. Gowdy. Mr. Macey, you look like you were gearing up to
respond?
Mr. Macey. I was winding up there a little bit. So there
are two kinds of stylized facts around this issue on either
side. One is, I think Congressman Issa made this point, that
it's absolutely nonsensical that a pharmaceutical company has
the right to advertise on television a prescription medication,
and a company can't make a similar solicitation for securities.
When you get off the airplane in Europe, you see that all the
time.
The problem that lawyers have, I think on the other hand,
with the issue that you raise about the general solicitation,
is that if we start putting SEC rules, Congressman, under
scrutiny from a First Amendment constitutional lens, we open up
a real Pandora's box. Think about the Securities Act of 1933
and registration statement. That's a prior restraint on the
press to say to a company, You can't send this document out to
investors without going to jail until the Division of
Corporation of Finance of the SEC says it's OK. That's also a
First Amendment violation--in fact, something that's very
commonly said around law schools--I don't think people have
really--it's quite amusing--is that one thing one learns in law
school is an unwritten rule of the United States is that the
First Amendment doesn't apply to the SEC.
I was kind of astonished, actually. The best part of this
hearing by far was when the Chair of the SEC said, Well, you
know, maybe this is unconstitutional, but I have to uphold the
law, and so I am going to ignore the Constitution where it
conflicts with the law. That's not the way I learned kind of a
hierarchy of documents in our system. That's the world we live
in.
Mr. Gowdy. There certainly is precedent for executive
branch entities not following laws that they believe are
unconstitutional, even recent examples of it.
Mr. Macey. I think that you have a moral obligation, if not
a legal obligation, if you're the head of a U.S. administrative
agency, to resign rather than enforce a law that you actually
believe is unconstitutional.
Mr. Gowdy. Let me move to one other area and if I have any
time left, I will yield to the chairman, who is an expert in
this area and I clearly am not.
I think it may have been you, Dr. Macey, or you, Dr. Rahn,
that commented on the perverse incentive to go after big fines
because that's the way we judge success. And I tend to judge
enforcement more by active prison sentences than I do the size
of the fine. So accepting that the SEC is not the U.S.
Attorneys Office, are you satisfied with the level of criminal
prosecutions or fraud; and if not, what can be done about it?
Mr. Macey. I think that if one looks at for example
financial fraud, particularly insider trading prosecutions, I
think that the problem that the government tends to have is,
just as a general rule, is that they overcharge. That is to
say, I think there are current prosecutions that I could cite
as examples, but there are many, many examples that if somebody
has done three things that involve really criminal fraud, I've
never understood why the government would charge them with a
hundred count indictment, where when you get to the number 97,
98, 99, 100, these are pretty big stretches as to whether the
fraud applies to that conduct. Whereas I do think where people
are actually ripping people off, let's go after them.
So that's one big problem that I have, that for what I
think are structural bureaucratic reasons, there are incentives
that the SEC has to say that everything is illegal unless we
say it's legal. I think it would be more helpful if they said,
Where you've actually really committed fraud here in these
situations where we know we have, because the structure of a
criminal trial is once the criminal defense attorneys cast
doubt on a few of these items, then the government can't come
in and say, Oh well, we weren't really serious about charging
those. Here's what we really want the guy to go to jail for.
So I think we need to be more selective and go after real
fraud.
Another thing is who are we really protecting? Somebody
mentioned in the first panel, Gee, isn't this great that we
fined Goldman Sachs so much money with respect to this CDO
scandal and the way it was selling structured products to
investors? I always like to remind my students that the people
who were ripped off in that case were two financial
institutions. One of them was IKB Deutch Industria Bank, a
Dusseldorf, Germany, headquarterd bank. And the other was ABNM
Amro, a giant financial institution in the Netherlands. This
prosecution is not helping the U.S. small investors, not even
helping U.S. investors; Certainly not helping small investors.
Mr. Gowdy. I would disagree with you, but when you rob
another poor person we call it common-law robbery, and when you
rob a rich company, we call it something else. And if for no
other reason other than to just prop up what's left of public
trust in our criminal justice system, I would just like to see
more suits prosecuted and fewer folks who don't have the means
to defend themselves.
Mr. Macey. I agree. My point is simply I'd like to see more
suits brought where the person who is being ripped off is not
ABNM Amro. There are plenty of small investors who are being
ripped off as well, and I'd rather have my tax dollars going to
protect those guys. But I agree with you in general, more is
better.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
For a change, I am going to go last, not first. So I yield
myself 5 minutes.
Mr. Silbert, the companies that are on your exchange,
what's the number, how many of them are audited?
Mr. Silbert. A hundred percent of the companies are
audited.
Chairman Issa. So they have the same audit standards as
public companies, right? Let me rephrase that. They have audits
as required for public companies.
Mr. Silbert. Correct. The auditors tend to be the Big Four
accounting firms.
Chairman Issa. I realize if you want Goldman to take your
public offering, the first thing you have to do is go to what
used to be kind of the Big 10, the Big 8, the Big 6, and now
the Big 4, which is becoming interesting since one of them has
to give you a credit or, sorry, a debt evaluation. Another one
can do something else. Pretty soon you run out of them able to
do anything for you.
So whether you use Pricewaterhouse Coopers or a regional
audit firm, the audit standard for Gap is essentially the same,
isn't it?
Mr. Silbert. Correct.
Chairman Issa. So the standard for an accounting firm
standing behind a qualified opinion is going to be the same for
these companies, whether they're public or private; isn't that
right?
Mr. Silbert. Correct.
Chairman Issa. Let me go through that sort of analogy.
We talked about the First Amendment. Dr. Rahn, you were
pretty straightforward. You are a nonlawyer like myself. You
read this very short chapter, written long ago. You know, it
shall not be abridged, boom, move on. But let me ask you a
series of questions just so we understand the nuances.
I've got an audited--a public accounting firm has done my
audit. Right now if I print it in the newspaper or I give it to
one of my investors and they post it on the Internet, I've
committed no violation, right?
Mr. Rahn. As far as I know.
Chairman Issa. But if I send it out to a group of potential
investors, I've committed a violation, right?
Mr. Rahn. Appears to be.
Chairman Issa. So if I send it out to just those people who
I know could legally invest, I've committed a violation, while
in fact if I give it to the New York Times or somebody posts it
on the Internet--it's fine on my Facebook, right? I just can't
drive people to my Facebook.
Mr. Rahn. You point out the absurdity of what we're doing.
Chairman Issa. So when we talk about the First Amendment,
and it sounds very lofty and when you go to the Constitution,
you sometimes lose the C-SPAN audience because they say, Oh,
well, that's not a recent document. The recent document of
posting something on Facebook being OK, while not being able to
go to investors of record who do this kind of investing
repeatedly and sending them information soliciting them
currently is not available.
Let us go one step further, though.
If JP Morgan and Goldman are being paid by my firm to go
out and find people that's OK, right? They can go solicit the
people who have accounts with them and they already know they
can be qualified, right.
Mr. Rahn. Yes.
Chairman Issa. All the major firms have--and I am getting
``yeses.'' Let the record indicate those are all yeses. She's
very good but she doesn't hear pantomime.
Let's understand that right now the current status quo
allows large brokerage firms to make these markets. And, Mr.
Silbert, you're larger than you once were, but you're not a
conventional brokerage firm. You don't have a whole bunch of--
and correct me if I'm wrong--you don't have a whole bunch of
people paid commissions to go make these transactions, right?
Mr. Silbert. So we do not have a distribution network like
in Goldman Sachs; that is correct.
Chairman Issa. But right now for Goldman and JP Morgan and
many other--we always use Goldman because of their size, but we
could use Bank of America, Merrill Lynch, too--they can in fact
make these markets, have hundreds of investors behind a single
name, and it's OK; it's just not OK for me to post to my
Facebook and drive people to go look at it and consider
investing, even if they're qualified. Is that the status quo
we're dealing with?
Mr. Koester. And as a former startup lawyer, it is one of
those rules that's oftentimes mystical to the individual who's
doing it. But there's a lot of different ways that people wind
up kind of finding magical ways to solicit without soliciting.
Chairman Issa. Now, the chairman when she was here was
unable to answer hypothetical questions for good reasons. She's
doing a due diligence and I commend her for starting this
process. But you all are here to answer the hypothetical. So I
hope you knew that was the reason.
Hypothetically, if the SEC lifts the cap on the 500/499 on
all those who are in fact employees receiving options and those
options maturing, because that ultimately makes them
stockholders, that's OK with all of you; is that right?
[All witnesses answer ``yes'' together.]
Chairman Issa. And if they take--and hypothetically the SEC
takes a standard that they oversee; in other words, an SEC list
of qualified investors, and they lift the cap on that list of
investors, those who either with the help of a JP Morgan or
Goldman or somebody, or on their own fill out a form and show
that they in fact should be not part of a limit protection in
this kind of investment, and she takes the cap off, is that OK
with all of you?
[All witnesses answer ``yes'' together.]
Chairman Issa. So as we close, and the ranking member may
want another round, but as I close, we have two major items
here--the employee who has a benefit limited unless we take the
cap off for them, and the qualified investor who either is
limited because there is only 499 option, or is unlimited
because they are a conduit through. If we allow for that direct
and the solicitation of those registered investors, that's good
with everyone on this panel; is that right?
[All witnesses answer ``yes'' together.]
Chairman Issa. I'll take that as a ``yes'' from everyone. I
hope that as the chairman considers all of this, that you're
all listened to.
Would the ranking member like another round?
Mr. Cummings. No.
Chairman Issa. With that, as we said earlier, for 7 days
the record will remain open, that includes all of you, to
revise and extend. I thank all of you for your testimony.
We stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:20 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]


