- REGULATORY IMPEDIMENTS TO JOB CREATION IN THE NORTHEAST--PART II

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REGULATORY IMPEDIMENTS TO JOB CREATION IN THE NORTHEAST--PART II

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON REGULATORY AFFAIRS,
STIMULUS OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT SPENDING

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 20, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-35

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
68-219 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs, Stimulus Oversight and Government
Spending

JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chairman
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York, Vice    DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio, Ranking
Chairwoman                           Minority Member
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JIM COOPER, Tennessee
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              JACKIE SPEIER, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on April 20, 2011...................................     1
Statement of:
Glazier, Travis..............................................    62
Gostin, Jud, president and chief executive officer, Sensis
Corp.; and Robert Simpson, president, Centerstate CEO......     6
Gostin, Jud..............................................     6
Simpson, Robert..........................................    13
MacMurray, Orrin.............................................    56
Reeves, Andrew, owner, Reeves Farms; Nancy Hourigan, owner,
Hourigan's Dairy Farm; and Tom DeMarree, owner, DeMarree
Orchards...................................................    22
DeMarree, Tom............................................    45
Hourigan, Nancy..........................................    37
Reeves, Andrew...........................................    22
Squires, Thomas..............................................    66
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Buerkle, Hon. Ann Marie, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York, prepared statement of...............     4
Cummings, Hon. Elijah E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Maryland, prepared statement of...............    75
DeMarree, Tom, owner, DeMarree Orchards, prepared statement
of.........................................................    47
Glazier, Travis, prepared statement of.......................    64
Gostin, Jud, president and chief executive officer, Sensis
Corp., prepared statement of...............................     8
Hourigan, Nancy, owner, Hourigan's Dairy Farm, prepared
statement of...............................................    40
MacMurray, Orrin, prepared statement of......................    59
Reeves, Andrew, owner, Reeves Farms, prepared statement of...    27
Simpson, Robert, president, Centerstate CEO, prepared
statement of...............................................    15
Squires, Thomas, prepared statement of.......................    68

REGULATORY IMPEDIMENTS TO JOB CREATION IN THE NORTHEAST--PART II

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 20, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs, Stimulus
Oversight and Government Spending,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Syracuse, NY.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3 p.m., at
2610 South Salina Street, South Side Innovation Center,
Syracuse, NY, Hon. Anne Marie Buerkle presiding.
Present: Representatives Buerkle and Kelly.
Staff present: Joseph A. Brazauskas, counsel; Sharon Casey,
senior assistant clerk; Gwen D'Luzansky, assistant clerk; Adam
P. Fromm, director of Member services and committee operations;
and Cecelia Thomas, minority counsel.
Ms. Buerkle. The committee hearing will come to order.
Good afternoon everyone and welcome to the hearing and we
represent the Oversight and Government Reform Committee.
Today's hearing is going to be on the Regulatory
Impediments to Job Creation in the Northeast. So I welcome all
of you here today and thank you to our panel of witnesses.
We will have three panels throughout the course of the
hearing, so this is, I think, a very exciting opportunity for
my colleague, Mr. Kelly, and myself to hear the concerns and
hear the regulations and hear what businesses in agriculture
and even government municipalities are going through in order
to comply with the sometimes onerous and sometimes very
unrealistic government regulations.
Before we begin today, I know that many of you saw the Post
Standard this morning. I would just ask all of you to join me
in a moment of silence. As you saw the three soldiers from Fort
Drum were killed in action in Afghanistan. They were fathers
and husbands and sons, and we sit here today and we enjoy the
freedom to come together to discuss the American way and
American dream and how to preserve it. And it is because of the
duty and the service and sacrifice that our military provides
for this Nation. So if we could just remember them in a moment
of silence.
And to all the veterans in the room today, on behalf of my
colleague, Mr. Kelly, and myself, thank you for your service to
this Nation. We are a great Nation and it is because of the
service and the sacrifices of our military.
[Moment of silence.]
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
At this time I would like to introduce sitting here on the
panel with me another Member of Congress, my good friend and
colleague, also a freshman this year in Congress, Mike Kelly
from Pennsylvania.
Mike's district is about seven counties and it stretches
from Erie, in the far northwestern corner, to just north of
Pittsburgh. So I'm delighted that he is here with me today to
hear your testimony. Mike sits also on the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee with me.
So it's a pleasure to have you with me here today. Thank
you very much.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you.
Ms. Buerkle. When we have our full committee hearings in
Washington, DC, our chairman, Darrell Issa, begins every
meeting with the reading of the mission statement of the
Oversight and Government Reform, and I'd like to read that to
you all today. I'd like you to understand what this committee
is about and how--what our goals are and what our mission
statement is.
Oversight Committee Mission Statement: We exist to secure
two fundamental principles.
First, Americans have a right to know that the money
Washington takes from them is well spent.
And second, Americans deserve an efficient, effective
government that works for them.
Our duty on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee
is to protect these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to
hold government accountable to the taxpayers because taxpayers
have a right to know what they get from their government.
We will work tirelessly in partnership with citizen
watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American people and to
bring genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy.
This is the mission of the Oversight and Government Reform
Committee.
Thank you all for coming here today. I think that this is
an exciting day for us in upstate New York. Today we will
continue an effort that my subcommittee and the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee have been examining since the
beginning of this year.
Our committee has focused on the regulatory impediments to
job creation. We've heard from job creators across the country
about how the Federal Government stifles job creation. And
today we'll focus on the issues which affect job creation in
upstate New York.
The strength of the economy and unemployment are on the
minds of most Americans. The nationwide unemployment rate
hovers at about 9 percent. That unemployment figure doesn't
even reflect the millions who have given up looking for work.
The rate is approximately the same in the State of New York;
8,000 of our neighbors received unemployment extension benefits
during the month of March. This is unacceptable and we must
create more jobs and turn this economy around for all New
Yorkers.
It is only appropriate that we are holding this hearing at
the South Side Innovation Center, which is an incubator for
small business job creation. Here Bob Herz and his staff help
entrepreneurial businesses to get business off the ground and
help people help themselves.
I want to thank Bob and all his staff here for hosting this
event and for all of their efforts that they have done--thank
you Bob--to make this afternoons's hearing happen.
This afternoon we will hear from local job creators in
business and agriculture that conduct business right here in
upstate New York. Our witnesses are construction workers,
dairy, apple, berry farmers, defense contractors and others
that employ many of the local community and provide the
necessary goods and services to our region.
As we attempt to recover our economy and put people of the
region back to work, we must begin to understand that the
regulations these industries face on a daily basis threaten
their attempt to survive. Industry faces an enormous amount of
regulations from many Federal agencies. This committee has
heard from job creators about regulations from the
Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Labor,
Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the Food and
Drug Administration.
The cumulative impacts of regulations from all of these
agencies is particularly harmful because of the difficulty of
the implementation and the tremendous cost of compliance it
places on a business or a farm. These costs negatively impact
important job growth. These regulations are a hidden tax on
businesses.
Worse yet, last week the EPA testified before a different
house subcommittee and admitted that the EPA ignores the
affects on jobs of the regulations they issue.
Local governments and municipalities are struggling to deal
with the state of the economy in continuing to provide
essential services to constituents while dealing with the
Federal bureaucracy. The practice of the Federal Government
pushing unfunded mandates down to the States leaves local
municipalities under intense pressure to make budgets work.
These local governments already have major budgetary
constraints and struggle to provide basic services for their
constituents.
Moreover, regulations that range from health care to street
sign replacement pile on even more cost to local governments
together with those unfunded mandates. This hearing will allow
businesses, farmers and local governments from New York to
provide Congress with an opportunity to hear how Federal
agencies affect their ability to create jobs and provide for
their communities.
It's important that you're here today; it's important that
we're here today so we can listen to you, listen to your
concerns as the business as business and as agriculture and as
municipalities. We have said over and over again that the
government cannot create jobs. It is the private sector. The
private sector is the backbone of our economy. They are the job
creators, and the role of the government should be to create an
environment so businesses can succeed.
So we are delighted to be here today and we're honored to
have all of you here today. We are looking forward to hearing
the testimony and to get started with our hearing. Thank you so
much.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Ann Marie Buerkle follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. I would now yield time to Mr. Kelly for his
opening statement.
Mr. Kelly. Thanks, Ms. Buerkle. It is a pleasure to be
here.
First of all, it's really a privilege for me to be able to
travel. I'm here from northwest Pennsylvania to be here with
Ms. Buerkle. We've been in Congress now almost 100 days, and
it's good to be here.
I'm especially happy to be here at South Side Innovations
Center. It's an incubator. And when Margaret Belte was showing
me through, I got to tell you, this is the place where
businesses start. And when we talk about America, we talk about
businesses that were started in a garage or in somebody's
basement, more important, somebody's head, and they were able
to move it forward. There's no other place in the world you can
do it except for here.
One thing that we're starting to realize, and I think that
as we go through these exercises, there was a movie out years
ago called Ground Hog Day and what it was, it was the
continuing frustration of figuring out how this all works. I
got to tell you, from a guy who comes from the private sector--
I'm an automobile dealer in my real life. I don't know how in
the world we've gotten to where we are. And more importantly,
if we don't change it--and this is not about Republicans or
Democrats--this is about Americans. If we can't get this
settled and get it backed off and make sure that the No. 1--the
competitive nature that we have isn't some external factor, but
actually our own government that makes it impossible for us to
succeed, then we have failed mightily.
So I'm glad to be here. We do want to listen to you; we
have to hear what you have to say; and we have to take the
message back to Washington and we have to be able to articulate
it the same way you do with passion and intensity to get it
fixed.
So again, I applaud you for being here.
Ms. Buerkle, thanks so much. It's always a pleasure to be
here with you.
And we're interested in what you have to say. Thanks so
much.
Ms. Buerkle. At this time, for the record, other Members
have 7 days to submit testimony for the record and any other
extraneous material that they would like to submit.
We will now welcome our first panel of witnesses this
morning.
First we have Mr. Jud Gostin, who is the chairman and CEO
of Sensis. Good afternoon and welcome.
Mr. Robert Simpson is the president for CenterState Corp.
for Economic Opportunity.
Thank you very much for being here.
It is the--pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses must
be sworn in. So if I could ask you to stand and raise your
right hands.
Panel I consisting of members Jud Gostin and Robert
Simpson.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Ms. Buerkle. Let the record reflect that all witnesses have
answered in the affirmative.
Thank you.
When we have our big hearings in Washington, DC, we
generally ask our panelists to limit their testimony to 5
minutes, however, we have a little bit more leeway here today.
So at this time I'd ask Mr. Gostin to begin with his
opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF JUD GOSTIN, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, SENSIS CORP.; AND ROBERT SIMPSON, PRESIDENT,
CENTERSTATE CEO

STATEMENT OF JUD GOSTIN

Mr. Gostin. Thank you Vice Chairwoman Buerkle,
Representative Kelly. Thank you for the opportunity to speak
today. I'm Jud Gostin, CEO of Sensis Corp., an aerospace and
defense firm located in East Syracuse, New York.
We started with five employees in 1985 and now employ 600
people, including about 450 engineers and computer scientists.
Although we sell globally, approximately three-quarters of our
revenues are from contracts with the U.S. Government, notably
the FAA and Department of Defense.
Air Traffic Systems is the larger of our two divisions and
has a laudable track record of deploying innovative systems and
design concepts to the FAA and NASA. We are a leading supplier
of surveillance and automation products and improve the safety,
efficiency and capacity of air travel.
Two of our large FAA programs ASDE-X and Runway Status
Lights, have been cited by the NTSB for their effectiveness and
improving runway safety. Our Aerobahn product provides the FAA
airlines and airport authorities with a collaborative
decisionmaking tool which, by a conservative estimate, saves
each airline user $5 million per year per airport in just
reduced taxi time and carbon footprint.
Defense and Security Systems, our other division, is
executing two state-of-the-art expeditionary ground-based radar
development programs for the Air Force and Marine Corps, both
with a potential to transition into significant production
contracts.
We are also leveraging Federal contracts along with our own
R&D funding to develop a family of very small sensors and
information-processing products to enhance the safety of our
war fighters and the security of our borders.
In that most jobs in our country are created by small and
medium-sized companies, from a job-creation perspective the
most onerous regulations are those that slow down the
activities of the such companies.
Under Secretary of Defense, Ashton Carter, included the
following guidance to defense acquisition professionals in a
recent memo: Increase dynamics in the small business role in
defense marketplace competition.
Small businesses have repeatedly demonstrated their
contribution to leading the Nation in innovation and driving
the economy by their example of hiring 65 percent of all new
jobs and holding more patents than all of the Nation's
universities and large corporations combined.
The reality is that the government's de facto acquisition
practices favor large and small companies to the disadvantage
of medium-sized companies like Sensis. These are companies with
annual revenues between $100 million and $1 billion.
Large companies receive many new contracts as non-competed
follow-ons to existing ones. While small companies receive
significant contract loading via SBIR, Small Business
Innovation Research Grants, and have a variety of other
practices that are designated in statute to promote small
business.
Medium-sized companies typically do not have enough of a
contract base to attract a sustaining level of follow-on awards
and are too big to be eligible for SBIR awards. And yet, these
companies are not only a primary source of job creation,
they're also an exceedingly viable, all be it underutilized
contributor to the effectiveness of government procurements.
A number of medium-sized companies possess a combination of
attributes rarely exhibited by large companies. Not only
exceptional development production and life cycle support
competence, but also a high degree of innovation,
responsiveness and agility.
Medium-sized companies are less limited by preconceptions
of what can't be done and are not encumbered by excess overhead
structure, bureaucracy and dated infrastructure. They are also
fully capable of leading major acquisitions. Sensis' standout
record as a prime contractor on major FAA and DoD programs is a
case in point. By virtue of these attributes, medium-sized
companies can provide the government with significant cost and
schedule savings and it is hard to remember a time when these
savings were needed more.
Here are some recommendations for regulatory changes that
would promote job creation in medium-sized companies.
Require substantial programs to begin with a competitive
prototyping phase and encourage the inclusion of medium-sized
businesses as prime-contracted candidates.
Enforce regulations that reduce the acquisition
redirections and delays that have a disproportionate impact on
medium-sized businesses.
Develop fast-track versions of government oversight
agencies, like DCAA, DCMA and the Earned Value Management
Center that are not well matched to the pace and scale of
medium-sized companies.
Enforce small and medium-sized business set-aside goals.
Institute a Medium-Sized Business Innovation Development,
MBID, program analogous to the SBIR program to provide timely,
ample funding for high-payoff development efforts.
Review and modify source selection criteria to eliminate
biases against medium-sized firms.
Recognizing that medium-sized companies competing for large
contracts may not have an abundance of relevant past
performance data, modify proposal evaluation criteria to
penalize poor past performance more than a lack of data.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on these
very important issues. I would enjoy discussing any of my
suggestions in more detail with you.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gostin follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Mr. Simpson.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT SIMPSON

Mr. Simpson. Thank you very much, Congresswoman and
Congressman Kelly for the opportunity to be here today.
I am Rob Simpson, president of CenterState CEO.
We are the region's leading business and economic
development organization representing over 2,000 members,
ranging from sole proprietors and consulting companies, to
service-sector retail companies, to our region's largest and
finest employers like Mr. Gostin sitting next to me.
We, in our efforts to understand how best we can serve our
members, regularly poll those members of the business community
and try to gauge from them some common themes that stand out in
their ability to do business with the Federal Government. There
are three issues that seem to be coming to mind more and more
frequently over the course of the last several months. I'd like
to speak briefly to each of them.
The first is immigration; second being issues as they
relate to international trade, and third and final, relate to
procurement something that Jud was talking about a moment ago.
Let's start with immigration, and I'll share a couple
examples. While many border States face different immigration
issues, here in New York State, immigration issues for our
business community have really been some of the stringent
immigration rules in the United States have been a hindrance to
our ability to grow and compete as a region.
We have the third-largest concentration of higher education
students in the country. We have over 140,000 students here in
this region. A number of those students, many of those
students, especially at schools like Syracuse University and
Cornell, are international students who come with F-1 Visas,
who have the ability to stay and work in the United States for
1 year's time before we send them home to compete with U.S.
companies working for international businesses in their home
country.
We'd love to find a way to hold onto more of those
students. Frankly, many of those students want to be here in
the United States. They bring with them unique skills and
expertise that can help New York companies and U.S. companies
be competitive. And we really believe there's fertile ground
here to loosen those regulations and allow the United States to
be the destination of choice for the smartest and brightest and
most talented people all over the world. That's something that
the business community would benefit from a great deal.
Second, we have many institutions, health care institutions
here, in our region that are critically important employers. We
have, unfortunately, a situation in the United States where J-1
graduate medical Visas are allocated across the country on a
very rigid basis. Every State in the Nation, whether it's North
Dakota or New York, gets 30 of these J-1 Visas. That obviously
doesn't play to the favor of many of our larger industrial
States like Pennsylvania and New York here in the northeast.
We'd love to find a new methodology that would allow our health
care institutions to find and train the best doctors, to
provide the highest-quality health care to our individuals, and
also use that as a way of a jumping-off point to continue to
grow our health care sector, which increasingly provides
opportunities for international health care delivery in a place
where we can grow our regional economy.
Finally, we have, on the immigration front, we have a
number of local companies who really have been impacted by
their ability to bring in workers from other countries from
their other plants around the world who have many multi-
national corporations here with headquarters. One company,
INFICON, who has done a significant amount of work with a
subsidiary in South Korea who's wanted to bring some of those
partners over to the United States in order to help them
deliver on a project for a major company, Samsung, a client of
theirs, Samsung down in Texas, they've run into significant
obstacles bringing those folks from South Korea to the United
States and, were therefore unable to fulfill their current
obligations to their customer which put that business in
jeopardy here in the United States. This is another area where
we could use some support from the Federal Government.
I guess the second, main issue, as it relates to trade, we
realize--I think there's an increasing awareness in this region
that 87 percent of the global growth over the next 5 years will
come from international markets. Ninety-five percent of the
world's consumers are outside of the United States.
Things like the South Korea Free Trade Agreement provide a
real and robust economic opportunity for our regional
businesses, particularly here in New York and in places like
Pennsylvania where agriculture is a really important component
of our region's economy.
And finally, procurement. You know, the U.S. Government
spends over $425 billion a year on procuring goods and
services. They are the largest procurement agency in the entire
United States. It is extremely difficult for small businesses
to get listed with the GSA as preferred providers for
procurement. Anything that can be done to ease that would be
greatly appreciated by our small business members.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you Congresswoman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Simpson follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Did we have a third panelist? He's not going
to join us.
OK. Thank you.
Mr. Gostin, I'm going to yield myself 5 minutes and start
to ask questions and then I'll ask my colleague to do so.
In your testimony you talk about the non-competed follow-
ons to disadvantage the medium-sized companies. Can you expand
upon that a little bit and help us to understand what that
means?
Mr. Gostin. Often we will describe products and services to
the government that appeals, you know, it's a good solution to
a compelling problem. And they'd love to fund the developmental
production of it. It's a good thing to do. And their response
to us is, ``Gosh, I wish we had a contract vehicle. If we only
had a contract vehicle, we could add this work statement onto
that.''
Without having that, somehow we have to figure out another
a way and often there is no other easy way.
And as a small business, medium-sized business, that's a
fairly typical response for us. You know, I don't know of a
contract vehicle you can use, but as a big business, with just
a large number of contracts, that's not nearly so much a
problem.
Now, these are not--I'm not suggesting for a minute that
these follow-on contracts are not worthwhile, they're not cost
effective. They often are all of those things. It's just that
it is, in fact, a big disadvantage to a small company not to
have that rapid capability to respond.
Ms. Buerkle. And who are you dealing with? Would that be
the Department of Defense when they say----
Mr. Gostin. I'm thinking mostly of the Department of
Defense. It's also the FAA, but it's primarily the Department
of Defense for us at this point in time.
Ms. Buerkle. Mr. Simpson, can you just explain for me a
little bit. You mentioned it, and I'm not really that familiar
with it--is it the J-1 graduate medical education and how that
works.
Mr. Gostin. Yeah. We've been spending quite a bit of time
talking with the folks at SUNY Upstate Medical University over
this issue recently.
Apparently what happens is there are 30 of these Visas that
are made available to each State. Those Visas--each State then
distributes those available Visas to a number of the medical
institutions and health care institutions within the State that
essentially allow them to bring in a medical professional--
graduate medical professional or medical professional from
overseas to train and to work in their hospital. Typically
these are specialty providers and they typically tend to be
specialties for which, frankly--that are medical institutions
have a hard time filling here in the United States.
Unfortunately, when New York State and North Dakota receive
the same level of Visa, it puts States like ours at a
competitive disadvantage. I wouldn't advocate for taking a
single J-1 Visa away the State of North Dakota, but I would
think that it might be in the best interest of our country to
expand the number of Visas that are made available or at a
minimum provide the States with some additional flexibility
when and where they have a critical shortage in a specialized
profession that they would like to recruit internationally to
give them the flexibility they need to do that recruitment.
Ms. Buerkle. Do you know who administers the J-1 program.
Mr. Simpson. I believe it's Customs and Immigration, but I
will find the answer for you, Congresswoman.
Ms. Buerkle. And has this formula has been in place for----
Mr. Simpson. My understanding it's been in place for about
a decade, that the rules prior to that were even more onerous I
think on many of the medical institutions. I think what they're
seeking at this point is just a continued refinement to the law
to make it a little bit more workable.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
I'll yield to Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. Gostin, I think it's important--and one of
the things we found by holding these hearings--we're able to
expose some of the practices of the government and how
difficult it is to get some of these contracts.
When you talk about the SBIR awards, if you could, and I
know it's a lengthy process, but for the sake of the people
that don't go through this every day--and I know you have to in
order to survive--just kind of walk us through it as quickly as
you can, the difficulty of trying to get those contracts.
Mr. Gostin. Well, SBIR contracts are--I think you need to
have fewer than either 450 or 500 people in order to be
eligible for SBIR contract, and they're multi-phased contracts.
First phase is probably nowadays--I date myself if I said
50,000. It's probably 100,000 right now--in which you get to do
some concept development. There's a second phase which is
substantially more than that where you actually get to do some
real development. And there's a third phase where you could
take it into the commercial--into the commercial world.
That's a very important part of the contract loading for
small businesses. And it's a great thing, because it spurs
innovation, spurs new ideas. The government puts out a document
saying, ``Here are some tough problems. Anybody got a creative
solutions,'' and small businesses respond.
The problem with being above 450, 500, you're not eligible
for that, which means that medium-sized companies, which not
only have the innovation and responsiveness and agility and
entrepreneurship of small companies, but they also have the
critical mass to actually do substantial programs, much more so
than small companies can do.
Can't get those good ideas--can't get contracts for those
good ideas. So if there was an analogous program, what I would
call, Medium-Sized Business Innovation Development as opposed
to Small Business Innovation Research, the government could get
access to good ideas for medium business that they really want.
And it would benefit the war fighters. It would benefit the
people that fly. It would benefit all the users who are looking
for quick responses and innovative responses, low cost, cost-
effective responses to difficult problems.
Mr. Kelly. One of the things we find is that a lot of these
standards, the bar's being set by people who've never actually
done what you do, they've never been involved in a business or
creating a business.
So my question is they come up with exclusionary criteria,
do you ever have a chance to weigh in? Do they ever invite you
to the table to sit down and say, ``You know what? Help us get
through this because obviously we're intent on you becoming
successful, or to America being successful. What could we do to
eliminate some of this?''
Because again, I go back to the American public, I don't
think understands the biggest problem we have right now is not
external competition. It's an internal problem and we limit
ourselves to what could do.
So if you could, I mean, are you ever invited to
participate in any type of a panel discussion about how that
would be fixed?
Mr. Gostin. On occasion, yes, I am.
This particular idea, when I have described this, the
senior members of the State Department, senior members of OSD,
their response has been universally positive. But it's a matter
of law in this case, because the SBIR program, it's a U.S. law.
There's no way that the Department of Defense could enact
this by themselves. So it just becomes more difficult.
Here's a situation where to make this happen, Congress, the
Department of Defense and contractors like myself, have to get
together and agree that it's a really good idea and try to make
something happen.
None of it is easy. We're not often asked to testify on how
do we improve the system.
Mr. Kelly. Well, I know none it is easy. But you know what?
All of us working together would get it fixed.
I don't like the fact that there's very little sharing of
data; there's very little data analysis; there's very little
group think on how to fix these things. So I find that
discouraging. I know the Congresswoman and I, we've talked on
the floor. I don't know how we got to where we are, but we
better find a way to get out of it soon, because we're really
hurting folks like you.
Mr. Gostin. It's not easy. If it were, I'd feel bad. I hear
you.
Mr. Kelly. We'll get there. We'll get there. This is the
only place in the world we can fix it, so we'll get that done.
Mr. Simpson, a little bit on the course agreement, and if
you could, kind of expand a little bit on the opportunities
that await American businesses if we're able to put together,
not only free, but fair trade agreements. And the other side of
that, if we're going to have rules, we've got to make sure that
we are the people that enforce them. We don't let people game
us.
Mr. Simpson. Sure. I think that's absolutely right. You
know, part of the challenge, specifically when you are talking
about the Koreas, a couple of major industry sectors where
there's real market opportunity for U.S. businesses are in the
automotive sector, high-technology sector and the agricultural
sector. These are, frankly, three areas that play to our
region's strengths here in upstate New York. I think they play
to the strengths of the northeast United States.
We have watched our market share with Korean trade decline
over the last of the decade. Unfortunately, what that does is
it costs U.S. business and it has cost us jobs. Growing our,
sort of world view, and our ability to do business
internationally has to be, from our perspective, one of the
fundamental strategies that we pursue as a Nation if we want to
be competitive globally in the long-term.
So we see, you know, there are opportunities for folks
here, like our furniture manufacturers. We have a world
renowned furniture manufacturer in Stickley Co. that's very
interested in doing increased business in Korea, companies like
Nixon Gear that do automotive work. Across the board a number
of our dairy manufacturers and agricultural producers are also
very interested in that market opportunity.
Mr. Kelly. Well, I was looking in your notes. It says,
``Over the last 10 years the United States has dropped from
being a top exporter to Korea with one-fifth of Korean imports
now being in third place with less than 10 percent market
share.''
This is an observation on my own. I know there's a--Hyundai
and Kia made substantial investments in West Point, Georgia and
Montgomery, Alabama. And in fact, half the cars sold in this
country are actually--Hyundai and Kia are actually produced
locally.
And I think one of the challenges we have is marketing the
idea. We no longer work within the confines of our country, the
United States. We work in the entire globe. The market is huge.
And when you said 95 percent, 95 percent, of the market is
outside----
Mr. Simpson [continuing]. Of all the consumers in the
world, they're outside the United States. Eighty percent of the
growth that economists predict is going to happen over the next
5 years is outside U.S. borders.
That's where the markets are. And from a business
standpoint, you know, we've been fortunate in this country to
be able to sustain ourselves on domestic consumption for a very
long time. I think, as we have seen over the course of the last
3\1/2\ years, those days, while they may not be forever behind
us, those days are changing. And I think it behooves us as a
country to adapt rapidly and to encourage, as you said, fair-
trade agreements with companies with whom we should be doing
increased business.
Mr. Kelly. And we do know the way out of this economic mess
we're in right now, we can't do it internally. We have to do it
using the whole world as our market. And we can compete. It's
not a matter of our lack of will to compete or our lack of
ability to compete or intellectually not being able to compete.
My observation from being at these meetings is we have
absolutely put ourselves in such a bad place, we limit
ourselves and our ability to compete in the world. So I'm with
you on this, and we are trying to get the Korean Trade
Agreement through. We also have more with Columbia and Panama.
I know there's some concerns with Columbia and Panama, and I
know there's also some concerns with the Korean agreement. But
I think if we can get that message out and market it the right
way so people understand the upside for the United States,
where the true gains are, because we will get people back to
work doing what they do best and that is taking care of their
families and taking care of their communities.
So thank you very much.
Mr. Simpson. Thank you.
Mr. Kelly. And I yield back.
Ms. Buerkle. I just want to comment, Mr. Gostin, if you
could, you're talking a program that would be analogous to SBIR
for medium-sized businesses. Have you thought about what that
looks like or is that something you could provide us with
information on.
Mr. Gostin. I'd be glad to do that, Congresswoman.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you on behalf of the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee. I want thank you both for being
here today and sharing your testimony.
I know I speak for my colleague Mr. Kelly, we'd like to be
partners with the job creators and with businesses. We'd like
to work with you and not put up obstacles. So although there
are many right now, many obstacles, many regulations, many
situations that businesses face in upstate New York, we'd like
to work with you to begin to solve these problems, these
issues, so we can get our economy, not just in upstate New York
but across New York and across the country, get it back on
track and do what's right for the American people.
A lot of these hearings and the purpose of this Oversight
and Government Reform Committee is to help restore the America
dream, to give entrepreneurs who are willing to take that risk
to spend money to create a dream to empower them to be
successful and not to impede their success.
So on behalf of our committee, thank you both for being
here today and we appreciate your testimony today.
At this time we are going to welcome our second panel of
witnesses.
First is Mr. Andrew Reeves who is the owner of Reeves
Farms. Welcome and thank you for being here today.
Nancy Hourigan is the owner of Hourigan's Dairy Farm.
Welcome and thank you for coming this afternoon.
Mr. Tom DeMarree is the owner of DeMarree Fruit Farm, thank
you very much for being here.
As is the custom of the committee, we'll ask you to please
stand and be sworn in.
Panel II, consisting of three members: Andrew Reeves, Nancy
Hourigan, and Tom DeMarree.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Ms. Buerkle. Please let the record reflect that the
witnesses answered in the affirmative. Thank you.
Again, we'll have each panelist give their opening
statement and then we'll take some time to ask questions.
Mr. Reeves, if you would start? Thank you.

STATEMENTS OF ANDREW REEVES, OWNER, REEVES FARMS; NANCY
HOURIGAN, OWNER, HOURIGAN'S DAIRY FARM; AND TOM DEMARREE,
OWNER, DEMARREE ORCHARDS

STATEMENT OF ANDREW REEVES

Mr. Reeves. Thank you.
Distinguished members of the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs, Stimulus
Oversight and Government Spending. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify at today's hearing.
Ms. Buerkle. If I could interrupt. Can you just move the
mic a little closer so everyone can hear your testimony.
Mr. Reeves. Is this any better?
Ms. Buerkle. That's better. Thank you.
Mr. Reeves. Agriculture is the largest industry in New
York. It may be the largest industry left in the United States.
In order for agriculture to continue to thrive, there must be a
stream-lined process to bring in seasonal, temporary labor when
necessary. The H-2A program is supposed to be a tool for the
American farmers put in place by Congress to expedite a legal-
temporary work force. This program is supposed to allow farmers
to develop a good business plan which ensures a plentiful
supply of top-quality produce, without having to worry about a
work force. All other businesses are able to grow and shrink
markets and production depending on demand. If a worker leaves
for any reason, 10 others are always ready to fill the void
immediately. These businesses are based on these variables.
If you hire an American recruit for temporary labor, they
will be looking for another job with benefits and full-time,
not seasonal status. Once another opportunity becomes
available, they leave or don't show up for work 1 day. As a
result, you must spend and average of $650 per worker and begin
a 10-12 week process to replace them with the H-2A program. The
H-2A program should extend the same freedoms to American
farmers as Congress originally intended. They should be able to
expedite legal foreign workers after exhausting all legal,
local employment opportunities and options in the existing
State. If an H-2A certifications has been granted in a
neighboring State, this would mean the neighboring States have
a shortage of eligible farm workers.
I believe to have me advertise in these neighboring States
and continue the recruiting process throughout half the life
cycle of my contract period is ridiculous. For my farm not to
be able to ask for experience when hiring is ridiculous. For me
not to be able ask for production standards without a challenge
from New York or the USDOL is ridiculous. Any other business
would not and could not operate in the parameters now set by
the present H-2A law.
The next problem that needs changing with the program is
the length of the process. We used to be able to send an
application to the State and Chicago for processing at the same
time. Now we send one out to the State first, and once they
finish their process, we then have the necessary order number
to now move on to Chicago with a different form. Many times the
State will approve something which the USDOL will reject. An
example is Work Production Standards. New York State will allow
them but the USDOL won't. They get rejected and thrown back,
where either an appeal is necessary, or you remove the
standards and move on. If you appeal, you have an 82 percent
success rate, but you now have put your process behind
schedule. If you choose to appeal, the USDOL no longer has to
certify your order within 30 days of your date of need. New
York State will not let me advertise asking for a resume, but
the USDOL says I can.
After we have survived everything to this point, we now
have to keep records of all applicants who have requested an
interview or job. We also must document this for future audits
and accept all applicants throughout half the term of the work
contract. Because the job posting goes on a national site, we
are bombarded with applications such as a fishing camp cook
with a degree in geography wanting to bop in and work for the
month of May on his way to Alaska in June, but he must know
more about the free housing first.
How about the family of Eastern Europeans asking if they
can move the whole family here? How about the LPN wanting a job
because she lost her license and needs a job, however, she
won't work weekends. How about the lady from Manila? How about
the kid from Auburn wanting a job loading? How about Burrell
asking, what do I mean by a resume? These are some of the
examples of resumes I deal with. How about the Ph.D. from
California who lost his job and applied? Dr. Cool is his email
handle. These are all lawsuits and possible litigations looming
on the horizon because our present system encourages it.
Now, if everything is fine, we have 30 days or less to
finish the process. We now move from overnight replies from
government to snail mail. Homeland Security claims to turn your
petition request around in 3 to 4 days. This is not true. If
you over-night your I-129 to California, they stamp it on the
day they receive it or the day after. A received letter with a
next-day stamp on it comes to you after the check has cleared.
Usually the process, with no problems, takes 12 to 14 days from
beginning to end. We now have 15 to 18 days left. Under the old
process we could block schedule groups when the order had a WAC
number. Now we must wait until the acceptance comes.
Next we must pay for Visas before we can schedule
interviews. We must email a request to CSC in order to get
permission to access a site to schedule interviews. This takes
5 days if you make no mistakes in the requesting process. If
you make a mistake, you will be notified within 5 days of the
mistake and you redo it. In 5 more days you will receive access
or another problem. The site will let you the electronically
schedule or just fill out the spreadsheet and email it. I
suggest email. The electronic system is on its third
spreadsheet and if there is a specific problem, you'll receive
a specific direction back with email scheduling. With the
electronic system, you'll receive an error list, without a clue
of where to begin. There's no direction as to how the system
works. You attempt to understand and operate it. If you fail or
have a problem, forget it. You will receive an email answer
which will never answer the question you asked.
I had a problem with an order which 18 emails were not
answered and 11 calls were not returned. One day during lunch I
found another CSC branch with names and numbers. The human
resources manager from another division was able to make proper
contact to their other division for me. He was amazed how it
took four calls to resolve the issue, so he thought. When my
workers interviewed, it still required a call to the Nuevo
Laredo Consulate to inform them the order scheduled and farm
names were wrong. They, as usual, were very helpful.
The next issue I have with the H-2A program is its AEWR's
of $10.25 per-hour wage rate. This is a 15 percent increase in
the labor cost from the program revamped during the past
administration. The rate went up in these times from $10.16.
This is an unrealistic wage for the workers considered
unskilled and not requiring any previous experience or work
standards.
We pay for Visas, we pay for food and travel both ways. We
take workers to the store. We must guarantee at least three-
quarters of the total hours in the contract, we must provide
housing and utilities at no additional cost. No taxes or Social
Security are deducted.
Many portions of their jobs offer them an opportunity to
earn even more when performing piecework. When your slower
workers are guaranteed a minimum of $10.25 per hour for
piecework, your faster workers make considerably more because
your production minimum standards are based on the slower
workers. This is a reason we quit growing green and yellow
beans, reduced acreage of peas, quit growing snow peas, and
wouldn't raise blueberries if they weren't organic and bring us
a higher price.
Lack of consistency is my final complaint with the program.
I can send an I-129 with only one copy and get an acceptance. I
have had a customer do the same and he was sent an approval
requested and to send another copy and $404 with another form
or they may not be able to schedule appointments at the
Consulate.
I have used production standards and have had customers
denied standards. I have been told to hire Puerto Ricans and I
have asked them to interview or submit a resume. I recently
talked to a large orchard producer from Virginia. Their farm
hires 178 H-2A workers. Last year they were forced to use a
Puerto Rican labor force because of problems with the H-2A in
Jamaica. I have the same labor-reporting system as this grower.
My vendor verified the orchard production was half last year of
other years. This farmer was asking me if there is any way
around the Puerto Rican labor situation. He said if he has to
use Puerto Rican workers this year, he will have an auction.
How can you expect to tell a business owner how he has to run
his business? No other business suffers these restrictions.
Now I'll briefly review areas I believe need change. Bullet
form is easiest.
Apply to State and USDOL at the same time.
Allow standards and experience to be included in the job
requirements.
Revamp the recruitment process. Why advertise in a State
which already has been approved for H-2A workers.
Reduce the recruitment period until the time the H-2A
workers arrive on the farm.
If the number of workers on an order are reduced because of
referrals, these slots should remain open so the farmer can
fall back on them if the referral workers don't work out or
leave.
Introduce a form of arbitration to resolve issues. Legal
service attorneys constantly look for areas to litigate.
The 30-day rule from the U.S. Department of Labor is not
adequate. It encourages farmers to lie about their need date
because the process cannot be completed within the 30-day
period.
Allow a farm to select where he gets his work force. Every
other business has that freedom.
Speed up the Homeland Security Process or make them tell
the truth. USDOL and Department of State believe in this 3 to 4
day turnaround.
Reduce the wage to a realistic level. The Bush order was
the best system thus far.
Repair the mess created by the new interview scheduling
procedure. It was introduced before it was ready, and I
guarantee it wasn't developed by CSC. They have always been a
great company to work with.
We must include the dairy industry. AgJobs is a deadon
arrival proposal. The changes have morphed it into a bad deal
for agriculture.
Strive for more consistency across the board. State and
USDOL, State Health Department, Homeland Security and
Department of State.
Let the H-2A workers pay their own Visa fee. This is
nonrefundable, and they should have some ``skin in the game.''
I have aired my grievances and hope I was able to shed
light on the problems of H-2A. AgJobs is not the answer here
either. Labor unions and legal service groups have killed the
good in this bill already. I will not endorse any program with
amnesty attached. The Amnesty Act of 1987 was another example
of it not working. The workers moved up the ladder and left a
vacuum which was filled with the millions of undocumented
workers in the United States. Most of the workers I recruit
once spent time illegally in the United States. I have
convinced them to go back and enter the legal H-2A program. I
have convinced not less than 10 farms to convert to legal H-2A
workers. These people should remain at the front of the line.
What we now ask for is a program to be developed which will
partner with today's agricultural industry and finally address
the H-2A needs of our dairy industry also.
We need to work this out together for the salvation of the
industry this country was built with. Let's once and for all do
this together once and do it right. Leave the unions and the
legal service ambulance chasers on the sidelines.
We owe this to an industry already bombarded with new EPA
and DEC regulations every year. We also have the Traceback and
Food Safety Requirements whose costs are all the burden of the
farmers presently. We are at a point of losing our producers if
something isn't done.
Washington needs to become proactive with this issue. Four
different programs in 3 years are confusing the lack of
continuity necessary for Agribusiness to develop and maintain a
long-term business plan.
Thank you very much for your time and the invitation.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Reeves.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Reeves follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Ms. Hourigan.

STATEMENT OF NANCY HOURIGAN

Ms. Hourigan. Thank you for inviting me to testify before
you today.
My name is Nancy Hourigan and I'm a member of the Onondaga
County Farm Bureau and on the board of directors of the New
York Agricultural Land Trust. My husband John and I and my son
Matt work about 8,000 acres of land in Onondaga County and
operate a dairy farm.
My family and I are proud of our farm and the time and hard
work that we have put into the operation to make it successful
and to keep it growing.
Our heritage and our roots are in the community and our
farm, and we want to see this business succeed at what is our
core mission--producing healthy, local milk for our neighbors
and fellow citizens of New York State. Our milk is sold to
Byrne Dairy; doesn't get much more local than that.
But the family farm has changed significantly over the
years. As we have had to grow in order to keep up with ever
escalating regulatory burdens and a price we receive for our
milk is at the mercy of global market conditions, even though
our cost factors are particularly influenced by being in a
State like New York, where all businesses face an unreasonable
high cost of taxes, energy and labor and regulatory compliance.
While I can and will expand upon some specific topics that
are of concern to me, the single biggest point I want to make
at this hearing is that the amount of actual time that I and my
family have to spend complying with various Federal regulations
and that has escalated to the point where I spend more time in
an office and on a computer and filing paperwork than I ever
did working with the cows, the crops and the personnel on the
farm.
Each and every day I spend filing paperwork to comply with
various Federal regulations, and each and every new piece of
paper I have to put up on my central-posting area on the farm
has a cost to it that is profound and can never be recouped.
The cost is my time and my husband's time. No amount of cows or
cropland added to the farm to ensure our financial stability
will enable us to recoup that time that we have to spend filing
ever increasing paperwork with various agencies.
I do not believe that each Federal agency that we deal with
has a comprehensive understanding of what it is like to try to
farm in this environment. I have to meet mandates from the U.S.
Department of Labor, wage and hour paperwork, the Homeland
Security Office, I-9 Forms, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
conservation and sanitation issues, the U.S. Department of
Transportation, DOT truck numbers, hours of service
regulations, the EPA for nutrient management issues, as well as
a various State compliance issues.
While President Obama discussed this issue in his State of
the Union speech in January, I can tell you that on the farm
itself, we have not felt much, if any, impact from a lessoning
of governmental regulations and paperwork.
Clearly we need to have government engaged in ensuring
safety for consumers in the food they purchase, the roads they
travel on and the environment. However, the current emphasis on
simply putting more and more regulations and paperwork on farms
and small businesses like mine, is out of control. I will never
regain the time I lost and continue to lose in making sure that
I'm complying with everything that I have to file.
So how can the Federal Government help New York State farm
families like myself? First and foremost, just stop imposing
new mandates. Follow the spirit of the Regulatory Review
Commission that President Obama discussed and actually
implement the recommendation to reduce the amount of time that
I spend filing paperwork.
Second, I would also like to suggest that the Federal
Government wrap up its activity in redirecting farmland
protection dollars to New York State. As stated, I serve on the
board of directors of the New York Agricultural Land Trust. It
is clear to me that with the vulnerability of New York's
farmland to development made more acute by the barriers placed
on farmers by the cost of complying with regulatory mandates,
the existing funds from U.S. Department of Agriculture have not
been directed to New York State as they have been to other
States where farmland is not so acutely in danger of being lost
to parking lots and housing developments.
When farmland is conserved in the local community not only
does the land provide wildlife, habitat and improved water
quality, it also ensures that a locally produced food supply is
secured and a family farm can remain with the land.
I would strongly suggest that the formula that drives the
allocation of funds to the various States be reviewed with an
eye toward ensuring that farm land that is particularly
vulnerable, especially on Long Island, in the city of Syracuse
and the Hudson River receive a priority.
Third, I would like to discuss one issue with the EPA that
has me very concerned because of the precedent-setting nature
of the agency's actions.
A section of Onondaga County is located in the Chesapeake
Bay watershed. My farm is not located within that watershed,
but the issue is very important to me as my family is connected
to other farm families who are in the watershed and rely on our
farm to provide cow feed and to do custom work and planting for
them that allows their farms to prosper and grow.
While I'm certainly not opposed to improving water quality
in the Chesapeake Bay, it strikes me as odd that all the
environmental stewardship practices that I have put in place on
my farm and other neighbors have put on their farm were not
originally recognized in the EPA's overly zealous desire to
clean up the bay by imposing strict regulations on agriculture.
On my farm alone we have spent tens of thousands of dollars
constructing a nutrient management storage facility and we are
a partner in a community digester whereby waste from our farm
and several other farms will help generate energy for county
facilities.
As a family farmer, I and my neighbors care about the
environment that we leave for our children. We are not going to
tolerate sloppy behavior, nor are we going to fail to do what's
right on our farms to protect the environment even when such
practices are expensive to implement and are not paid for by
the consumer dollar. However, the EPA's overreach on this issue
is frightening to me and my fellow farmers as with one single
regulation originally proposed in the draft TMDL, the EPA was
willing to sacrifice over 900 farms in the Chesapeake Bay
watershed.
I am pleased that the State DEC and EPA, in consultation
with New York farm bureaus and others, came to an agreement to
accept New York's watershed implementation plan, but I realize
this plan may still impose significant regulatory burdens on
some smaller family farms. So I need to urge you to continue to
work for conservation dollars in the next farm bill cycle for
the on-the-farm environmental stewardship measures.
But the main point I want to make is that knowing that the
Federal Government can act this precipitously and unfairly and
jeopardize my own and my neighbor's farm operation by issuing
one poorly thought out regulation, makes me lose sleep at night
and question long-term ability of my family to keep our farm in
operation for the next generation.
The last issue I want to discuss is the need for realistic
and not clogged with paperwork guestworker program that you
have already heard about from Mr. Reeves.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today and
present testimony from the farmers perspective of the serious
and ever increasing Federal barriers to growth.
I appreciate you taking the time to listen to me and your
consideration of my own time as a farm family business in New
York State to try to reduce the time I spend in compliance
costs.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hourigan follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Mr. DeMarree.

STATEMENT OF TOM DEMARREE

Mr. DeMarree. Good afternoon. I appreciate being given the
opportunity to discuss apple industry labor concerns. Thank you
for your attention.
I'm Tom DeMarree and I own and operate a 200-acre fruit
farm in the Town of Williamson, Wayne County. I'm also the
current president of the New York State Horticultural Society
and past board member of the New York Apple Association.
We grow over 100,000 bushels of apples as well as
processing peaches and a few other stone fruits. We also own
and operate cold storages on our farm. Six people work full-
time or part-time on our farm and an additional 29 people
depend on the seasonal work available through our farm to
support their families.
According to the New York State orchard survey, over 42,000
commercial acres of apples in the State, and in the past 20
years growers have renewed this acreage of 3 to 4 percent per
year. More than 65 percent of the New York apple acreage is in
the seven counties of the south shore of Lake Ontario. In the
past 4 years most of the fresh apple growers in these counties
have been replanting it at a rate of 500 to 1,300 trees per
acre which costs between $6,500 and $13,000 an acre.
This means that apple growers in these counties over the
past 4 years have invested around $46 million in new apple
orchards alone. Twice this amount is likely to have been
invested on farm machinery, equipment, labor, housing and other
real estate improvements as well as apple storages, packing
lines and other cooperative marketing facilities over the same
period.
Our own operation has invested hundreds of thousand of
dollars in capital improvements over the past 4 years. We spend
over $5,000 an acre annually growing, harvesting and delivering
our fruit, 80 percent of which benefits the local economy.
This is our sixth year using H-2A program. Securing H-2A
labor is expensive and increasingly fraught with government red
tape and stress. The U.S. Department of Labor and New York
State Department of Labor in Albany are attempting to make this
program so difficult that no one will choose to use it.
Growers, however, have almost no choice but to use this program
if they wish to secure legal employees skilled enough to
perform the required work efficiently and on time.
The Labor Department tells growers what they must put on
the work orders, limiting the experience requirements requiring
employers to tolerate employees missing up to 5 consecutive
days of work without notifying the employer in advance. How are
growers supposed to harvest each apple variety at an optimum
quality when the workers can miss work without notifying the
employer.
The Department of Labor in Albany has also been requiring
referrals to Puerto Ricans to be interviewed within 10 days
when these referred persons often have no experience working on
a fruit farm. Growers should not have to argue with or petition
DOL employees with no practical experience in operating a fruit
farm about the experience required for fruit farm employees in
a business producing perishable crops.
Thousands of dollars were lost in New York fruit farms in
our local economies last year because of delays in securing
farm labor. Fruit was picked late and had a lower quality plus
a lower value. The failures to secure labor or the loss of
skilled labor during critical planting, crop protection or
harvesting operation results in financial losses that are not
only jeopardizing the farm business but also the local economy.
Losses in apple quality jeopardize both year-round and part-
time employees' income.
Fruit growers need employees familiar with their particular
varieties and the market requirements those farms are
attempting to meet to secure the best possible price for each
variety of fruit. Fruit growers do not want to train new
employees annually. They want to retain trained employees.
Untrained employees make expensive mistakes that today's
businesses cannot afford. Workers also prefer to work with the
same farm year after year.
As time goes on there are fewer skilled people who are
willing to move from place to place every 6 to 10 weeks to
harvest crops as they mature. Given a choice, most people would
prefer to earn a living in one place in a clean, dry
environment that does not require continuous physical labor.
I know that these issues are difficult and controversial at
times, but growers must have some assurance that they will have
a consistent, skilled labor work force available to them that
will be willing to retain trained workers.
Congresswoman Slaughter has been recently working as a
strong advocate on behalf of growers in contacting the Labor
Department to solve some of these problems. I would urge you to
contact her office to work with her to get the H-2A program to
be more responsive to their needs.
Thank you very much for your time.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. DeMarree follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. And thank you to all of our panelists.
I sit here and I listen to your testimonies and I shake my
head and wonder how did we get to this point where you're
subject to both the State as well as the Federal regulations.
And I want you to know that we were sympathetic here, and we
would like to work with you.
The issue that is recurring and recurring, and I hear from
both the agricultural as well as the dairy industry, is this H-
2A program. And I would like to ask all of you if you could
imagine what the perfect H-2A program would look like, if you
could tell us what that would mean to you and what would an
ideal H-2A program look like.
Mr. Reeves. Well, to me it would be able to, at the same
time, apply to the State and the Federal Government, same form.
They virtually ask for the same information. It's a Federal
program, so I think the Federal Department of Labor, U.S.
Department of Labor, should supercede anything regulated by New
York State. And at the same time, Homeland Security would be
your next step. If the process takes 12 to 14 days, then let's
give more than 30 days to process from beginning to end and not
lie about it.
What I have to do--I shouldn't say this--but I'll tell you
what I have to do. If I need workers on the first of March, I
have to turn around and say I need them on the middle of
February, first of February, because if everything goes well,
there's no way with the new system from the time I get a
certification out of Chicago to the time I interview my
workers, that I can do it in 30 days. And in my presentation
you'll see a day breakdown on it: It's going to take 12, 14
days for Homeland Security. I'm going to spend the next 5
days--this is if I'm sitting in my chair. And as soon as I get
a notification, I'm on the computer and going to work with
scheduling appointments. You know, there's no day in between.
It's overnight stuff, everything else.
Next thing I do is go to CSE say, ``Hey, I want to be on
scheduled appointments.''
So what do they do? Five days later, if I ask them
properly--you know, if I miss one number or something like
that, in 5 days they'll tell me, ``Hey, you missed a number.''
So then I redo it again with the number, then again in 5
days they'll say, ``OK now you can schedule.''
What I need top to bottom is a program developed with the
farmer's input. The people that have to work with it, that have
to make it work, we're left away from the table. I went to
seminar in December in Atlanta on the new program. The guy that
developed this new program for the Department of State didn't
want to hear anything from anyone. This was his deal; he knew
what he was doing; and this is the way all the concepts are
going be.
To sit there in the room, we had State, we had Homeland
Security there, we had Department of Labor there. The
representatives of the Consulates and the Department of State
and the Department of Labor couldn't believe it when I sat up
and said, ``What do you mean it takes 3, 4 days for Homeland
Security to process? It takes 12 days to 2 weeks.''
Here's two Federal branches that said, ``No, it doesn't.
It's 3 to 4 days.''
I said, ``They cheat on their stamp on the form. That's how
it's 3 to 4 days. But it's a 12 to 14-day process.''
And you've got two Federal agencies that are all working
together with this that are unaware of it.
Ms. Buerkle. You mentioned in your testimony about the Bush
administration. Was there a different set of standards and now
it's changed? You mentioned you were in a conference about the
change.
Mr. Reeves. The changes. Three days before President Bush
left office, he did an executive order that changed H-2A. He
rolled back the wage. There were some pluses or minuses to it
but it was still best program yet. He streamlined the
referrals.
When you have to advertise State applications, he made it
where when they hit your farm, you don't have to take any more
applications and keep a record of them, because all this period
of time, like 75 days up to that point, his administration felt
was adequate time to look for referrals in U.S. workers. And
that was changed--actually, that was changed 3 days before he
left office and there's been three other changes back and forth
since that one. So in 3 years we've had four changes.
And the funny thing is, if you're a farmer, how do you turn
around and say, ``Well, I'm going to H-2A this year. But what's
the law going to be?''
When I was down in Atlanta in December, the only thing we
were handed out was the agenda for the meeting. There was not
any handout--the program south of the border had changed; the
forms north of the border had changed; not one agent or farmer
was given anything but agenda for the meeting because here it
was December 6th and they didn't have this program ready to
launch January 1st, but yet January 10th it took effect. I
mean, that's just ridiculous.
Ms. Buerkle. Have you received any specifics since the
January 10th implementation?
Mr. Reeves. My brothers will tell you that I've lived in my
living room on the computer trying to find rules and
regulations on where do I get the spreadsheet; how do I get the
spreadsheet.
The spreadsheet had--it's on it's third copy now--the first
one I wanted to schedule 22 workers, and I called CSC and said,
``Your spreadsheet won't work. It's not formatted properly to
take more than 17 workers, because 5 of the 22 that it would
take, were formatted properly.''
They told me, ``You don't know what you're talking about.
Cut and paste and come right down through the country names,''
that they had there.
So I cut and paste 33 on there, and did it electronically,
and it crashed in the system. And it took--it took 18 emails,
11 calls, and the problem was, they said, ``Well, once the
system ate them up, we can't sort them out.''
And so this was a 2\1/2\ week process that should have been
3 days. But at least now they have a spreadsheet that is pretty
much working. But it's the third one since January.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you. I'm way over my 5 minutes.
Mr. Kelly, I'll yield to you. Thank you.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you. You can take as much time as you
want. Really we need to hear you for as long as you want to go
because I know how frustrating it is.
I'm trying to understand. I'm going to ask Ms. Hourigan,
what's the reason for the EPA? Is there anybody finding
anything that the EPA does that makes sense to any of us?
Now, we all have State DEPs that should have the primacy
over how--I would like to think that the local folks know a lot
more about what the local issues are than somebody in
Washington, DC, that's never been here and doesn't understand
what it is that you do, that any of you do.
So if you can, this EPA issue is huge. It is huge, and it's
shutting down America as we go across the board. I just wish--
listen, I wish we could tell you it's only in agriculture. I
spent 2 days with health care providers. Their problem is they
can't see any reason to stay in the business. You talk to
people in the banking business, their regulations are so
onerous, they're afraid to lend money to anyone because they
don't know who's going to come in and shut them down.
If this is the United States of America and we're more
worried about internal conflict and internal regulation than
outside? I mean, we've got a real problem. Tell me on this EPA
thing, this is absolutely incredible, and I don't think the
American public has any idea. You know, they ride down the
interstate and see these beautiful farms and say, ``God, I'd
love to do that. That's got to be fun.''
Just from listening to you folks, I mean, at some point
there's an old saying, don't worry about the mule, just load
the wagon. I think the mule is about ready to unhitch itself.
Ms. Hourigan. The only thing I can say, is all three of us
here we do what we do because we just like to be farmers.
Bottom line. And we've all been pulled away from what we like
to do because of these regulations and the paperwork.
And I'm sure his brothers are ticked at him a little bit
because he's not out there with them physically with the people
that are working. I'm sure hoping you're listening and you can
find answers for us, because I certainly don't understand it
all. It's just evolved in the last 10 to 20 years to such a
critical mass of paperwork and regulations, and we just can't
farm anymore.
Mr. Kelly. Let me ask you something. Because Ms. Buerkle
asks this question all the time. If you knew then what you knew
now, would you be doing what you're doing?
Ms. Hourigan. Well, you can see I'm not the youngest one
here.
Mr. Kelly. Me either.
Ms. Hourigan. We're starting to question if this is any fun
anymore. And when my husband says it's not any fun anymore to
farm, that's serious.
Mr. Reeves. That's a key phrase that I've heard from more
farmers in the last 2 or 3 years. My brothers and I say the
same thing. The fun is out of agriculture. I mean it used to be
with seasonal business you could go on vacation in the winter.
There is none of this any longer. You're just bogged down with
regulations. We had DEC the other day, going through the DEC
audit--that's another deal that's necessary. You know, it's an
absolute necessary thing, but also a lot of the regulations
that they are requiring of you, are absolutely absurd.
You know, on your sprayer you've got to have a label in a
bag, on the sprayer, not only in the cab, because if you drive
across the road and a car or something hits you, they have to
be able to see what's in that tank. And--but every time they're
telling you about these regulations and these changes, they're
also reminding you what the fine is going to be if you don't do
it. They seem more fine oriented than they are production
oriented.
That's difficult for the agricultural mind to understand.
We're not into, ``Do this or you're going to get fined.'' We're
into, ``Let's take the proactive approach and let's get this
done.''
Mr. DeMarree. I think there's an awful lot of regulation
coming both from Washington and New York State combined. It
doesn't matter which government you're referring to.
I've been in the business 30 years. Thirty years ago we
could farm and not necessarily do anything that we are doing
differently than what we are today, but we have to certify; we
have to fill out forms; we have to follow regulations. It isn't
changing anything that we're really, truly doing other than
we're spending time filling out forms to tell somebody else in
Albany or Washington what it is that we're doing. It's the same
practices. The same thing we are doing. We're not doing
anything different. We aren't improving anything. There's no
improvements to our fruit, or dairy, or vegetables or whatever.
But we're just having to spend more and more and more of my
time, my wife's time, in following paperwork, following rules,
doing things, doing things that somebody else says that we have
to do that isn't changing anything. It isn't improving how the
fruit is grown, how the vegetables are grown or how the milk is
produced. It isn't different. It hasn't changed in 30 years.
It's the same, but yet we're spending--I'm spending 10 hours a
week just doing forms and reading new rules and regulations.
Albany just came down with a new set of rules that you have
to follow a new form every time that there's a change in an
employee status. If an employee works--has a work agreement
with us, it says they're going to work 45 hours. We worked 48
hours last week. I have to get new paperwork and fill out a new
form because his hours changed. That's how crazy the system has
gotten to be because somewhere along the line somebody got
taken advantage of. Probably.
I won't say that isn't the way that it should be, but when
you start making everybody try to solve problems because of one
incident, the world is going to come to a stop because you
can't regulate everything--every problem, every issue out of
reality. So----
Mr. Kelly. I appreciate your testimony, because I find it
absolutely intriguing that a business that runs somewhere
between a trillion three and a trillion five a year in the red
has the audacity to come in and tell you how to run your
business.
My question really comes down to have any of these people
that come in and set the bar--I asked the last group this--the
people that set the standards, have any of them actually ever
done anything in agricultural, actually been in farming?
Mr. DeMarree. Absolutely not.
Mr. Kelly. So this is a software program that somebody puts
on their laptop and tells you what you are going to do.
Mr. DeMarree. Absolutely. As was said a few minutes ago,
the H-2A that we're using to have labor that's legal and that I
can sleep at night knowing I'll have a work force there
tomorrow, that ISSA isn't going to come in and take them away
because I thought they were legal. They showed me documents
that I determined to be legal, but they weren't, they can come
in and take my work force away and my crop will fall on the
ground and I'll have no recourse. This is the program that I am
using so I can sleep at night knowing that I can get a cropped
picked of apples, and yet we have all kinds of problems trying
to secure a legal work force.
And nobody wants to hear when you try to talk to somebody,
as what's been said, nobody wants to hear what your problem is.
Absolutely nobody wants to hear what your problem is. They know
better in the agencies that you're dealing with than what I do
when I'm trying to do my job. That's a very frustrating thing.
And we spend more time right now on organizations, as you
can tell from the people sitting here, we spend a lot of time
in organizations trying to just to keep a toe in the door in
trying to keep some of this regulation at bay and nobody wants
to hear us.
Mr. Kelly. Do you ever have an audience with any of these
folks, this alphabet soup of people that show up, whether it's
EPA, DEP, whoever it is, any of them ever give you the audience
to sit down and discuss with you what your problems are and
what the comment fixes would be from the people that actually
do it? No.
So other than seeing Ms. Buerkle and myself, you really
wouldn't have a chance to talk to a government that pretty much
dictates how you're going to run your business.
Mr. DeMarree. I've been to Washington in the last Congress,
and the organization that I'm president of has been to
Washington this year. And I've been there last year and talked
about these same issues. And it's just the same thing over and
over and over again. We keep asking for relief and don't get
anywhere.
Every time--virtually every time they make a program
different, they make it more difficult. They don't make it
easier. They make it more difficult, because the mindset is
that we're going to put--we're going to reduce the unemployment
rate so we're not going to allow foreign nationals to come in
and work in this country. That's the mindset of what's going on
with this program. That's where the whole problem with this
program is, that the mindset is we don't want that program
because we want to put U.S. citizens to work.
My business, and everybody's business, is a short window of
time that we need people. I can't hire somebody for 6 to 8
weeks or 10 weeks, put on 30 employees for 8 to 10 weeks, and
then tell them that they can't work anymore because I don't
have anything else for them to do. Who's going to come to work
for me 10 weeks, work 40 to 50 hours a week depending on how
the week goes, and then tell them at the end of 8 to 10 weeks,
``I'm sorry. I don't have any work for you.''
How do I hire somebody that's only going to work for me 8
to 10 weeks a year. That's my business; that's what I'm in;
that's what I have to face. That's why this program gives me
that opportunity to try to bring somebody in that isn't out of
a country--that has people that are willing to work. And yet
nobody wants to seem to help us make that system work, at least
reasonably well for us.
Thank you.
Mr. Reeves. Food safety is a big issue. And we're deep into
the food safety with daily deliveries, fresh produce all the
while. Fortunately this year, we're able get 100 percent return
workers from Mexico. What this does, and people don't
understand it, the U.S. Department of Labor, State doesn't,
this is critical because our food-safety program has standards.
Everything we harvest in the field has a written standard that
has to be followed and inspected twice a year. Our workers
return, they know the standard. It's the same thing. They
follow the procedure. We go through the inspections. We do a
great job of food safety.
This is why it's critical to have continuity in your work
force and not have to--imagine having the same workers as last
year and have to jump through all these hoops to try to get
them back and hope you get them back, and it's all tied in with
everything else. The food safety issue--wildlife. I have to
monitor wildlife in our fields on a daily basis and keep a log.
If I see a goose, I have to document where I saw it and how I
chased it off. Same with the deer. These are the food safety
requirements that Wal-Mart, Price Chopper and Wegmans--it's
good. They're looking out for the consumer. And we don't mind
that, but there has to be somewhere, someone on our side.
And a lot of it is our own fault. I think laborer--myself
is the biggest issue in agriculture. No. 2 is perception. And,
you know, the news media is as guilty as anyone else. Look at
an agricultural commercial on television. Green Giant and
here's five guys picking sweet corn in peach boxes. Here's a
Stouffer's commercial--I think it's Stouffers. Here's a guy
growing peppers on the other side of the fence is a dairy farm.
Now, isn't that ridiculous? You can't have anywhere near
anything. And we tolerate it.
Pick Right, here's a company that's owned by a farmer. He's
got an old John Deer 430 cultivating in the field and says,
``That's my business manager as soon as he gets finished
plowing.''
I wrote him a letter stating, ``This is bad for
agriculture. We're high tech. We're an industry to be reckoned
with. We've got to stop this.''
He sent me a certificate for a 12-ounce bag of frozen
veggies. But we're our own worst enemy. We are high tech. I'm
proud of what I do for a living.
I've worked in industry. Nothing is as challenging as
agriculture is. You do all this and deal with the weather
besides. We need to do a better job of advertising the
technology in our business, the education it takes to run a
business like this, and run it successfully, and we need to
pound it into the media also. Get out there on the farm and do
a story. Follow through one of these audits in the field on
food safety. Look at what we're doing in agriculture and we
should not any longer tolerate these commercials that degrade
agriculture and farmers and make us look like a bunch of
country hicks, because no one is going to be successful in
farming any longer if they don't have an education and they
don't have the ability to put two and two together and take a
proactive approach for the future.
Mr. DeMarree. I would just say ditto. I mean, it's exactly
how so many of us feel in agriculture today, that we're the
Green Acres generation back with the pitch forks and bib
overhauls and riding around. You know, that's the perception
that we work against--well, in the media, but also in the
regulatory agencies that we deal with--is that the mindset is
that agriculture in this country is run by a bunch of
hillbillies. Pardon me to the reference for anybody who takes
offense to it. But that's exactly how it's felt, that when, as
I said in my statement, when somebody else sitting at a desk in
Albany or in Washington can tell me how to fill out and what I
have to put in my work order and what a work order can and
cannot have in it, and is telling me that my business will
operate because of what this work order has in it, how am I
going to survive?
I can tell you the generation working my farm is the last
generation that's going to work that farm.
Ms. Hourigan. I'll end by saying--and I told you our milk
is sold to a Byrne Dairy, which is a local business--I'm really
glad these two guys are still in business because I appreciate
local food. And I'm glad to know where it's coming from and how
it's produced. And I hope all the rest of you do the same.
Mr. Kelly. I'm going to finish up and turn it back over.
Keep your passion and don't give it up because I'm telling
you, the way we'll fix it is by staying on message and not
getting distracted. I know it's hard to do and I know that
every day you wonder why I keep doing this and how much longer
can I do it. Just keep in mind, if we don't get it fixed here,
there's no other place in the world it can be fixed. Let's just
make sure we stay on target. We'll get this fixed. It's going
to take a lot of fight from all of us.
Thank you for being here. I appreciate your bravery for
being here and taking the time out of what you do every day to
spend it with us. Thank you.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Kelly.
And I would like to thank all of you as well. I, too, would
like to echo Mr. Kelly's comments. If you quit, they win. And
so this is about preserving all that you've worked for.
We want you to know how much we appreciate your efforts and
for you to be here today and take time off your busy schedules.
We'd like to work with you and continue this dialog, we would
like to take your message to Washington, which we will.
I failed to introduce--we have members from the Oversight
Government Reform Staff, so they're listening and working with
us as well. So we will take this message to Washington. It
won't stop here in this room. We want to encourage you, and
please work with us and dialog with us, and let's continue to
get this job done.
Thank you all very much for being here.
At this time we are going to welcome our third panel of
witnesses.
First we have Orrin MacMurray of C&S Companies. Welcome and
thank you for being here.
Mr. Travis Glazier is the director of Intergovernmental
Relations of Onondaga County. Thank you for being here.
And Mr. Thomas Squires is the administrator of Cayuga
County. Thank you very much for being here.
As is complying with the rules of the committee, I would
ask you all to stand and be sworn in before your testimony.
Panel III, Orrin MacMurray, Travis Glazier and Thomas
Squires.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Ms. Buerkle. Please let the record reflect that the
witnesses have all answered in the affirmative.
Thank you very much. Please be seated.
At this time we will open up our hearing to all of you to
give your opening remarks, and I will start with Mr. MacMurray.

STATEMENT OF ORRIN MACMURRAY

Mr. MacMurray. Thank you very much, Vice Chairwoman Buerkle
and Representative Kelly. Appreciate this opportunity.
I'm Orrin MacMurray. I'm the chairman of the C&S Companies.
We're a 500-person architectural, engineering and construction
company. We have 14 offices around the United States.
And the activities of the Federal Government, as it relates
to both legislation and regulation, have a significant impact
on our business and our ability to create jobs here and
elsewhere.
I'd like to give you about six examples of things that do
have a direct impact on our ability to grow business.
The first relates to government competition with the
private sector. Various Presidential memoranda and Federal
agency guidance documents over the last year or so have
indicated a preference on the part of the Federal Government to
begin to remove commercially available services that have
historically been performed by private industries creating jobs
in the private sector into the government sector. This is
harmful to the private sector, especially to firms such as the
C&S Companies and it places a heavy and needless burden on the
taxpayers who are looking for ways, in fact, to reduce the size
and the expense of government much more so than to expand and
increase it.
It's a threat to our economy a couple other ways,
specifically as it relates to professional services. The
specialized and innovative design capabilities that are
available in the private sector are important to meeting
government's needs. Life-cycle costs can be higher when work is
performed entirely in-house by the government. A recent study
performed in the State of New York comparing the services of
private design professionals to government professionals showed
a 15 percent savings in using private professionals for that
purpose.
And it certainly can be argued strongly that designing and
constructing the infrastructure that we need to support our
economy in this country and maintain the standard of living
that we have, is certainly not inherently governmental such as
other functions of the Federal Government are.
Another example is the way overhead is calculated. The
Federal Government promulgates Federal regulations under the
Federal Acquisitions Regulation, specifically FAR, and that's
used by individuals that provide services to the government for
calculating fees that could potentially cost--that could be
potentially charged to government.
Unfortunately, these regulations, although they are
national in nature and scope, they're interpreted differently
by different States, and what this creates is a situation where
firms like C&S that operate in most of the States across the
country are required to go through multiple audits in order to
satisfy each individual State government that we're complying
with the Federal Acquisition Regulations, as opposed to having
one cognizant audit, one calculation and one audible amount for
our company that would be accepted across the country for work
performed that is either performed directly for the Federal
Government or for States and local government with Federal
funds.
This creates extra work for the government, it creates
extra work for business and it consumes dollars that we could
be putting toward hiring people and putting them to work and
being more productive.
The third example is the 3 percent withholding mandate that
was put into place under Public Law 109-222. This creates a new
requirement that will be effective in January 2012 where 3
percent of the gross amount of billings to any government that
contracts out $100 million or more for goods and services on an
annual basis will be withheld as effectively as a withholding
tax or a withholding against an income tax obligation.
First of all, in our business 3 percent is frequently our
total profit, if that, not to mention the amount that we owe in
taxes. It creates a tremendous unfair burden on business.
First of all, we will lose the use of those funds and
provide the Federal Government with an interest-free loan for
between a year and 2 years while we go through the
reimbursement process.
And second, it will create tremendous infrastructure cost,
and I mean, government infrastructure cost to maintain and to
administer this system.
This bill was scored, I am told, at about an $11 billion
savings in 1 year. The Department of Defense has indicated that
in the first 5 years of implementing this legislation it will
cost that department alone $17 billion in order to implement
it. I find it very difficult to see the logic in a 1-year
savings of $11 billion being justified by then spending $17
billion in just one department and that doesn't include the
costs that will be required in the State of Pennsylvania or in
the State of New York in order to collect all this money and
forward it on to the Federal Government. Who's going to pay to
hire those staff? Who's going to pay for the computer programs
that will be necessary to track this? Who's going to develop
the paperwork and administrative infrastructure that's
necessary to save $11 billion in 1 year so that we can all
spend hundreds of billions of dollars in the future years. It
just baffles.
Another area that we could use some relief is in the
Securities and Exchange Commission area, the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act created a need or
established a requirement for municipal advisors to register.
Engineers were carved out of this requirement, consulting
engineers that work for government. Now the SEC is writing
regulations that will reapply this regulation to consulting
engineering businesses that provide services to counties and
cities and towns throughout our country. Effectively it's part
of any consulting engineer's job to cost out alternatives, to
do cash-flow analysis, to provide financial analysis of those
things that they design and oversee the construction of--and
construction contractors do the same.
Improving the environment is another area. There have been
numerous commissions, the latest of which was authorized under
SAFETEA LU, the previous surface transportation legislation
that has come back and recommended streamlining of
environmental permitting processes. So you were talking earlier
about the EPA, the EPA has a very valid mission and needs to
make sure that we're paying attention to natural resources
nationwide. But the reality is that when we have to do a draft
Environmental Impact Statement, a final Environmental Impact
Statement where you have to have State regulatory review, city
regulatory, town regulatory review, national review, we are
superimposing review on review on review to the point where
we're so buried in review that it takes 7 to 10 years to build
a bridge over a creek out in the country that should take us 18
months to 2 years to design and construct and simultaneously go
through the permitting process. We are burying ourselves in
administrative costs and in delays that drive the cost up as
well.
The last item I wanted to mention is immigration reform.
You have already heard other speakers so I will be brief. We
have 65,000 H1-Bs authorized nationally. C&S employs hundreds
of engineers and scientists. We need access to those that
graduate from colleges with engineering and scientific degrees
in this country that are not necessarily U.S. residents and
citizens. We need the availability of those people so that we
can create additional jobs, more economic activity and compete
in a global marketplace, which is definitely what we have in
the world we have today.
So thanks for conducting these hearings and thank you for
listening to my comments. I'd be happy to answer any questions
that you have.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. MacMurray follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Mr. Glazier.

STATEMENT OF TRAVIS GLAZIER

Mr. Glazier. Madam Chair, Representative Kelly, thank you
very much.
Thank you for the opportunity--sorry. By the way, I'm
speaking on behalf of Deputy County Executive Matt Millea, who
was not able to be here. He's the Deputy County Executive in
charge of fiscal services for Onondaga County.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you, the
committee, today. I thought this would be a good opportunity to
discuss the impacts of Federal mandates in our municipality,
specifically how Federal mandates that provide a one-size-fits-
all approach have created waste and inefficiency in the use of
tax dollars and drives up property taxes.
Onondaga County has strived to provide a clean, healthy,
safe place to live. As with many historic urban areas, our
county and city have had to deal with the challenges of
environmental cleanup, aging infrastructure and a decreased
population base to support these needs. Despite these
challenges, we have made monumental strides toward cleaning up
our lakes and modernizing our infrastructure for wastewater
treatment. However, despite all of these efforts, Onondaga
County continues to fight an uphill battle. This is due, in
part, because of Federal mandates that fail to take into
account an analysis of costs and benefits tied to mandatory
regulatory actions, and that can result in scarce tax dollars
being spent on compliance measures that are neither effective
nor equitable.
One example of this concerns the Federal Government's
apparent efforts to pursue uniform national nutrient control
standards for surface waters across the county. Reliance on
approaches that do not account for varying ecological
conditions on nutrient pollution in different water bodies, and
the use of one-size-fits-all technology approaches to address
nutrient pollution problems can result in major public
expenditures with little or no improvement in water quality.
Site-specific factors, the cost of controls and current
economic conditions call for approaches other than mechanical
application of outdated command and control methods. Onondaga
County and the city of Syracuse, like many communities across
the country, support an aging infrastructure system. The
combined sewer system that leads to sewer overflows here in
Syracuse has been in place for over a century, and as a result,
would be excessively costly to completely replace.
To address this challenge Onondaga County has taken a lead
role in implementing an innovative and balanced approach to
combined sewer overflows that combines elements of traditional
gray infrastructure, as well as a more practical and cost
effective green technology, or green infrastructure, that
captures the rain wastewater where it falls, rather than
constructing large treatment plants that cost a lot to build
and operate.
The challenges we face in applying this innovative and
cost-effective approach to combine sewer overflows is that the
regulatory community is geared toward decades old, traditional
technology approaches, and can be somewhat inflexible and
resistant to integrating these new innovative approaches into
practical compliance schedules, design approvals and compliance
monitoring methods. Regulatory guidance documents and
compliance criteria haven't been written for the new green
technologies, and this inhibits the pursuit of more cost-
effective approaches to these widespread challenges.
Another example is the EPA needs to establish a National
Sanitary Sewer Overflow wet-weather policy that incorporates
cost effective and realistic wet-weather related standards.
SSOs are overflows of sanitary sewers resulting from a number
of factors, including significant wet weather events such as
heavy rains and rapid melting snow pack or a combination of the
two. Currently, there are no EPA approved national wet-weather
SSO standards. This has left wastewater collection systems such
as the county's vulnerable to enforcement actions following
record setting wet-weather events that exceed approved design
standards, even after the district has expended millions of
dollars to construct the projects, whose design has been
approved by the permitting authority.
In Onondaga County, wastewater treatment is supported by
usages fees. The costs of penalties for noncompliance and
infrastructure improvements drive up these user fees. These
user fees, combined with the excessive property tax burden in
our region, have created an unfriendly business environment.
From the perspective of a local municipality there is no
local control over these mandates. While in Onondaga County
there has been in a monumental effort to mitigate the issues
around CSOs and ensuring clean water, the residents are still
penalized for situations that are the result of circumstances
out of their control.
In closing, there are significant benefits to Federal
regulation. However, instituting more practical assessment of
the cost effectiveness of regulatory measures would relieve
some of the unnecessary burdens that are the result of outcomes
which are far beyond the scope of fiscal possibility. Proper
recognition of the fiscal limitations that exist in the goals
set forth in these mandates, coupled with greater flexibility
in the implementation of solutions by local stakeholders, will
promote a more competitive business environment.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak before the
committee.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much, Mr. Glazier.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Glazier follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Mr. Squires.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS SQUIRES

Mr. Squires. Madam Chair, Representative Kelly. Thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you today, and I'd like to
especially thank you for conducting this hearing in Central New
York here locally. That's a great honor certainly for all our
community here in Central New York. So thank you.
I'd like to take a few minutes and give you some examples
of how Federal action, regulation and inaction hinder Cayuga
County in hiring employees, cost us revenue and increase our
costs.
We receive millions of dollars in Federal aid, primarily in
the area of health and human services. All of these grants come
with specific accountability and reporting requirements,
requirements that cause staff to take time away from the core
program to fulfill. The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
[TANF] program is a good poster child of this phenomenon.
Due to Federal regulation, the district staff spends a huge
amount of their time on meeting Federal requirements for
employability reporting. To be eligible for Federal TANF
dollars, we must count, track and report for every TANF adult
the time spent in countable work activity. We have coding
requirements and monthly work verification reporting. This is
labor intensive and could result in State and local penalties
if not done. These requirements take away from work we could be
doing with the clients, it eats up valuable staff time, takes
resources away from the community for no more than reporting to
the government.
The Federal Government also has strict requirements in
place to entitle counties to be eligible for Title IV-E
reimbursement for child welfare costs. There's a complex set of
eligibility criteria that must be met. If all criteria and
documents are not found, there is loss of funding based on
Federal audits.
Costs associated with child welfare are huge expenses for
the county. Due to the complexity of the requirements, we had
to dedicate staff to function as our eligibility team. Again, a
lessening of the requirements will enable counties to dedicate
much needed resources to the clients.
To be sure, requirements are needed to protect the
taxpayers. We respectfully ask that your committee look at
decreasing the requirements for all Federal programs so their
staff may spend more time delivering the program services that
the taxpayers pay for.
Many times the Federal Government pushes mandates down to
the States and in turn down to the counties. Many times these
mandates aren't as applicable and should not apply to the
counties because we're much smaller than cities and States.
Along these lines is the Prison Rape Elimination Act. While
noble in title, this act is filtered down to local jails and
requires additional documentation, investigation and reporting
that, frankly, is not necessary at the county level. It may be
appropriate for larger facilities, but in our case will
probably require adding an additional staff position to fulfill
requirements that we don't believe should apply to us anyway.
In some counties, Indian Nations have been allowed to sell
tobacco products and gasoline exempt from sales taxes. In our
county the cost is measured in the millions of dollars, as well
as lost jobs and commerce to businesses that comply with the
sales tax law. The Cayuga Indian Nation has applied to the
Bureau of Indian Affairs for land in Seneca and Cayuga counties
to be taken into Federal trust. These counties and the State of
New York have repeatedly and vehemently opposed these trust
applications, because their approval would impose a sovereign
Indian reservation on the counties, which would mean not only
land coming off the school, town and county tax rolls, but the
uncontestable opening of Class II electronic bingo parlors thus
bringing gambling to counties that do not want it. It would
also totally remove local jurisdiction over the lands placed in
trust. House bill H.R. 1231 would allow any federally
recognized Indian tribes to be granted land in trust. The
Cayuga Indian Nation was not federally recognized in 1934 and
would not be eligible to have land placed into trust, except
for a provision in the bill called the Carcieri Fix. We
strongly urge all Members of the House to oppose this Carcieri
Fix provision in the bill.
I'd like to mention briefly unemployment. Somewhat
regularly, Cayuga County decides to not hire when the position
may be temporary or seasonal in nature. There is a local cost
to unemployment. The decision to not hire is always driven by
our desire to avoid the cost of unemployment. In some of these
cases, the position may have the potential to turn into a
permanent position. Unfortunately, too many times we aren't
able to go down that road to explore that option. I would urge
the committee to change the eligibility requirement for
unemployment, or decrease the local share to allow us to put
more people to work.
In closing, I would like to thank again the committee for
giving me the opportunity to be here today. On behalf of Cayuga
County, I thank you for all the support from the Federal
Government and ask that you continue your hard work in finding
ways to reduce the Federal impediments to the efficient
operation of local government. Thank you and I will be happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Squires follows:]

Ms. Buerkle. Thank you all very much, and thank you for
your testimony this afternoon.
It's interesting, because this morning we had a hearing
over in Monroe County, in Irondequoit, and we heard from Monroe
County and the county executive and we also heard from the
sheriff of Wayne County who many of their issues were very
similar to yours.
But the interesting part--and we even heard it from the
panel that preceded you--these rules and these regulations are
made without the players being at the table. And these unfunded
mandates create such a burden on the counties and the local
governments and the taxpayers without them having any say in
how those programs are going to be executed. We got onto the
topic of Medicaid in Monroe County this morning, which is a
separate hearing.
My first question is to Mr. MacMurray. I'd like to have you
explain to us this SEC registration municipal advisors. Are you
saying pursuant to Dodd-Frank that engineering firms are now
going to be treated as if they were financial advisors?
Mr. MacMurray. The Dodd-Frank indicated in Section 975 that
they were exempting engineers providing engineering advice.
That was because Congress recognized in the preparation of
legislation that what was targeted here were financial
advisors, people that are advising on bank financing, people
that are advising municipalities on bonding, on what types of
financial structured deals should be used for public
infrastructure. That, of course, is not the practice of
engineering and construction companies. That's the practice of
banks; that's the practice of financial folks.
So Congress specifically carved out the engineering and
construction industry. What's happening is that in the
rulemaking that's going on now, that the SEC is putting in
place, is they're kind of expanding the definition or
redefining much of what consulting engineers do for
municipalities all over the country. They're redefining that
now in terms that would require that we all--we in the
consulting engineering business--obtain these municipal advisor
staff certifications.
So it's just another example of--I think it's an example of
two things: One of the Congress being wise and carving it out,
but it's also an example of how, even when Congress is wise and
makes sure that something is appropriate, that when it comes to
rulemaking, it can get bifurcated.
Ms. Buerkle. And I think that illustrates the issue that
we've had with the Health Care Bill, as well as with Dodd-
Frank, is the legislation was then handed over to the
regulators and regulators came up with their interpretation of
the law.
Mr. MacMurray. It may not always be consistent. It's like
another example is the 1099 situation, which I'd like to thank
both of you for your vote in support of appeal of that
requirement. In fact, while we're on that, I would hope that
you would sign onto H.R. 674, that's to repeal legislation for
the 3 percent issue that I mentioned earlier too.
Yes. There are situations that need to be addressed after
legislation has been passed. Sometimes there's things that come
to light and we need to deal with that.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you. I yield 5 minutes to Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. MacMurray, tell me about this 3 percent and
why you don't get paid interest on it? The government holds it
and you don't get paid interest? How long do they hold it?
Mr. MacMurray. Effectively it's analogous to having
withholding out of my paycheck for my income tax in the
following year. So effectively it's the same sort of thing.
What's being proposed here, though, is unfair on a number of
levels.
First of all, if we provide services to the Federal
Government and it costs about $100,000, the Federal Government
says, well, about 20 to 30 percent of that has to be
subcontracted to minority disadvantaged business or to service
connected disabled business. There are a number of programs.
So right off the bat, we might take, say, $20,000 or
$30,000 off of that amount that a company like C&S is actually
going to self perform.
Then there are some services that can't be performed by our
company, so we turn around and possibly subcontract another
$5,000 or $10,000 of work. So the actual work that we would do
might be in the neighborhood of $60,000 or $70,000, in my
example, out of a $100,000 contract.
Now, if we are lucky, and we make the average profit on
this type of work nationally, that's going to be someplace in
the 5 to 10 percent range. So if we take, say, $60,000 and
suppose we made 5 percent on that, that's $3,000. That's $3,000
in profit. Our income tax obligation for that $3,000 might be
20 percent, 30 percent, depending on what corporate rate we're
paying. So it could conceivably be $1,000 in my example.
Well, what the Federal Government--this law will require us
to have $3,000 deducted right off the top and the Federal
Government will then hold those $3,000 until we file our income
tax and get that refund, which will be at least a year, and
depending on when the services were provided, if they were
provided at the end of tax year--you follow me? Or at the
beginning of a tax year, it could almost be 2 years before you
get the money back.
And, of course, under the Federal Acquisition Regulations,
to make things even worse, if we do go out and borrow that
money so we can meet payroll and pay our light bill, the
Federal Acquisition Act [FAR], does not allow us to calculate
interest as an eligible overhead expense, so there's no way we
can recover that interest on that money. So effectively that
comes out of our pocket. So in order to meet payroll and pay
our employees and potentially add additional jobs, it's just
another rock being thrown under the wheel.
Mr. Kelly. So your cost of operation is affected by this.
So is this something when you do a government contract, you
have to actually bid it higher than you would normally bid it
to a normal entity to cover that 3 percent, because effectively
your cost of operation, you know, the gross versus the net--I
understand completely--you have to somehow recoup that.
Mr. MacMurray. We have to try.
Mr. Kelly. Or you walk away from the business.
Mr. MacMurray. We have to try or we have to make a decision
that we can't work on that particular work with the Federal
Government. And that's going to hurt the government, hurt our
taxpayers because there's going to be less competition and
that's not an attractive alternative either.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. Glazier, I want to ask you real quick,
because I come from a community that's aging also. And when we
talk about this problem that we have with storm and we have
wastewater and everything else.
Look it, is there any type of remedial program? Because
what I see is that the property transfer from people who own
those houses--usually they're seniors. In order for them--
there's some point in their life where they're going to sell
where they live and they're going to move into another
lifestyle. That has to be fixed, usually, before they can sell
the house, does it not, if there's a problem where the
downspouts are tied in?
Mr. Glazier. Yeah. In fact, in Onondaga County we've just
begun a proactive downspout program, and I'm coming up short
with the name of the program, but the program is going to go
deal specifically with that. We have added a local law that
when houses are sold, there's an inspection to ensure for
specifically that purpose.
Mr. Kelly. In my community, it averages somewhere between
$12,000 and $15,000 to fix this. These are homes that are being
sold for $30,000, $35,000. So a senior, really, someone who's
worked all their life, paid their taxes, lived within their
means, have been good stewards of the community, are put in a
position they really can't get out of the homes they live in
because of this regulation.
What bothers me is I know we have these ideas that we think
are going to be really great, but the unintended consequences
really put people in a position where they can't, at this point
in their life, actually move from where they've been because
some of this over regulation. And I know it's important. I
know. But it makes me scratch my head. Why are we doing this to
the people that are most vulnerable that can't make the
adjustment?
Mr. Glazier. Well, I think from our perspective, one of the
main criticisms we have is that--there's--everything is
regulation and measurement as opposed to helping to try and
find ways as we're trying to proactively attempting to do,
which is try and mitigate the issue where it begins.
Because of the stringency of the current Federal
regulations there isn't real recognition of that effort. You
know, they just sit at the end of the spout and measure and
because of that we are, you know, we're making leaps and bounds
as far as the situation we're in and the dates and the age of
our physical infrastructure that deals with this, but we're
still measured by the antiquated system.
Mr. Kelly. I know, it is. It's frustrating.
And just final, Mr. Squires, because I see this only in
government. Is the cost of running a program have--it's totally
irrelevant as to what the cost-benefit analysis is.
Have you seen any of these programs that make sense to you
from a cost-benefit analysis, because in private business if
the end product doesn't justify what you're doing, you either
don't do it or you just go out of business. So I'm trying to
understand the cost overruns of these, and it's always absorbed
by the taxpayer.
Do you have any input into any of these programs?
Mr. Squires. We don't. We don't have a lot of input as far
as the regulations, requirements and accountability and
reporting and all that sort of stuff. I think you're right with
the point you're driving at is that the cost of the program
becomes so enormously expensive compared to the actual benefit
that it flows to the intended beneficiaries of the program.
It's frustrating for us when we have a whole pile of
regulation reporting and tracking and so forth and information
that needs to be given, and it costs us employees, it costs
dedicated staff to do that.
Chair Buerkle referenced earlier that government should not
be the driver of jobs, and I absolutely agree with that. That
being said, there are going to be jobs that are paid for and
come from the government. It's frustrating when we have to
increase the number of jobs that government pays for that we
tax people for, for things that--we wonder if it's just jobs
that put together a bunch of data that sit on someone else's
desk and they check off on their checklist and say, ``OK, we
got it. Things must be fine.'' That's not the reality of the
situation.
What we wonder sometimes is if we got less money from the
Federal Government, the State government, passed through the
State government, if we got a little less for the program and
were relieved of a lot of the reporting requirements and a lot
of the tracking and a lot of the administrative requirements, I
think we would be further ahead because we would have fewer
people on our payroll that we're taxing the taxpayers for and
we would end up giving more benefit to the intended
beneficiaries.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you.
Ms. Buerkle. Just to give an illustration of your cost-
benefit analysis, we spoke recently to a school superintendent
and he received a Federal grant of $40,000 and he said in order
to comply with all of the strings attached of the $40,000, it
was going to cost him close to $200,000 to administer that
regulation--or that grant. So the cost-benefit analysis is
certainly something that needs to be done more.
I have one last question because it came up this morning in
Irondequoit, Mr. Squires. The Prison Rape Elimination Act. I
asked Sheriff Virts over in Wayne County if it was his
understanding that there was any way for the county jails, the
smaller entities, to opt out of this law. He did not think so.
Mr. Squires. I don't think so. I spoke to our sheriff,
Sheriff Dave Gould in Cayuga County and this is something that
he's looking at. Our interpretation is it absolutely applies to
us. We're a small facility. We're not a State facility.
Incidents happen in jails, you know, violence and so forth.
We think the staff that we have and the procedures and
processes in place to address those issues are sufficient for
our facility. They're appropriate. We're a well-run facility.
So this is another layer of bureaucracy and administration that
we have to pay for and we estimate it's going to be a position
that will be dedicated almost full-time to these kinds of
regulations.
Again, taxing people for positions that, in our view,
aren't productive and give no benefit to the taxpayers we have
been taxing.
Ms. Buerkle. Have you been able to affix any cost to this
law when it goes into effect?
Mr. Squires. We think it's more work that can be absorbed
by current staff, and we're talking about adding a staff
position to do that. So the total cost including fringes would
be somewhere in the ballpark I'm going to guess $50,000,
$60,000. There may be other work that staff person could take
on, but that's the additional cost that comes from this act.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
Do you have any further questions?
Mr. Kelly. No.
Ms. Buerkle. I want to thank all of you for being here this
afternoon and sharing your testimony with us.
Your input is so important to us as were the two previous
panels and the three earlier today. It's so important that
Congress hears from you all. And I want you to know that we
will take your testimony, take the information that you have
given to us, and bring it back to the full Oversight and
Government Reform Committee and let them know. We'll share with
them the concerns and the regulations and even the impediments
that the Federal Government puts up.
So thank you all very much for being here today.
Thank you to those who sat through this hearing and
participated today. I think it's good for us to hear from the
community, from the job creators.
At this time we will adjourn the meeting. The committee is
adjourned. Thank you all very much.
[Whereupon, at 5:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[The prepared statement of Hon. Elijah E. Cummings
follows:]


