- FOIA IN THE 21ST CENTURY: USING TECHNOLOGY TO IMPROVE TRANSPARENCY IN GOVERNMENT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FOIA IN THE 21ST CENTURY: USING TECHNOLOGY TO IMPROVE TRANSPARENCY IN
GOVERNMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY, INFORMATION
POLICY, INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS AND
PROCUREMENT REFORM

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 21, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-140

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-376 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Technology, Information Policy, Intergovernmental
Relations and Procurement Reform

JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma, Chairman
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania, Vice       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia,
Chairman                             Ranking Minority Member
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              JACKIE SPEIER, California
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 21, 2012...................................     1

WITNESSES

Ms. Melanie Ann Pustay, Director, Office of Information Policy,
U.S. Department of Justice
Oral Statement...........................................     4
Written Statement........................................     7
Ms. Miriam Nisbet, Director, Office of Government Information
Services, National Archives & Records Administration
Oral Statement...........................................    20
Written Statement........................................    22
Mr. Andrew Battin, Director, Office of Information Collection,
Environmental Protection Agency
Oral Statement...........................................    28
Written Statement........................................    30
Mr. Sean Moulton, Director, Federal Infomation Policy, OMB Watch
Oral Statement...........................................    43
Written Statement........................................    45

APPENDIX

Ms. Mary Beth Hutchins, Communications Director, Cause of Action
Statement for the record.................................    58

FOIA IN THE 21ST CENTURY: USING TECHNOLOGY TO IMPROVE TRANSPARENCY IN
GOVERNMENT

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 21, 2012,

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Technology,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:16 p.m. in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Mike
Kelly [chairman of the subcommittee], presiding.
Present: Representatives Kelly, Chaffetz, Walberg,
Lankford, Meehan, Farenthold, Lynch, Connolly, Murphy and
Speier.
Staff Present: Kurt Bardella, Majority Senior Policy
Advisor; Michael R. Bebeau; Molly Boyl, Majority
Parliamentarian; Gwen D'Luzanksy, Majority Assistant Clerk;
Adam P. Fromm, Majority Director of Member Services and
Committee Operations; Justin LoFranco, Majority Director of
Digital Strategy; Tegan Millspaw, Majority Research Analyst;
Mary Pritchau, Majority Professional Staff Member; Laura L.
Rush, Majority Deputy Chief Clerk; Peter Warren, Majority
Legislative Policy Director; Jaron Bourke, Minority Director of
Administration; Krista Boyd, Minority Deputy Director of
Legislation/Counsel; Ashley Etienne, Minority Director of
Communications; Adam Koshkin, Minority Staff Assistant; Suzanne
Owen, Minority Health Policy Advisor; Rory Sheehan, Minority
New Media Press Secretary; and Cecelia Thomas, Minority
Counsel.
Mr. Kelly. This is a hearing on FOIA in the 21st Century:
Using Technology to Improve Transparency in Government.
The hearing will come to order.
This is the Oversight Committee's Mission Statement. We
exist to secure two fundamental principles. First, Americans
have a right to know that the money Washington takes from them
is well spent. Second, Americans deserve an efficient,
effective government that works for them.
Our duty on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee
is to protect these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to
hold government accountable to taxpayers because taxpayers have
a right to know what they get from their government.
We will work tirelessly in partnership with citizen
watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American people and bring
genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy. This is the mission
of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee.
I am going to allow myself an opening statement.
Today's hearing is going to address the transparency in
government and how advances in technology can be used to
improve public access to information. This hearing will focus
particularly on the Freedom of Information Act, or FOIA, which
is the primary tool the public has to get information from
their government.
Transparency is extremely important and is necessary in
order to have a government that is accountable to its people.
Holding the government accountable and ensuring the public's
right to know represents the fundamental mission of this
Committee.
When President Obama took office, one of his first actions
was to release a new memo on FOIA directing agencies to adopt a
presumption of openness and in a statement to the public, the
President said ``Transparency and the rule of law will be the
touchstone of this presidency.'' I would like to now play a
short clip of his comments.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Kelly. Those are very strong words. I completely agree
with President Obama's statements. However, during last week's
Sunshine in Government Week, many transparency groups expressed
concern with this Administration's compliance with FOIA. These
concerns address a variety of issues including agency
stonewalling, delays and excessive fees. Recently, the Central
Intelligence Agency had a class action lawsuit filed against it
for illegally discouraging requests by imposing significant
fees without notifying requestors.
The Department of Homeland Security has also been accused
of charging exorbitant fees on FOIA requests. During this
Committee's review of agency FOIA logs, we found one case where
the agency charged the requestor over $70,000.
The Department of Justice, which is responsible for setting
agency FOIA compliance, has also been accused of defending
Federal agencies when they choose to withhold documents. Last
year when asked by the Supreme Court about President Obama's
presumption of openness, the Department of Justice lawyer said,
``We do not embrace that principle.''
Clearly, there is more work to be done to ensure that
citizens get prompt and substantive responses to their requests
for government information. Technology is valuable tool for
promoting transparency and is the focus of our hearing today.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about ways to
make government more transparent and more accountable to the
public.
Mr. Kelly. I now recognize the distinguished Ranking
Member, Mr. Connolly, for his opening statement.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the distinguished Chairman.
As I said before, my great grandfather Kelly would be proud
that there was a Kelly sitting in that chair. He would be even
prouder if there was his great grandson sitting in that chair,
but that is a different issue.
We are delighted to have you all here today. I agree with
the distinguished Chairman the first part of everything said
and I disagree with the second part of everything he said. I
actually believe there is a record of enormous transparency
that is unprecedented in the Obama Administration. I actually
believe this Committee, despite its best efforts, has actually
allowed that to be documented.
Last year, for example, the full Committee held a hearing
on FOIA and, hyperbole and rhetoric aside, we discussed several
FOIA advancements since 2009. First, the President issued the
Executive Order the distinguished Chairman referred, directing
agencies to err on the side of disclosure rather than secrecy,
a reversal, I might add, of the Bush era policy, which
certainly favored secrecy led by the distinguished Vice
President, at the time, Dick Cheney.
Second, agencies reduced the FOIA backlog, this is a fact,
by 40 percent, eliminating 55,000 backlogged FOIA requests, an
accomplishment by any measure. At the time, President Obama had
only been in office two years. Last year, the number of FOIA
requests increased dramatically and yet, 23 of 37 agencies,
more than half, still managed to reduce their backlog.
Unfortunately, over 250,000 new requests submitted to the
Department of Defense and the Department of Homeland Security
increased the government-wide FOIA backlog.
While most agencies improved FOIA management substantially,
it seems some could still learn from the best practices of
others. To that end, I appreciate the EPA witness appearing at
today's hearing to discuss its FOIA Module web portal. The
EPA's portal, which works with multiple agencies, helps the
public submit and track FOIA requests, search for information
and view agency responses to FOIA requests. It allows agency
employees to log in securely and to process applications.
From relatively modest, upfront and annual operating costs,
this portal allows EPA to save approximately $3.5 million over
a five year period. This sufficient return on investment should
encourage other agencies to consider adopting similar modules
to achieve similar savings and efficiencies.
Similarly, agencies are unlikely to be able to reduce FOIA
backlogs or provide quality FOIA responses, a metric that is
every bit as important as speed of responding if agencies are
subjected to arbitrary reductions in the size of their
workforce. We cannot have it both ways up here, Mr. Chairman.
We cannot complain about the responsiveness on FOIA requests
while we are hacking away at the Federal workforce and
disparaging Federal employees in the process. We cannot allow
antipathy toward the Federal Government to impair our ability
to respond to citizens' needs. The Office of Personnel
Management projects that retirements will increase some 18
percent next year alone. In addition to understanding potential
technology improvements for FOIA, we need to recognize staffing
needs as well.
I want to thank the witnesses for appearing today and I
look forward to learning especially more about EPA's module to
see how we can save money and perhaps help other agencies.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing.
Mr. Kelly. I thank my Irish colleague. I cannot say what my
grandfather would have wished. There are more Kelly's and
Connolly's than we can possibly keep track of.
We are going to recognize right now our first panel: Ms.
Melanie Ann Pustay, Director, Office of Information Policy,
U.S. Department of Justice; Ms. Miriam Nisbet, Director, Office
of Government Information Services, National Archives & Records
Administration; and Mr. Andrew Battin, Director, Office of
Information Collection, Environmental Protection Agency. Thank
you all for being here.
Pursuant to Committee rules, all witnesses must be sworn
before they testify. Please rise and raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Mr. Kelly. May the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative. You may be seated.
In order to allow time for discussion, if you could, please
limit your testimony to five minutes. We won't be real strict
on that, but if you could, that would be great. Your entire
written statement will be made a part of the record.
Ms. Pustay, would you please open?

WITNESS

STATEMENT OF MELANIE ANN PUSTAY

Ms. Pustay. Good afternoon, Chairman Kelly, Ranking Member
Connolly, and members of the Subcommittee.
I am pleased to be here today to discuss agency use of
technology in administering the Freedom of Information Act and
the Department of Justice's continuing efforts to ensure that
President Obama's ``Memo on the FOIA,'' as well as Attorney
General Holder's ``FOIA Guidelines,'' are fully implemented.
The Attorney General issued his new FOIA Guidelines during
Sunshine Week three years ago and based on our review of Chief
FOIA Officer reports and agency annual FOIA reports, it is
clear that agencies are continuing to make significant,
tangible progress in implementing the guidelines and expanding
their use of technology to do so.
In fiscal year 2011, despite being faced with a noticeable
increase in the number of incoming requests, agencies were able
to process over 30,000 more requests than the previous year.
The government released records in response to 93 percent of
requests where records were located and processed for
disclosure, marking the third straight year in which such a
high release rate was achieved. The government also improved
its average processing time for simple requests.
Agencies continue to meet the demand for public information
by proactively posting information on their websites. Many
agencies have also taken steps to make those websites more
useful by redesigning them, by adding enhanced search
capabilities and by utilizing online portals and dashboards
that facilitate access to information.
For example, the Department of Energy created a full text,
searchable FOIA portal that provides access to documents
previously released under FOIA. Similarly, numerous components
of the Department of Defense made improvements to their
websites and created systems for the proactive posting of
contracts.
I am particularly proud to report on the successes achieved
by the Department of Justice. For the second straight year, DOJ
maintained a record high 94.5 percent release rate for those
requests where records were processed for disclosure. Perhaps
even more significant, when the Department released records, it
did so in full in response to 79 percent of requests. Despite
three straight years of receiving over 60,000 requests, the
Department also increased the number of requests processed and
reduced our backlog by 26 percent.
My office carries out the Department's statutory
responsibilities to encourage compliance with the FOIA. As part
of our work in implementing the Attorney General's Guidelines
and our commitment to the initiatives in the National Action
Plan for the Open Government Partnership, OIP is leading the
effort to maximize the use of technology across Federal
agencies to streamline the FOIA process and to improve the
online availability of information.
Just this past year, OIP reconvened the Interagency FOIA
Technology Working Group to exchange ideas on this important
topic. The group discussed various tools to assist with FOIA
processing, including technology that can aid in the search and
review of documents, shared platforms that allow for
simultaneous review and comment on documents, and software that
automatically identifies duplicative material.
An area that I believe holds great promise in increasing
the efficiency of agency FOIA processes is the use of
litigation software in the FOIA context. Agencies often have to
manually review hundreds, if not thousands, of pages of paper
and electronic records for both responsiveness and duplication
before disclosure analysis can even be made.
By utilizing e-discovery tools to perform some of these
necessary administrative tasks, agency FOIA staff can focus
their efforts on reviewing records for disclosure and providing
a timely response. OIP has already begun using this technology
and we will continue to develop its capability with the goal of
helping all agencies employ similar tools for the overall
benefit of FOIA administration.
We are also researching new technologies that will
substantially improve the FOIA consultation process by allowing
multiple components and agencies to review and comment on
material simultaneously.
With well over 1 million visitors since we launched last
March, the Department's new government-wide FOIA website,
FOIA.gov, has revolutionized the way FOIA data is made
available to the public and has become a valuable resource for
both requestors and agencies. The website graphically displays
the detailed statistics contained in annual FOIA reports and
allows users to compare data between agencies in overtime. The
website also serves as an educational resource by providing
useful information about how the FOIA works, where to make
requests and what to expect through the FOIA process.
Recently we expanded the function of the site even further
by adding a new search tool that will help the public locate
information that is already available on Federal Government
websites. This new tool allows the public to enter a search
term on any topic of interest and FOIA.gov will then search
across all government websites at once and then capture
documents posted anywhere on an agency website.
We launched yet another new feature just a few weeks ago by
including hyperlinks to the on-line request forms that agencies
have to make it easier than ever to make a FOIA request. In an
effort to improve FOIA processes and increase efficiency, there
are over 100 offices across the government that have already
developed the capability to receive requests online.
I am very pleased to report that OIP itself, my office, has
just launched an online capability. Requestors can now make
requests and file administrative appeals online. Our portal
also allows the public to establish their own user accounts and
they can track the status of their request or appeal at any
time and receive their determination from OIP through the
portal.
Looking ahead, we will continue to work on administration
of the FOIA and to enhance government transparency. We will be
looking to explore new ways to utilize technology to achieve
these goals. We look forward to working with the Committee on
these important matters.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Pustay follows:]

Mr. Kelly. Thank you very much, Ms. Pustay.
Ms. Nisbet.

STATEMENT OF MIRIAM NISBET

Ms. Nisbet. Good afternoon, Chairman Kelly and
Representative Connolly.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you to
discuss the Freedom of Information Act and information
technology.
I heard from your opening remarks that you both have a
sense of some of the challenges that face the government, the
15 Cabinet level departments and the 84 agencies that
administer the FOIA. We certainly have seen that.
As you know, the Open Government Act of 2007, which amended
the FOIA, created our office to do several things: to review
agency policies, procedures and compliance with the law; to
recommend policy changes to Congress and the President to
improve the administration of FOIA; and also to resolve
disputes between FOIA requestors and the Federal agencies.
We opened our doors two and a half years ago in September
2009. Our work has reached customers in 48 States, the District
of Columbia and 13 foreign countries. Individuals, including
veterans, researchers, professors, journalists, attorneys and
inmates comprise more than three-quarters of our workload. Our
cases in fiscal year 2011 involved 42 Federal agencies
including all 15 Cabinet level departments.
In carrying out our mission, therefore, we do see how
agencies are using technology every day to administer FOIA,
tracking requests, searching for and reviewing records, posting
frequently requested records online, and using agency websites
to provide information about FOIA resources.
In 1996, Congress passed the Electronic Freedom of
Information Act amendments or the e-FOIA to clarify that the
law applies to electronic records as well as traditional paper
records. Sixteen years later, agencies are still working to
fully implement the e-FOIA. Agencies continue to improve and
modernize their processes but improvements can still be made,
as you both have noted.
Some obstacles that we have noticed are outdated technology
and challenges posed by the need to properly manage electronic
records. Certainly my parent agency, the National Archives and
Records Administration, takes those needs and concerns to heart
and works on those every day.
Mr. Battin, from the Environmental Protection Agency, is
going to give you details of the FOIA Module, a one-stop shop
portal for FOIA requests. My agency is a partner in that
project with EPA and the Department of Commerce because we
believe it has great potential to improve the public access to
government information and to save taxpayers money by sharing
agency resources and adapting existing technology. Other
departments and agencies have expressed interest in the
partnership and we hope they will join us. The FOIA Module is
scheduled to be launched for agencies this summer and unveiled
to the public in October.
An area in which FOIA and technology intersect is with
proactive disclosure of government records. The e-FOIA
amendments require every agency's website to include certain
information made public under FOIA. Agencies are continuing to
make additional information available on their websites in
rather staggering amounts.
In order to ease the public's navigation across agency
websites, we are encouraging them to standardize FOIA sites to
ensure a customer friendly and efficient way for the public to
find FOIA resources. Last week in observance of Sunshine Week,
the national initiative to promote open government, OGIS posted
on its blog some suggestions to improve the FOIA process
administratively such as top-down support for FOIA, developing
with stakeholder input, an easy to use template for agencies to
customize; standardizing and indexing online FOIA reading
rooms; and providing full contact information to designated
FOIA professionals.
Finally, OGIS has observed that collaboration across
agencies is a cost effective and beneficial tool for exploring
ways to improve the administration of FOIA through existing
technology. There are several efforts underway in the Federal
FOIA community to look for ways to collect the information
technology requirements of FOIA professionals and communicate
those to companies that create products for them to use to
identify technologies that agencies now use that can be
repurposed for FOIA; and to share knowledge about FOIA issues
such as complex database requests and best practices to help
agencies handle them better.
We appreciate the Subcommittee's efforts to examine ways
that FOIA can work better and more efficiently for everybody,
the public and the agencies. We thank you for the opportunity
to testify.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Nisbet follows:]

Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Ms. Nisbet.
Mr. Battin.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW BATTIN

Mr. Battin. Good afternoon, Chairman Kelly, Representative
Connolly and members of the Subcommittee.
My name is Andrew Battin and I am the Director of the
Office of Information Collection in the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency's Office of Environmental Information.
I am pleased to appear before you today to discuss the FOIA
Module developed in partnership with the Department of Commerce
and the National Archives and Records Administration. I am also
pleased to join my colleagues from NARA and DOJ on this panel.
EPA is committed to the implementation of the
Administration's open government and transparency goals. EPA
demonstrated this commitment by striving for reduction in
processing time of FOIA requests and recognizing that
information technology creates an opportunity to improve our
FOIA performance.
EPA has sought continually to be proactive in improving our
FOIA administration and to be innovative in the use of
technology to enhance our FOIA performance, both internally and
for the public. We made it a priority to deploy a system to
help track requests and produce EPA's annual FOIA report.
Further, the agency believes that efforts made to improve
processing and extend public access to FOIA responsive
documents are very much in keeping with the principles of the
Administration's open government directive. In embracing the
directive mandate for greater transparency, EPA has posted
databases from multiple program areas to its website containing
information frequently requested under FOIA.
To build on our strong record of transparency, innovative
use of available technologies and overall FOIA performance, in
June 2010, our Deputy Administrator, Bob Perciasepe, launched a
cross-EPA workgroup to identify ways to improve further still
the efficiency and consistency of our FOIA processes, to
explore the use of tools to inform citizens, as well as to
update regulations and policies.
The workgroup report included a recommendation to invest in
tools and technologies that streamline FOIA operations and
increase public access and transparency. As managing partner of
regulations.gov, we explored whether the eRulemaking Program's
technology infrastructure could be used to accept FOIA
requests.
We procured a third party technical and cost feasibility
assessment that concluded that eRulemaking Program's technology
infrastructure could be used to accept FOIA requests, store
them in a repository for processing by agency staff and allow
responsive documents to be uploaded into the system and posted
for public access.
These analyses indicated that leveraging the eRulemaking
technology infrastructure could be accomplished with a fairly
modest investment. EPA shared the analyses with the Federal
Government's two FOIA leads, the Department of Justice and the
National Archives Administration, to validate the approach of
developing a FOIA module.
The module would automate FOIA processing and reporting,
store FOIA requests and responses in an electronic records
repository and enable the public to search, access and download
previously released FOIA responses for participating agencies.
The module would also accumulate statistics on FOIA actions
throughout the year and summarize this information for an
agency's annual FOIA report.
Later, other agencies were invited to learn about and
explore the use of a possible FOIA Module. Through this broader
outreach, requirements were developed and refined for how such
a FOIA Module could operate. We continued our conversations
with our Federal partners. Based on the assessment, and a
number of agencies expressed interest in the FOIA Module.
Following finalization of the workgroup's recommendation
for a FOIA Module, EPA entered a partnership with NARA and the
Department of Commerce. These agencies provided funding to help
design and develop such a solution. The construction and
deployment of the system is estimated to cost $1.3 million. The
module is scheduled for partner agencies to use later this
summer and available for public submissions by October 2012.
As development of the FOIA Module recently reached a
sufficient state of definition to clarify how its component
capabilities are expected to work, managers in both EPA and DOJ
recognized that it has become timely to harmonize EPA's efforts
on the FOIA module with the functions provides by DOJ's
FOIA.gov now and in the future.
Accordingly, we have begun a series of conversations about
each organization's electronic tools to understand in greater
detail any near term, technical coordination needs and to
identify potential future complementary capabilities. We look
forward to continuing productive, interagency collaboration
moving forward on this important work.
I appreciate the opportunity to provide this testimony and
would be happy to respond to any questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Battin follows:]

Mr. Kelly. Thank you all. You complete written testimony
will be entered in the permanent record.
You were all within the five minutes. That was very good
and usually doesn't happen here.
I recognize myself for the first questions.
Ms. Pustay, DOJ says it is going to develop its own portal.
Why doesn't it just choose to work with the EPA on theirs?
Ms. Pustay. We actually just launched our portal, so we are
done with the portal we have. As I mentioned in my testimony,
there are 100 agencies that have online request portals, so
this has been a wave of use of technology across the
government. As I mentioned, one of the focuses of the Attorney
General's FOIA guidelines was to encourage agencies to utilize
technology, so we have had a whole range of options being
explored across the government. Now, as I said, there are up to
over 100 agencies with online request portals.
As I mentioned, as a new feature for FOIA.gov is we are
including on that website hyperlinks to all the online request
forms available across the government to make it easy to reach
them through FOIA.gov.
Mr. Kelly. DOJ is responsible for setting FOIA policy and
compliance across the government, as well as litigating on
behalf of all FOIA lawsuits. Has there ever been a case where
the Department of Justice has disagreed with an agency
withholding information and refused to defend it?
Ms. Pustay. There have definitely been cases where
additional information was released as a result of application
of the Attorney General's Guidelines. We saw that most
especially in the immediate wake of issuance of the Guidelines.
That has been three years ago, so we have been working very
hard to train agencies, implement and focus on the new
requirements to apply foreseeable harm standards, to not
withhold information just because you legally can, some of the
things we saw the President mention in the video that you
showed a moment ago.
At this point, we have a nice engrained understanding of
the provisions of the Attorney General's Guidelines across the
government.
Mr. Kelly. Last year, a DOJ lawyer told the Supreme Court
that ``The DOJ does not embrace the principle of openness.''
Can you explain that disconnect between the President's memo
and the DOJ's actions?
Ms. Pustay. I am happy you asked me that so I could clear
that up.
As I understand it, the exchange that occurred during the
course of the Supreme Court argument was simply not that there
was a disagreement with the presumption of openness, the actual
question being asked of the attorney was whether FOIA
exemptions should be interpreted narrowly.
Of course they should be. We have Supreme Court precedence
that says FOIA exemptions should be interpreted narrowly, but
there is a corollary principle and that is that FOIA exemptions
must also be given meaningful reach and application consistent
with the fact that Congress included in the FOIA exemptions for
a purpose, to protect vital interests like personal privacy and
national security.
He was attempting to explain that the concept of narrow
interpretation of exemptions had to be analyzed in reference to
the corollary principle, that exemptions must also be given
meaningful reach.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you.
The purpose of the hearing is to examine ways to use
technology to improve transparency. What do you think are the
most important advances in this area? What are the biggest
challenges? Each of you has very unique perspectives on this.
Mr. Battin, why don't you start? We will give Ms. Pustay a
chance to catch her breath.
Mr. Battin. I certainly think the biggest challenge we
face, and one of the main reasons we went into development of
the Module, was to improve our efficiencies in being able to
meet the public demand. Through the use of the Module, we are
internally focusing on improving the process to answer FOIAs,
bring consistency to the process and create a repository for
future use.
For the public, we are increasing transparency, allowing
them to submit online, track their progress throughout and have
access in the end. All these are challenges that we face
through some of our antiquated approaches.
Mr. Kelly. Ms. Nisbet?
Ms. Nisbet. Representative Kelly, I think that the
partnership that you heard about and the effort to build a one-
stop shop portal really gives you an indication of where a lot
of people think the future of technology is going to take us
with having something that is really easy for the public so
they don't have to go to 350 places to make a request, to be
able to quickly see what information has been already disclosed
and is publicly available so maybe they don't even have to make
a request.
On the other side is to make easier for agencies to share
the resources they have and also to process requests in a more
efficient way. We have many different systems out there and
trying to find ways we can actually share with each what we
already have with each other instead of coming up with so many
different solutions I think this has some natural cost
avoidance built in.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you.
Ms. Pustay?
Ms. Pustay. I will mention something we haven't talked
about yet so far this afternoon.
One important thing is as agencies have been working very
diligently to proactively post information, to anticipate
interest in records and put those records, sometimes more than
records, put databases, put whole websites up dedicated to
particular topics, they are really working to try to anticipate
interest in records and get information out to the public
before a request is even made.
There are lots of releases being made by agencies separate
and apart from FOIA. That is great because that is part of the
Attorney General's Guidelines as well.
One thing we think is important is to have the ability to
capture all that information. That was one of the reasons we
put on FOIA.gov the find tab so that if you are a researcher or
a student, and you're looking for information on a particular
topic, there is a way to look across agency websites and
capture them.
Going to the next level, what we are working on now at the
Department is metadata tagging. Our plan is to work with GSA to
actually have standardized ways to tag records before they are
posted, to make the search process for them even that much more
precise. We have to be careful as agencies are very
enthusiastically putting information up on the web. Websites
can easily become overwhelmed with data. It is very important
that there be a way to find the information you are looking
for.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you.
I will now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to our
panelists.
I spent 14 years in local government before coming here and
in the Commonwealth of Virginia, we actually have some of the
most stringent FOIA laws in the United States. By the way, the
FOIA laws do not apply to the State Legislature, of course.
My schedule was subject to FOIA, my phone lines was subject
to FOIA, my emails were subject to FOIA. I had to deal with
FOIA requests personally and as chairman on behalf of the
county government and sometimes they would be overly broad
requests that were not very specific. It was very hard to
respond to them without producing reams of material that
presumably the requestor didn't really intend.
A lot of times if the FOIA came from the press and were
overly broad to try to make sure they didn't draw it so
narrowly that we only juridically answered the exact question
they made. They tried to often make them overly broad and we
would have to negotiate with them and say you need to be more
specific, otherwise you will get the Encyclopedia Britannica
printed.
I have seen the challenges of FOIA. All good attorneys, and
certainly our county attorney, always advised agencies and
individuals in the local government, whatever you do, do not
stall, do not stonewall, don't try to create barriers to
responding in a timely fashion or you can find yourself
prosecuted, you can find yourself in violation of the law.
With that introduction, Ms. Pustay, maybe I can start with
you, presumably there is also similar guidance given to Federal
agencies in terms of by and large you have to assume it is a
legitimate request and be responsive. Would that be fair?
Ms. Pustay. Absolutely. There is a whole range of things
that agencies do routinely and certainly as part of our
outreach and training to agencies, my office conducts training
throughout the year. Every year, we reach thousands of agency
employees. There are many different techniques actually to use
when working with requestors.
The big advantage of open communication with requestors
about what they are looking for is that if the requestor can be
more precise, the information can be provided to them more
promptly. Requestors understand that and are always very happy
to work with agencies. Maybe not always very happy, but usually
very happy to work with agencies to help focus their request.
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Ms. Pustay. Also, there is a real push right now across the
government to increase efficiency again as part of the AG's
Guidelines specifically directed toward looking for more
efficient ways to respond to requests. We are seeing that
agencies are processing more requests. They processed 30,000
more last year, releasing more information.
There is a bigger picture here where agencies overall are
looking to be cooperative to implement the FOIA guidelines.
Mr. Connolly. If I could ask, maybe Ms. Nisbet wants to
chime in here too, the Chairman alluded to some barrier, some
problem still going on, the cost of providing material
sometimes seemingly exorbitant and delays. So, those are two
metrics I wonder are we measuring that we are bringing down the
response time so that we are more responsive? Are we also
measuring the other impediments that the Chairman rightfully
cited such as the cost of providing the material requested so
that we are not needlessly creating barriers for people?
Ms. Nisbet. I think trying to deal with those kinds of
early speed bumps is something I know my office has worked very
hard on. As you know, part of our mission is resolving disputes
between FOIA requestors and the agency. We deal with those
every day. Fees and delays continue to be some of our largest
numbers of cases.
They are still a problem but also we see a corresponding
emphasis on customer service, on picking up that phone as
quickly as you can and talking to the requestor to be able to
talk about the scope of the request so that you don't have lots
of time spent looking for something the requestor is not even
interested in. Those are very, very fundamental customer
service things that we certainly are seeing people trying to do
a better job of.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, I see my time is up. How does
the Chair wish to proceed? I do have a few more questions.
Mr. Kelly. We will do another round.
Mr. Connolly. All right. I yield to the Chair.
Mr. Kelly. The Open Government Act changes fee waivers and
statuses and I know there is some confusion out there. We
played the President's remarks and maybe created a Pandora's
Box but didn't mean to. When we start telling people about
openness, transparency and everybody will have access to almost
everything and anything you want and anytime you want it, I
understand.
I am not a lifetime politician. In fact, I have only been
here a year or so. I understand you can say things that
sometimes sound good in front of a group and you turn back to
the agencies that handle them and say, my God, I wish I hadn't
said that, it creates a lot of problems for us, but there are a
lot of lawsuits, are there not? Why do we have so much trouble
with the excessive fees? Ms. Nisbet, maybe you can weigh in on
that. I know the Ranking Member asked something about that but
there is some concern out there.
Ms. Nisbet. Representative Kelly, there is a lot of
confusion both amongst requestors and agencies about how the
fee categories work and the fee waivers. I think this is one of
the first things a FOIA public liaison officer, a FOIA customer
service center can do, is to work with the requestors to
explain them.
As I mentioned, my office has a number of cases that
revolve around fees. That can definitely be a barrier but if
you walk through what the requirements are both for the fee
category you are in as well as the fee waivers, it can really
help.
I will give you an example. Last year, we had a requestor
come to us concerned because it had gotten a bill for $450,000
to process a big database request. Working with the agency,
which was very cooperative, and the requestor who was seeking
to avoid the lawsuit, to resolve those issues pretty quickly
and get to the substance of the case.
Mr. Kelly. Ms. Pustay, in your opening statement, you said
93.1 percent of requests were handled. There is some confusion
on that. The White House claims 93 percent but they didn't
include cases that were no response of record, cases where the
request was considered by the agency to be improper, or cases
where the requestor did not pay fees for records. When all
those cases are included, the response rate drops down to only
a 65 percent rate and a lot of those are heavily redacted.
When we talk about response rate, the American public
oftentimes feels we are being gamed, they are being told one
thing and the actual figures seem to go in a different
direction. Maybe you could clear up that for us?
Ms. Pustay. Sure. I am happy to and I am glad you asked
that question.
We refer to it as a release rate actually. First, in terms
of the overall numbers, to address your last point, all the
detailed statistics about the numbers of requests that are
handled by an agency, the disposition of the request, to get to
your comment about how much time it takes, all of that is
incredibly detailed information and is all required to be
prepared very year by every single agency as part of their
annual FOIA report. All this information is publicly available.
We then take all that information and have it on FOIA.gov
now where it is easily manipulated, compared and contracted. In
terms of accountability and transparency about how agencies are
doing, the annual FOIA reports and FOIA.gov's graphic
representation of that data is what should give you confidence
that you are seeing the statistics however you want them.
To get to your question about a release rate and how we
calculate it, the reason we calculate it by not every single
request that is processed, we calculate a release rate based on
those requests where there are records to be processed because
it is only for those requests that the agency has the decision
to make, do I release or do I withhold.
Out of those requests, where an agency is actually looking
at the record and deciding, do I release or withhold, in 93
percent of those requests information is released either in
full or in part.
Mr. Kelly. So the 65 percent we talk about is an actual
rate. Is that more accurate than the 93 percent?
Ms. Pustay. Respectfully, it doesn't make sense to
calculate a release rate based on the requests where there were
no records, for example. Where there are no records, the agency
never has a chance to say I want to release or I am going to
withhold because there physically are no records in response to
that request. To have the release rate be meaningful, it is
based on those requests where there are records.
Mr. Kelly. When we respond to people, we are setting the
parameters saying this is what we could do based on what we did
have and what we came away with?
Ms. Pustay. Exactly.
Mr. Kelly. So there is a clarification on that. That is how
you come up with the 93 percent.
Ms. Pustay. We say the release rate is based on looking at
the numbers of requests where records were processed for
disclosure. That is the reason why I say processed for
disclosure.
Mr. Kelly. Okay. That is the key, processed for disclosure?
Ms. Pustay. Yes.
Mr. Kelly. Not on number of requests?
Ms. Pustay. Exactly.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. Connolly?
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Pustay, picking up on something the Chairman was
referring to, why would we ever redact something in a FOIA
response?
Ms. Pustay. Of course, there are nine exemptions that
Congress put into the statute to provide protection for a range
of information. Personal privacy is the most frequently used
reason to protect information.
Mr. Connolly. First of all, Congress provided for that?
Ms. Pustay. That is right.
Mr. Connolly. Secondly, that requires someone to actually
go over the documents to make sure we are appropriately
redacting pursuant to these nine exemptions?
Ms. Pustay. Exactly.
Mr. Connolly. That takes a little time which could add to
the backlog not because anyone is trying to prevent information
from getting into public hands but because actually we are
trying to protect the innocent and sensitive material?
Ms. Pustay. Of course.
Mr. Connolly. Let me ask a different question of you, Ms.
Nisbet, because your office is sort of the ombudsman for the
Federal Government.
Surely there is a difference between a FOIA request at EPA,
for example, I want to see the studies on lead in water, I want
to see the empirical evidence that led you to decide to
regulate that issue, no national secrets there versus a FOIA
request that says I want to see the Department of Homeland
Security's assessment of strategic assets and the plans to
protect them, how many are vulnerable and how many are secure,
I would like to see that, please. Fair enough? There is a
difference?
We have to manage those two requests even though they are
both FOIA requests with different levels of sensitivity,
awareness and scrutiny. Would that be fair?
Ms. Nisbet. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Just using those two examples, in terms of
the time, resources, backlog, responsiveness, protecting
national assets, maybe I am a terrorist making that request
using the Freedom of Information Act because I want to save
myself research time, I want you to do it. How do we protect
ourselves and how do we differentiate in these requests as a
Federal Government between one and the other?
Ms. Nisbet. That is why you have very dedicated FOIA
professionals who work on these kinds of issues every day.
The processing of requests, as you point out, can be fairly
simple particularly when there is an easy search in one place
and the response is, we don't have any records, to agencies or
departments that are quite decentralized and a search would
require, for example, with the State Department, not only
looking in Washington but looking overseas.
As well and checking for whether or not there were
responsive records, gathering those records, determining
whether there they are really responsive, reviewing them and
particularly if they deal with classified information or with
sensitive information whether it is financial, personal
privacy, whatever the nature of the records, or maybe all of
those in one document, reviewing them carefully to be sure a
release to one is a release to all and that a release to one
person who might be a very legitimate researcher is not going
to also be turned into something harmful by a requestor who
doesn't have a beneficial idea.
Mr. Connolly. In other words, we have to sometimes exercise
some prudent judgment?
Ms. Nisbet. Every day.
Mr. Connolly. When we do that, it is always, in a sense, an
arbitrary line. We are drawing a line saying no, we are not
going to go on that there side. It is a matter of opinion
whether that is the appropriate line or it should be moved out
here or whether there should be any at all. Nonetheless, the
people making that judgment have to make that judgment?
Ms. Nisbet. And they have to make a decision so that the
requestor can know what are you going to get, are you going to
get anything, how many pages or are you not going to get
anything, and also that they get an answer.
Mr. Connolly. Right. A lot of our economic competitors in
the world don't have FOIA. You can't go to Beijing and FOIA
their plans for X, Y, Z, or Tehran or lots of other places.
Mr. Chairman, would you indulge me just to ask Mr. Battin
if he could take a little bit of time to talk us through how
their portal works and why so many people see it as perhaps a
model for other Federal agencies. By the way, where are you
from?
Mr. Battin. I thank you for both questions, Congressman. I
am from Pennsylvania. I grew up in Pennsylvania.
In terms of how the Module works, the Module is designed to
provide a single place for the three participating agencies to
allow the public to come in and submit a request, to track that
request in a very open and transparent way so they know within
the 20-day period that we are looking to respond where in the
process their request is.
Also it is designed to give them an opportunity to have a
dialogue if there are issues that need to be clarified with the
FOIA staff and the requestor. There is now a forum to do that.
Next is providing access to the public to receive those
answers so they can go to a particular spot, not only look at
their request and answers to that request but other questions
that may have been asked. That is kind of the public side of
this.
On the inside internal to the benefits to the agencies, a
lot of what we are stressing is processing efficiencies, the
consistency in responses, having that repository for reuse so
that we don't have to begin answering questions from the
beginning again. Our current solutions don't have that
repository that we can go back to and answer a question day
forward. That is a huge resource drain when we have to recreate
the answers time and again.
Also providing referrals to other agencies as is necessary,
within the system we have the ability to refer to our
partnering agencies if there is a question or maybe it should
be directed to them and providing that ability to enable a
repository for searching for other agency purposes such as
electronic discovery. That is something Ms. Pustay mentioned in
the beginning. Having that repository of electronically
discovered information preassembled is very important.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your indulgence.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, sir. It is nice working with you. It
is easy.
That is going to end the questioning for the first panel.
We appreciate your being here today.
I think we would both agree, I have only been with Mr.
Connolly for a year, the service you provide our country is
very great. Sometimes you have to appear before a committee and
it seems maybe we are at you for a certain reason, but we do
represent the people of the United States and we think it is
very important that there is a clear and transparent approach
to everything we do in this government.
Thank you so much for being here today. We appreciate your
indulgence.
We are going to take a short recess and then we will have
the second panel.
Mr. Connolly. I thank you for your sentiments, Mr.
Chairman.
[Recess.]
Mr. Kelly. We will now welcome our second panel. Mr. Sean
Moulton is the Director of Federal Information Policy at OMB
Watch. Mr. Moulton, thank you for being here with us today.
Pursuant to Committee rules, all witnesses must be sworn
before they testify. Please rise and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
[Witness responds in the affirmative.]
Mr. Kelly. May the record reflect that the witness answered
in the affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, if you could, please
stay within the five minutes. As you have seen, we are pretty
liberal with that. I am not usually liberal that way but
sometimes I am. Being beside Mr. Connolly, I am being a little
more liberal today.
We are going to allow you your opening statement somewhere
in the five minute range, please.

STATEMENT OF SEAN MOULTON, DIRECTOR, FEDERAL INFORMATION
POLICY, OMB WATCH

Mr. Moulton. Chairman Kelly, Ranking Member Connolly,
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify today on the important topic of how technology can
improve implementation of the Freedom of Information Act.
My name is Sean Moulton. I am the Director of Federal
Information Policy at OMB Watch, an independent, non-partisan
organization that advocates for more open, accountable
government.
Improving citizen access to public information has been an
important part of our work for 30 years. We also have
experience using technology to make government information more
available to the public online.
I will begin with a look at the current situation of FOIA
implementation. Last week, OMB Watch published our assessment
of FOIA performance at 25 agencies. Our assessment evaluated
processing of FOIA requests, the rates of requests granted and
the use of exemptions. Across these issues, the news is mixed,
with progress in some areas as well as a few setbacks.
In 2011, the Obama Administration increased its FOIA
processing and processed the highest number of requests since
2005. Unfortunately, the number of requests received increased
even faster, resulting in a rise in the overall backlog.
Although many agencies have made progress in reducing their
backlogs, continued improvement is still needed.
In terms of granting requests, 2011 added to the Obama
Administration's three-year average of a 95 percent granting
request rate whether in full or in part. This is higher than
the Bush Administration's average of 93 percent or the last
years of the Clinton Administration at 89 percent. However, the
Obama Administration more often partially granted requests
compared to the previous Administrations.
Finally, on exemptions, the total use of exemptions dropped
by 7 percent. Notably, the use of the most discretionary
exemption declined as well in 2011. Use of Exemption 2,
internal agency rules, decreased by 63 percent. Use of
Exemption 5, for interagency memoranda, fell by 14 percent.
These declines come after steady growth in the use of both
exemptions during the Bush Administration.
Turning now to the issue of technology, OMB Watch strongly
believes that technology can improve FOIA performance. For
several years, OMB Watch has advocated for the development of a
robust electronic FOIA system that incorporates three main
improvements: allowing the public to submit and track requests
electronically at a centralized site; improved communication
through the use of email; and to post online in a searchable
system documents released through FOIA.
Many of these needed reforms are embodied in the FOIA
portal project being led by EPA. The project will provide a
single interface for the public to submit requests to any
participating agency and would modernize the infrastructure
agencies used for processing, tracking requests and publishing
information. When completed, we believe the FOIA portal will
help agencies process requests faster at a lower cost while
expanding online disclosures and improving requestors'
experience.
Mail delays and postage costs would be reduced through
online communications. The portal would also speed up
consultations and referrals between agencies. Released
documents would be uploaded to a public website available both
to the requestor as well as to any other searchers. Withheld
documents would remain in the system restricted from public
access but quickly available to agency review in the event of
an appeal.
Although the project is at an early stage, we believe it
merits support from Congress. Congress should make it clear
that it expects every agency to participate in such a
centralized e-FOIA system. Congress can also play a helpful
oversight role to ensure that such a system maintains high
standards of usability for the public.
In addition to the FOIA portal, OMB Watch recommends other
key technology reforms to improve FOIA. These suggested reforms
include: update the electronic FOIA provisions to strengthen
the standard for publishing released FOIA documents online;
expand the types of information agencies are required to
proactively post on their websites; establish a government-
wide, online document disclosure goal; and update the e-
Government Act to better address electronic records management
and disclosure needs in IT procurement decisions.
In conclusion, OMB Watch is fully committed to the
Committee's goals of using modern technology to improve
transparency. With the right reforms and investments, FOIA can
be quicker, easier to use and more proactive in disclosing
information to the public.
I sincerely thank you for the opportunity to address this
Committee and I look forward to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Moulton follows:]

Mr. Kelly. Thank you.
Again, everyone is right on time today within five minutes.
You made a comment in your opening remarks when you were
saying the Administration answered it harshly. What does that
mean?
Mr. Moulton. Partial. I am sorry if I didn't pronounce it
properly. Partial disclosures where a requestor would ask for a
lot of documents or even one document and it might be redacted
or some of the documents disclosed but not all and an exemption
is cited to withhold some of that information, so a partial
instead of a full grant.
Mr. Kelly. If I remember correctly, in the Clinton
Administration, it was 89 percent, is that correct?
Mr. Moulton. That is correct. That is a combination of both
partial and full grantings. The Obama Administration uses a
significantly higher partial granting as a percentage of that.
There are about 50 percent of the grants they make or requests
they answer are partially granted rather than full granting.
Mr. Kelly. When we talk about the information being
answered, clear that up for me. You are saying that 50 percent
are partially answered?
Mr. Moulton. Right and then full granting would make up the
remaining 43 percent. That combines to be a 95 percent average
over the three years.
Mr. Kelly. Under the Bush Administration, it was 93
percent?
Mr. Moulton. It was 93 percent combined.
Mr. Kelly. You are not running for office. You are allowed
to make mistakes when you are talking to us. We are not going
to film that and play it back later on.
So the Clinton Administration was 89 percent, the Bush
Administration was 93 percent and now, under the Obama
Administration, it is 95 percent. We have seen a marginal
increase of about 2 percent. I know in 2008, you had some ideas
that you submitted to President-elect Obama. Has a lot of it
been taken in and placed into effect?
Mr. Moulton. The recommendations we made during the
transition had some impact. As Ms. Pustay testified, there have
been a number of agencies that have been using technology more
aggressively in opening up their online forms for requesting
information. They call them portals.
The problem really is lack of consistency. Not all the
agencies are creating the same types of capacity online and
some of them aren't. We think the FOIA portal that EPA is
developing really offers a level of consistency across
government that is greatly needed.
Mr. Kelly. This portal they are opening at the DOJ, is it
going to be similar to the EPA's? It sounds to me like the EPA
has really done a good job with this portal as they come
forward. I think you were talking about more of a partnership
or a sharing. What do you see coming with that? Is it looking
like it is going to merge? Are they going to have something
very similar and as easy?
Mr. Moulton. Certainly it is hard to say what will come
about. I would say the features we know are being developed for
the EPA FOIA portal far outstrip other portals and other
efforts that we have seen from other agencies. It really is
trying to put all of the modern advances and improvements that
have been developed for FOIA in one place.
The FOIA portal that Ms. Pustay was talking about really
was a portal to allow you to request information online, but I
don't believe it has the same level of ability, it does have
tracking but then to post the information to allow electronic
communication.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. Moulton, thank you.
I am going to now yield to Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly?
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just clarify in response to the Chairman's last question,
you are referring to the DOJ portal versus the EPA portal?
Mr. Moulton. Correct. The DOJ portal is right now mostly
just request information online. The EPA portal is going to be
much more robust.
Mr. Connolly. Right. So, Mr. Chairman, I think you were on
to something there that would suggest the EPA portal really
still could be a model even for DOJ.
Mr. Moulton. Absolutely. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. In response to one of the Chairman's
questions, correct me if I am wrong, the statistic was
something like 93 percent in the Bush Administration and 95
percent in the Obama Administration?
Mr. Moulton. That is the average rate of disclosure, yes.
Mr. Connolly. But what has to be taken into account in
response to the Chairman's query is the difference in volume?
Ninety-three percent of half a million is one thing; 95 percent
of 1 million is quite something else again. Wouldn't we have to
take into account the volume difference too, not just that
percentage? It is more than a marginal increase if you take
into account volume?
Mr. Moulton. Compared to the last years of the Bush
Administration, the volume is significantly higher. The Bush
Administration did handle, in the beginning years when they
took over from the Clinton Administration, a higher volume they
dealt with for several years and requests steadily came down.
Mr. Connolly. I am just saying the percentage may be a
little misleading depending on the volume we are talking about.
That is all.
I want to ask you three questions and I want to try to get
them in 3 minutes and 29 seconds.
Uniform criteria, I think that is a good point you were
making. We have 70 something agencies or 100 different agencies
and they all have different criteria, sometimes they may have
to given the nature of the specialized mission, but we ought to
have some sort of universal criteria so we are all operating
from the same playbook.
Are we making some headway in that regard, do you think? Is
Ms. Nisbet's ombudsman role, her agency's ombudsman role,
helping us in that respect?
Mr. Moulton. I think we are making progress. We have seen a
lot of agencies invest in technology, improve their processing,
improve their proactive disclosure. It is partly comfort level,
comfort with technology, comfort with FOIA, that leads some of
the agencies to advance further and other agencies sometimes it
is also a resource question of having the resources to make
those investments and improvements.
Mr. Connolly. Again, we were talking about partial
responses. That can be, depending on one's point of view, a
good thing or a bad thing, a good thing in that at least you
are trying to be responsive but you can't be 100 percent
responsive for the exemptions or privacy, whatever it may be.
On the other hand, partial may be no, you are not being
responsive. You actually are kind of covering up and impeding
transparency. What is your take on this increase in partial
responsiveness by this Administration?
Mr. Moulton. It is difficult to decide exactly what is
going on just based on the statistics. The increased use of
partial disclosure as part of the response from government has
been growing for many years since about the year 2000, growing
steadily, more partial disclosures, fewer percentage-wise full
disclosures.
This could be a change in government information. It may be
that government information is becoming more commingled with
privacy information or national security information, so
partial redactions are a necessity. It could also be a change
in requests, that people are requesting larger amounts of
information and that some of it is something that has to be
withheld, or it could be, as you say, a bad thing. It could be
a change in the attitude and the implementation by the agency.
From the statistics, it is impossible to tell. It would
really require an audit of requests, a random audit to see what
was requested, what was responsive and what was given to figure
out exactly what is going on here and driving this.
Mr. Connolly. That is a good point. For example, maybe
there was a 1,000 percent increase in the Homeland Security
requests. Of course that is going to be a partial response if
you are lucky.
My final question quickly is do you see a pattern of more
or less arbitrary barriers, obstruction, needless delays in the
last few years or are we improving in that regard?
Mr. Moulton. You mean in processing FOIA?
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Moulton. I think again the answer is that the record is
mixed. I think some agencies have made a lot of improvements in
removing preexisting barriers. I think that is something to
also stress that some of these barriers have been embedded in
the process for years predating this Administration or the
previous Administration.
Mr. Connolly. It is a culture.
Mr. Moulton. A culture of if it can be withheld, then it is
better to play it safe than sorry. That is something that is
very hard to overcome. There is a lot of training going on, a
lot of investment at various agencies going on, and I think
some agencies have made greater strides than others. We have
seen some agencies who have kept a more business as usual
attitude towards processing FOIA requests and having the same
types of responses. Even when they can disclosure more
information, they choose not to.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
I would say whenever we talk about all this information
that is out there, people are a lot more comfortable now. They
are becoming more comfortable with technology, getting on and
doing a lot of things maybe they wouldn't have done in previous
Administrations, but also the world has changed dramatically
after 9/11.
When I think what we put out there, I don't know another
country in the world that allows more people to look at what it
is doing. I would say our model is probably the most perfect
model out there but it also does allow for an openness no place
else in the world does allow and I do think we have to be very
careful with it.
I would agree with Mr. Connolly, I think the world changing
so quickly, the amount of information that is out there, we do
have to be very careful with it. The President's opening
remarks, again I go back to, sometimes we have to be careful.
We open a Pandora's Box. We establish a standard that is may be
hard to live up to in the real world. As we go forward, I think
the public does expect, and may be more suspect, of things than
they were before. We have a lot more people asking a lot more
questions at a lot of different levels. While some people think
that is very healthy, I do think it is healthy, but again,
there is a lot of responsibility with how you handle that
material.
I really do appreciate you being here today. All the panel
members, thank you for what you are doing in service to our
country.
With that, the meeting is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 4:30 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


