- WHERE ARE ALL THE WATCHDOGS? ADDRESSING INSPECTOR GENERAL VACANCIES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WHERE ARE ALL THE WATCHDOGS? ADDRESSING INSPECTOR GENERAL VACANCIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 10, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-144

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-454 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Maryland,Ranking Minority
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania        Member
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                     Columbia
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          JIM COOPER, Tennessee
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  PETER WELCH, Vermont
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       JACKIE SPEIER, California
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 10, 2012.....................................     1

WITNESSES

The Honorable Phyllis K. Fong, Inspector General, U.S. Department
of Agriculture,
Oral Statement...........................................     6
Written Statement........................................     8
The Honorable Brian D. Miller, Inspector General, U.S. GSA
Oral Statement...........................................    15
Written Statement........................................    17
Mr. Jake Wiens, Investigator, Project on Government Oversight
Oral Statement...........................................    21
Written Statement........................................    23
The Honorable Daniel I. Werfel, Controller, Office of Federal
Financial Management, Office of Management and Budget
Oral Statement...........................................    50
Written Statement........................................    53

APPENDIX

The Honorable Elijah E. Cummings, A Member of Congress from the
State of Maryland:
Opening Statement........................................    75
Letters to President Barack Obama................................    77

WHERE ARE ALL THE WATCHDOGS? ADDRESSING INSPECTOR GENERAL VACANCIES

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 10, 2012

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:55 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Darrell E. Issa
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, Burton, Mica, Chaffetz,
Walberg, Lankford, DesJarlais, Cummings, Maloney, Norton,
Tierney, Cooper, Connolly, Quigley, Davis, Murphy, and Speier.
Staff Present: Ali Ahmad, Majority Communications Advisor;
Alexia Ardolina, Majority Assistant Clerk; Kurt Bardella,
Majority Senior Policy Advisor; Michael R. Bebeau, Majority
Assistant Clerk; Will L. Boyington, Majority Staff Assistant;
Molly Boyl, Majority Parliamentarian; Lawrence J. Brady,
Majority Staff Director; Steve Castor, Majority Chief Counsel,
Investigations; John Cuaderes, Majority Deputy Staff Director;
Jessica L. Donlon, Majority Counsel; Kate Dunbar, Majority
Legislative Assistant; Adam P. Fromm, Majority Director of
Member Services and Committee Operations; Linda Good, Majority
Chief Clerk; Frederick Hill, Majority Director of
Communications and Senior Policy Advisor; Christopher Hixon,
Majority Deputy Chief Counsel, Oversight; Mark D. Marin,
Majority Director of Oversight; Ashok M. Pinto, Majority Deputy
Chief Counsel, Investigations; Laura L. Rush, Majority Deputy
Chief Clerk; Jonathan J. Skladany, Majority Counsel; Cheyenne
Steel, Majority Press Assistant; Rebecca Watkins, Majority
Press Secretary; Jaron Bourke, Minority Director of
Administration; Kevin Corbin, Minority Deputy Clerk; Ashley
Etienne, Minority Director of Communications; Susanne Sachsman
Grooms, Minority Chief Counsel; Carla Hultberg, Minority Chief
Clerk; Lucinda Lessley, Minority Policy Director; Dave Rapallo,
Minority Staff Director; Safiya Simmons, Minority Press
Secretary; Mark Stephenson, Minority Director of Legislation;
and Ellen Zeng, Minority Counsel.
ChairmanIssa. The hearing will come to order.
Before we begin, this is an unusual hearing, and I hope
that you will all agree that this is a hearing in which we are
not talking about any particular problem that has occurred in
the recent or not recent past; we are talking about an ongoing
question of the independence, the value of inspectors general,
and where this Committee should go in strengthening the 12,000
men and women, $2 billion budget that ultimately protects the
taxpayers.
So with that, I am going to make a special request.
Recognizing that votes will interrupt this hearing and make it
probably impossible for us to get through two panels, I am
going to make a request that we be able to consolidate under
one panel. In order to do that, I am going to ask unanimous
consent here on the dais that all members agree not to get into
areas that would create an inherent conflict between a
transparency or sunlight individual, such as POGO, and the
Office of Management and Budget.
Do I hear any objections?
[No response.]
ChairmanIssa. Hearing none, could we please consolidate
this so that we can get through one panel? If anyone objects to
questioning as somehow creating a conflict, I will rule on it.
But my intention is that I believe everyone on the panel and
everyone on both sides of the dais today wants this hearing to
accomplish the same fact-finding.
So if the staff would get that done while we do the opening
statement.
The Oversight Committee exists to secure two fundamental
principles: first, Americans have a right to know the money
Washington takes from them is well spent and, second, Americans
deserve an efficient, effective government that works for them.
Our duty on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee is to
protect these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to hold
government accountable to taxpayers, because taxpayers have a
right to know what they get from their government. We will work
tirelessly in partnership with citizen watchdogs to deliver the
facts to the American people and bring genuine reform to the
Federal bureaucracy. This is our mission.
In 1978, the position of inspector general was established
to promote efficiency and ensure that a threshold of
accountability was integrated government-wide. I, myself, saw
the inspector general far before that, when in the military,
where their role, for generations, was critical. Commanders do
the best they can, but commanders need watchdogs at all levels,
independent watchdogs. The IGs are America's front line of
oversight in the Executive Branch.
In fiscal year 2009 alone, their audits and investigations
identified over $43 billion in potential savings. Having a
robust group of permanent inspectors general at the Federal
agencies is the best way to protect taxpayers from waste,
fraud, and abuse.
The Obama Administration has often proclaimed its
commitment to transparency and accountability. That is why it
is so troubling, and I remember that his predecessor had
similar situations and want to note that, but the President has
allowed vacancies at several IG offices to linger for months,
and in some cases years.
Even more disturbing is the Administration's willingness to
demonstrate a pattern, at times, of hostility towards some
members of the inspector general community. That is not to say
that that has not happened with past administrations.
One of the President's first actions on the IG front was to
remove IG Gerald Walton from his post at the Corporation for
National and Community Service. We on this side of the aisle
objected to it and continue to feel that this was
inappropriate.
However, that is not the issue for today. The issue for
today is in fact how do we find something, regardless of who is
in the White House, that satisfies, first, the American
people's right to know and right to be protected from waste;
second, strengthens the relationship between this Committee and
our counterparts in the Senate in being able to count on the
inspectors general as our conduit into the Executive Branch.
We can all have discussions about this Administration, and
we have had plenty and will have more, but I think when we look
at exposing taxpayer loss and waste, we cannot look at any one
administration. We have often, on a bipartisan basis, lauded
the success of tracking the stimulus fund spending. Doesn't
mean we agree to the stimulus bill itself, but it means that,
in fact, we saw inspector general given a new job as chairman
of that and we saw his years of experience help him help us
understand what we would do next to improve transparency in the
Federal Government.
Today, four IG posts have been vacant for more than 1,000
days. Five IG vacancies are at cabinet departments. One of our
points will in fact be to deal with such situations as USAID's
vacancy at a time in which Afghanistan and Iraq are not yet
settled questions, and the variability of that entity to
deliver its historic support, rather than direct funding to
indigenous nationals, without USAID direct oversight concerns
us and would concern us even more if we cannot have an
inspector general there.
So, in closing, I think it is extremely important not to
allow today's hearing in any way to reflect on the current
Executive Branch individuals, including President Obama and
Vice President Biden. In fact, we need to look beyond that. We
need to look to the question of do we need to change the law
for future presidents that would ensure prompt filling of
vacancies in the absence of presidential action; could CIGIE or
other entities have the right to temporarily fill those? If
there is a dismissal--and I must admit I was tardy here because
I was dealing with a potential false dismissal of an inspector
general today--the fact is if that occurs, what is our ability
to ensure that the acting inspector general in that entity or
agency is in fact independent and that that dismissal is
reviewed, or any other action reviewed in a way that prevents
any loss of the independence, no matter what the allegation is.
As we all know, it is clear that inspectors general wear
two hats. One of them is for the agency or the cabinet position
they work for. They may or may not be presidentially appointed;
they may or may not be confirmed in the same way. That may be
something that needs to be changed. But today we will primarily
be dealing with, and asking the question of, how can we get
greater independence and, for this Committee, more consistent
transparency to this Committee and to the public.
With that, I recognize the Ranking Member for his opening
statement.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Chairman, just a point of clarification.
Just one point. The OMB, as I understand it, has a policy of--
--
Chairman Issa. I recognize the OMB has chosen not to be on
this panel. We will remove the name. It may very well mean that
he will be called back for a future hearing.
Mr. Cummings. That will be fine. First of all, it is not
that they are unwilling; it just sets another precedent. And
they will testify at any time, so they are glad to come back.
Chairman Issa. Sure. It was an ask for, and I had hoped
that they would view this as the time in which it would not be
a problem. As you know, Administration selectively decides at
times that they will sit with non-Administration and
selectively decides they won't, but ultimately we will respect
their decision. We will get through the first panel. If there
is time, based on some change, but I suspect strongly there
won't be and we will have to reschedule.
Mr. Cummings. That will be fine. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. I really appreciate that.
Inspectors general are critical to ensuring that our
government works effectively and efficiently on behalf of the
American taxpayers. Although our Committee plays a prominent
and often public role in conducting government oversight, we
rely heavily on IGs to conduct audits, inspections, and
investigations on a daily basis at Federal agencies. Our
Committee also plays a unique role in overseeing IGs and
ensuring that they have the tools to do their jobs.
In 2007, one of the most respected members of our
Committee, Jim Cooper, introduced H.R. 928, the Improving
Government Accountability Act, to enhance IG independence and
efficiency. Under the then-Chairman Henry Waxman, the Committee
approved this legislation by a voice vote. The House and Senate
then adopted it and the bill was signed into law by President
Bush in 2008. In my opinion, this is how we should approach
today's hearing: by working together in a bipartisan manner to
ensure that oversight is rigorous and constructive.
Today we will discuss IG vacancies at Federal agencies.
Right now, seven IG positions are vacant that require
presidential nominations and Senate confirmations. Although the
President has nominated several candidates who are awaiting
Senate confirmation, he is yet to nominate others. In addition,
an existing vacancy at the Special Inspector General for
Afghanistan Reconstruction requires a presidential nomination,
but not a Senate confirmation.
We all agree that we should have highly qualified,
dedicated professionals in place at every IG office across the
Federal Government. Personally, I am most concerned that the
Administration has not nominated anyone to serve as State
Department IG. The last Senate confirmed State Department IG
was Howard Krongard, and he resigned after an investigation by
this Committee into his conflicts of interest and his failure
to conduct sufficient oversight of agency operations. That
position deserves to be filled as soon as possible.
To be fair, the number of current vacancies is not
necessarily unusual. In fact, in the fourth year of George W.
Bush's presidency, there were also seven vacancies for Senate
confirmed IGs, including at the State Department, Department of
Treasury, the General Services Administration, and the
Department of Health and Human Services. And this does not
include Clark Kent Ervin's recess appointment to serve as IG of
the Department of Homeland Security, which was never confirmed
by the Senate.
The fact that President Bush had as many IG vacancies in
2004 as President Obama does today does not mean we should
ignore the current vacancies. Similarly, we should not single
out the current Administration for purely partisan reasons.
As part of our review today, we also have to acknowledge
the role played by the Senate in these vacancies. For example,
President Obama nominated Michael Horowitz to be the IG of the
Department of Justice on July 29th, 2011. Until 2009, Mr.
Horowitz had served as a presidentially appointed, Senate
confirmed commissioner on the United States Sentencing
Commission; yet, even though the Senate had confirmed him
previously, his nomination was held up for eight months. When
the Senate finally did the vote, they confirmed his nomination
by a voice vote.
Similarly, Brian Miller, the current IG at GSA, who will be
testifying here today, had to wait nine months before the
Senate finally confirmed his nomination by President Bush in
2005.
The IG vetting process is very extensive and challenging.
It becomes even more difficult to identify qualified candidates
who are willing to serve when they are blocked by anonymous
holds and undue delays in the Senate.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not recognize the hard
work of those who serve in IG offices. This includes not only
the thousands of staff who dedicate their professional careers
to these tasks, but also those who serve as acting IGs while
others await Senate confirmation. In fact, just yesterday our
Committee heard testimony from the very capable acting IG at
the Department of Homeland Security.
Nobody should be under the misimpression that the lights
are turned off at IG offices while they await a permanent IG.
These officials and staff do a terrific job on behalf of the
American people and I commend them for their dedication.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
All members will have seven days to submit opening
statements for the record.
As I recognize the panel, I would ask unanimous consent
that, because we are not sure whether we will get to him, the
Honorable Daniel Werfel's opening statement be placed in the
record as though he did testify.
Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Issa. We now introduce the Honorable Phyllis K.
Fong, who is the Inspector General of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture and Chair of the Council of Inspectors General, or
CIGIE, as we will tend to call it here.
Also a returning favorite, the Honorable Brian D. Miller,
who is the Inspector General of the United States General
Services Administration. Welcome back.
And Mr. Jake Wiens is the investigator for the Project on
Government Oversight, often called POGO. Welcome back.
Pursuant to the Committee rules, I would ask you to please
rise to take the sworn oath. Raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Chairman Issa. Let the record indicate all witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Please be seated.
As I previously said, we are unfortunately, today, going to
be on a very tight constraint because of votes. I will try to
keep our folks to their five minutes. I would ask you to try to
stay to your five minutes. And I assure you we will stay as
long as we can on a vote and, if possible, return as soon as
possible.
With that, we recognize Ms. Fong for her opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF WITNESSES

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE PHYLLIS K. FONG

Ms. Fong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Cummings,
and members of the Committee. It is a real privilege to be here
today to represent the Federal IG community, which consists of
73 IGs in the Executive and Legislative Branches.
At the outset, before I get into the topic of this hearing,
I would like to express the appreciation of the IG community to
you and the members of the Committee for your continuing
support of our mission and your interest in our work. This
Committee has a noteworthy record of bipartisan support for the
contributions of IGs. In particular, we note your work on the
Data Act of 2012, which was recently passed by the House and
which contains several provisions that would greatly assist IG
operations if enacted. So, on behalf of the community, we want
to thank you for your support.
My written statement provides an overview of the IG
Council's activities, so I am going to focus my remarks this
morning on the role that we play as a Council in filling IG
vacancies.
As has been remarked, the process to fill vacancies
involves multiple players and a thorough vetting process, and
CIGIE plays a very small role at the front end of this process.
By law, we are responsible for submitting recommendations on
potential IG candidates to the appropriate appointing
authority; namely, the President for cabinet level agencies,
and the agency head for smaller designated Federal entity IGs.
To do this, we have set up an IG recommendation panel to
receive materials from interested candidates. The panel is
composed of experienced IGs who represent different kinds of IG
offices, who bring insight and experience to the process.
With respect to the PAS IGs, the panel provides
recommendations on an ongoing and continuous basis to the
Office of Presidential Personnel so that that office can
consider candidates as vacancies arise.
When a vacancy arises in a DFE IG position, the panel
contacts the appropriate agency head directly to offer its
assistance in filling that vacancy.
CIGIE actively reaches out to numerous groups to publicize
this process and to ensure that people who may be interested in
IG positions understand the role that we play in the process
and that they are able to take advantage of that role.
I should note here that while we do provide one source of
IG candidates to appointing authorities, we are not the only
source of candidates. For example, people who are interested in
IG jobs can apply directly to the appointing authorities if
they so desire. Also, our recommendations are not binding. The
appointing authorities are not required to accept or to act on
our recommendations when they make decisions on how to fill IG
vacancies.
Once we provide our recommendations, our formal role in the
appointment process is over.
We look forward today to continuing our work in this area
and we welcome your questions and comments. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Fong follows:]

Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Inspector Miller?

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE BRIAN D. MILLER

Mr. Miller. Good morning, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member
Cummings, members of the Committee. Thank you for inviting me
here to talk about the role of inspectors general. My remarks
today reflect only my personal experience.
It is a great privilege for me to have served as inspector
general since being confirmed in 2005, and I recognize the
tremendous responsibility that comes with this job.
IGs wield a large amount of discretion and authority. They
issue reports that can have a devastating impact on the agency
and individuals. IGs make criminal referrals, often resulting
in felony convictions and incarceration. IGs advise heads of
Federal agencies and the Congress. We regularly appear at
hearings such as this one and often meet with members of
Congress and their staff. Perhaps most importantly, IGs need to
navigate sometimes difficult relationships with their home
agency, as well as relationships with other IGs, agencies,
prosecutors, and the law enforcement community as a whole.
Part of the genius of our system of government is that IGs
provide the needed check and balance on the operation of
Federal agencies.
Now, the usual incentives for taking a presidential
appointment do not apply to IG positions. IGs are not
policymakers; they apply the laws and policies already on the
books. They are not political. IGs have to be nonpartisan,
fair, and impartial. Finding and nominating the right person
for the job is absolutely vital.
IGs have a dual reporting requirement to Congress and the
agency head. As one former inspector general, Sherman Funk, put
it in the Fall 1996 issue of the Journal of Public Inquiry,
dual reporting equates to ``straddling a barbed wire fence.''
Mr. Funk stated that because of the challenges facing IGs, the
job must be done with sufficient common sense, a healthy dose
of good humor, unremitting homework, support by professionally
competent staff, and, above all, a solid and reflexive
integrity. Then the barbed wire fence may cut occasionally, but
it will not disable.
Based on my own experience, I believe that once selected
and appointed, an IG needs time and experience on the job to
develop long-term audit and investigative priorities, the
ability to hire highly specialized staff, and the independence
to accomplish the mission. My permanent appointment allowed me
the needed leverage and longevity to make lasting improvements
to my office and to make long-term recommendations to GSA.
Additionally, I believe my impact has been greater because
I have been able to create longstanding relationships with
agency officials, the Department of Justice, and the Congress.
I have also worked hard to establish partnerships with State
and local IGs in law enforcement as part of my duties with the
Financial Fraud Enforcement Task Force.
Examples of some of the steps I have been able to take
include the following:
In 2008, I formed the Office of Forensic Auditing to employ
innovative auditing and investigative techniques, and to
develop evidence that meets admissibility standards for
prosecution in Federal courts.
In 2011 we began a criminal intelligence program to augment
our investigative activities by consolidating our information-
gathering efforts and serving as a force multiplier for our
special agents around the Country. We have integrated our
hotline into this program so that a trained investigative
analyst looks at very complaint and tip to identify trends and
connections to other open cases. Additionally, our partnership
with FinCEN, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, broadens
our agents' ability to spot bribery cases and kickbacks.
I appreciate the time and effort that went into confirming
me as an inspector general, and I hope that my efforts have
served the interests of the United States. Thank you for your
time, and I would be happy to answer any questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]

Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Wiens.

STATEMENT OF JAKE WIENS

Mr. Wiens. Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Cummings, thank
you for inviting me to testify today.
My name is Jake Wiens and I am an investigator at the
Project on Government Oversight, which is also known as POGO.
From POGO's perspective, the inspector general system is an
essential component of a well functioning Federal Government.
IGs identify billions of dollars in cost-savings every year;
they conduct investigations that hold government officials and
contractors accountable for misconduct; and they help to
evaluate the effectiveness of government programs and policies.
Because POGO considers IGs to be so incredibly important,
we regularly undertake efforts to strengthen and improve the IG
system as a whole. Some of those efforts have focused on giving
IGs the tools to be more independent and other efforts have
focused on the necessity of holding IGs themselves accountable
for misconduct and poor performance.
Our most recent effort to strengthen the IG system is a web
page that we created called Where Are All the Watchdogs? The
web page continually tracks the overall number and length of IG
vacancies, and whose responsibility it is to fill the
positions.
POGO created the IG vacancy tracker because we firmly
believe that the effectiveness of an IG office can be
diminished when that office does not have permanent leadership.
IG offices that are led by permanent IGs have a number of
structural advantages over IGs that are led by acting IGs. Some
of those advantages are unique to the IG context and others are
general management concepts that could apply in basically any
organization.
One structural advantage to permanent IG leadership
involves independence. Another advantage of permanent IG
leadership involves credibility. Both of those qualities can
have a huge determinant on the effectiveness or lack thereof of
a particular IG office.
As of today, 10 of the 73 statutory IG positions are
vacant. Some of the positions have been without permanent
leadership for years on end, while others only recently became
vacant. Although the overall number of IG vacancies is
important, the context surrounding particular vacancies is
necessary to truly understand the implication of that vacancy.
IG positions can become vacant for a variety of reasons, some
of which are troubling, while others are completely
appropriate; and in some occasions a vacancy may even be
beneficial. Likewise, IG vacancies can continue for extended
periods of time for a variety of reasons.
It is useful to look at some of the current vacancies to
understand how they began, why they have continued, and what
the implications of those vacancies might be.
The State Department IG has now been vacant for 1,576 days,
just over four years. The position first became vacant when
State's most recent permanent IG, Howard Krongard, resigned
amid allegations that he had been blocking criminal
investigations into contractors operating in Iraq. The
initiation of that vacancy created an opportunity to fill that
position with a highly qualified and well respected permanent
IG who could restore credibility to that IG office. But that
opportunity has not been realized, as the position has remained
vacant without a nominee since the last year of the Bush
administration.
The Corporation for National and Community Service IG
position has now been vacant for 1,064 days. The position first
became vacant in June 2009, when President Obama removed CMCS's
most recent permanent IG, Gerald Walton, under controversial
circumstances. Since Walton's termination, the Obama
Administration has nominated two candidates for the position.
The first was nominated in February 2010, but his nomination
has since been withdrawn; and the second was nominated in
November 2011 and has been awaiting Senate confirmation for 177
days. The continued vacancy, regardless of fault, comes at a
terrible time for the CMCS IG because their budget was recently
cut in half during the fiscal year 2012 appropriations.
The Special Inspector General for Afghanistan
Reconstruction position has now been vacant for 461 days. The
position became vacant after the original SIGAR, Arnold Fields,
resigned his office amid scrutiny by a bipartisan group of
Senators, as well as POGO, who had arrived at the conclusion
that he was not qualified for such an important position. But
the fact that a replacement has not been appointed by the
President, even though it has been more than a year since
Fields resigned, also shows that it can be easier to create
outside pressure for a removal than for an appointment, even
though the impact of not having a permanent SIGAR is just as
bad as having an ineffective SIGAR.
POGO strongly urges both the Obama Administration and
Congress to make filling all of these vacancies a priority. But
we also caution that filling the vacancies quickly should not
come at the expense of identifying highly qualified candidates,
a process which can take time.
Thank you very much for asking POGO for its views on these
important issues, and I would be happy to answer any questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Wiens follows:]

Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Before I recognize myself, I would ask unanimous consent
that two letters from Congressman Chaffetz, one to President
Obama dated February 9th, 2012, and one also to President Obama
dated May 17th, 2011, be placed in the record, both related to
these vacancies.
Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Wiens, one quick question, not as my own
question, but in your opening statement you said that sometimes
a vacancy can be good. I am presuming that what that really
meant was sometimes creating a vacancy would be good, but
retaining a vacancy is never desirable.
Mr. Wiens. Yes, exactly. It is the initiation of that
vacancy is what I meant----
Chairman Issa. Good.
Mr. Wiens.--that creates that opportunity.
Chairman Issa. No problem at all. Okay.
I am going to start with a question I know the answer to.
That always makes it a little easier from the dais. Mr. Miller,
are you familiar with White House liaisons that operate within,
for example, GSA?
Mr. Miller. Generally. I have met, I think, each one.
Chairman Issa. Ms. Fong, you are too?
Ms. Fong. Yes.
Chairman Issa. And, Mr. Wiens, are you familiar with how
White House liaisons are placed in all the branches of the
Executive Branch?
Mr. Wiens. I am not as familiar.
Chairman Issa. Okay, then I will stick to my two IGs for a
moment.
In your experience, isn't it true that these White House
liaisons, regardless of who is in the White House, have pretty
much unfettered access to information that they would choose to
have, and the ability then to report it directly back to
counsels in the White House?
Mr. Miller. I wouldn't know, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Well, in your particular case, the White
House liaison was aware of your investigation and the chief of
staff, actually, in this case, I believe, reported it back to
the White House counsel. So there is a separate avenue in every
administration of these legislative or White House liaisons.
Here is one of my basic questions for the two IGs. That is
all well and good, but do we currently have that same level of
transparency from IGs, or anyone else, in each of the branches?
[No response.]
Chairman Issa. We will take that as a no.
Ms. Fong. I am sorry, but I don't follow your question.
Could you----
Chairman Issa. Well, Ms. Fong, unless you report with the
same specificity and constant reporting nature that a White
House liaison does at you name the ABC, Justice, GSA, SEC,
wherever, unless we have that same level, then the White House
knows an awful lot more about things that are going right and
wrong more directly and more unfettered than we do, isn't that
true? Because you are our only eyes and ears; we don't get to
appoint a person who works for this branch to sit every day and
be able to be in the critical meetings with the cabinet officer
and other direct staff. Isn't that true?
Ms. Fong. I will just say that from our perspective we, as
you know, have a statutory responsibility to report directly to
you, as well as the head of our agencies, and we carry that
responsibility out. We believe that is a very important
responsibility.
Chairman Issa. And that is my very question.
Mr. Miller, you are a hero around here. You did a very good
job, and continue to do a very good job in your role at GSA,
and we want you to do that. But I want to make a point here
today, and that was the reason for this fairly long set of
questions. In the case of your recognition that there was a
huge problem with the Las Vegas GSA party, and other problems,
you determined that and informed the White House through the
referrals that GSA made directly to counsel, but not you doing
it, but it happened as a result of your reporting it to the
administrator, and thus to the White House liaison, the chief
of staff, and so on. But you didn't report it to us during that
10 months. The current statute would have made it a
requirement, wouldn't it?
Not the general interpretation of the statute, but doesn't
the current statute, Ms. Fong, if something is significant,
significant enough that you are pre-warning an administration
official, you are pre-warning them because you want them to
deal with it immediately, and it is in fact serious, doesn't
that trigger the same requirement under current statute that
you report to Congress?
Ms. Fong. I think you put your finger on exactly what the
issue is. The language in the statute says keep the head of the
agency and Congress fully and currently informed of significant
issues. As you noted, the practice is to work with the agencies
on urgent issues immediately so that they can be addressed very
quickly, and then to work with Congress as quickly as can be
reasonably handled; and it does involve some discretion and
some judgment.
Chairman Issa. So if this Committee were to send a letter
to CIGIE, but to all the IGs, in light of the historic
interpretation--and I want to be very fair, there is a historic
interpretation and then there is an interpretation that perhaps
I am going to give you today from the dais. It would be my new
interpretation that anything that you choose or believe you
have to tell the head, formally or informally, because you
believe it is significant, triggers that requirement that you
also tell us in due course.
Don't have a problem with caveats for things which have
unique sensitivity, law enforcement sensitivity, but the basic
we have a problem reporting, would it help if perhaps the
Ranking Member and I made it clear that we believe that should
trigger the information on some basis to us?
Ms. Fong. Or do you need new legislative language, which is
always our backup?
Ms. Fong. We always welcome legislation.
Chairman Issa. No you don't. All of us would prefer to work
refining things without vast new laws, because we always piggy-
back a lot on once we get to a new law.
My time has run out, but could you comment on that?
Ms. Fong. Sure. I appreciate your comments. I am aware that
there have been legislative proposals on this area, and you are
aware of some of the concerns that the IG community has
historically had. I think we should definitely have continuing
dialogue with you on this to flesh out areas where you have a
concern where perhaps you don't believe we have been as
forthcoming as you believe we should be, and I think we should
continue that dialogue with you, your staff, the Ranking
Member.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
I believe we have enough time for the Ranking Member's
questions, and then we are going to go do the votes and then
come back. So the gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Fong, the Council of Inspectors General on Integrity
and Efficiency issues annual reports on significant activities
and accomplishments of the Federal IGs. Each year your report
includes data on government-wide potential savings and total
savings to the government from all IG audit recommendations.
Can you explain the difference between potential and total
savings? I think we have a chart here somewhere.
Somebody put the chart up. There we go.
Can you explain the difference between potential and total
savings?
Ms. Fong. Let me just take a step back.
Mr. Cummings. Okay.
Ms. Fong. My understanding of the data--and this is based
on the data that each IG office compiles in response to the IG
Act requirements. And the data categories talk about potential
savings because it is very difficult to measure actual savings.
So my understanding of the data that we are providing is that
we give a number for potential savings from audits and another
number for potential savings from investigations. We add that
up and have a total number of potential savings overall.
Mr. Cummings. Okay.
Ms. Fong. It is very difficult to track actuals because of
the nature of the criminal justice system, for example.
Mr. Cummings. But you do this report, right? It comes out
of your office, right?
Ms. Fong. Yes. The Council does the report.
Mr. Cummings. So your annual reports for the last five
fiscal years, 2006 through 2010, show a promising trend, is
that fair to say?
Ms. Fong. I think you are right. I have looked at the
results for the last three years; not the last five because I
couldn't do that. But the last three do look as if we are on a
very upward trend. I will note that a large portion of the
recoveries in the last few years have been due to Postal
Service IG and some of the specific work they are doing on
pensions and EBT.
Mr. Cummings. So let me show you the stats, okay? The graph
up here shows that the potential savings for all IG
recommendations and the actual savings to the government have
steadily increased dramatically over the years, and I
understand it is hard to get the actual number, so I guess
these are pretty close estimates.
But no matter how you look at it, in fiscal year 2006, the
potential savings were only $9.9 billion and the total savings
were $16.7 billion. By fiscal year 2008, the potential savings
were $14.2 billion and the total savings went up to $18.6
billion. By fiscal year 2010, potential savings shot up to
$80.2 billion and the total savings went up to $87.2 billion.
Does this appear to be accurate to you?
Ms. Fong. I appreciate your asking me that question. This
is the first that we have seen the chart, and I would be very
happy to take the chart and analyze it in light of the data we
have and provide you some comments on it for the record.
Mr. Cummings. I guess I think that one of the things that
we find is that in government today there is a lot of talk
about Federal employees and what they don't do and what they
don't accomplish, and agencies that don't accomplish certain
things; and this Committee being concerned about savings, it
seems like this would be something that would be at the top of
your list as far as what you are effective at, because that is
something that we are all interested in.
But you are not that familiar with these charts, is that
what you are saying to me?
Ms. Fong. Yes. I think generally the numbers appear to me
to be accurate, but I would like to just take a closer look and
get some comments back to you.
Mr. Cummings. But based upon what you do see, there is a
positive trend going forward.
Ms. Fong. Yes, there is a positive trend.
Mr. Cummings. And can you generally comment on why that
might be? Without even knowing all the numbers. I mean, is
there something happening that we don't know about?
Ms. Fong. Well, I would like to say that as the IG
community matures and gets more experienced, that we are
getting better at identifying the issues that really require
oversight and that that is showing some payoff in terms of
dollar recoveries as well as recommendations to improve
programs. I would like to say that.
Mr. Cummings. Well, just say it.
Ms. Fong. I will say that.
Mr. Cummings. All right, you have said it. To me, it looks
like both potential savings and total savings have increased
dramatically under this Administration. What does this say
overall about the community of inspectors general under the
Administration? Can you comment generally on the effectiveness
on the community of inspectors general and some of whom are
acting? In other words, we have concerns about vacancies and
whatever, but obviously the actings and the people in permanent
positions, apparently they are doing something significant
because that is a big jump from a few years ago until now.
Ms. Fong. Well, just to comment on the jump, again, I just
want to reiterate that a large portion of that is due to the
Postal Service IG's accomplishments. I want to give them
appropriate credit.
But to get to your larger point about the acting IGs and
their organizations, I have spoken to many of them recently.
All of them have told me, the ones I have spoken with, that
they are going after their mission full speed ahead, that they
are very proud of the accomplishments of their offices, that
they feel they have issued some very hard-hitting reports with
real dollar recoveries, and they feel that their offices
continue to operate at a high professional level.
Mr. Cummings. Well, as I close, I would agree with that and
want to publicly thank them for what they do. I think it would
be almost impossible for us on this panel and this Committee to
effectively and efficiently do our jobs without you, without
the IGs.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. And on that agreement we will stand in
recess until just a few minutes after the second of two votes,
which means about 15 minutes. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Chairman Issa. This meeting will come to order.
We now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis,
for five minutes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wiens, thank you for being here today. Let me say that
I am very thankful for the service that your organization
provides. I would remind us that it is important to have
permanent inspectors general. I want to point out, however,
that the lack of a permanent IG does not mean that those
offices simply shut down. One indicator of effectiveness is the
amount of recovered funds, or the number of suspensions or
debarments, or other quantitative metrics, all of which IGs
report to Congress on a semiannual or quarterly basis.
Do you have any statistics that compare the output of
permanent IGs to acting IGs?
Ms. Fong. Let me go ahead and comment on that question.
When we compile our statistics, we compile them for the whole
community of IGs. Now, I believe that we could break it out, on
a fiscal year basis, the statistics for organizations headed by
permanent IGs versus organizations headed by acting IGs, but we
do not currently have those statistics.
Mr. Davis. All right. Well, but I am sure you would agree
that acting IGs often perform very valuable services in
conducting audits, inspections, and investigations. Would that
be correct?
Ms. Fong. Yes, I would very much agree with that.
Mr. Davis. For example, the acting IG at the Department of
Interior conducted the investigation into the Deepwater Horizon
spill, is that correct?
Ms. Fong. I believe that is correct.
Mr. Davis. I asked my staff to pull together some stats on
this, and I think there is a slide that we could look at that
might show what I am talking about. For example, the Department
of Homeland Security currently has an acting IG named Charles
Edwards. In fact, he testified before us yesterday. Before he
assumed his post, recovered funds were $3.7 million in fines;
savings and administrative cost savings were $6.5 million.
After he assumed his post these amounts increased to $19.9
million and $20.5 million, respectively.
My point is not that he is doing something substantially
different than his predecessor, although that may be true; my
point is that the IG offices are made up of thousands and
thousands of dedicated workers who devote their professional
careers to this. Would you agree that there are these
individuals who are indeed professionals?
Ms. Fong. Yes. The offices of inspector general have many
very dedicated and very professional and experienced people.
Mr. Davis. And if we would take a look at SIGAR in the
quarter before Acting Special IG Trent took over, SIGAR
proposed only four suspensions or debarments. Most recently,
Acting IG Trent's office proposed 40 suspensions or debarments.
Similarly, at the State Department, before Acting IG Geisel was
in charge, the IG's office recovered $715,000 in funds and
opened 14 investigations. Under the acting IG's leadership,
recovered funds increased to $10.7 million and the number of
investigations opened has increased to 49.
I guess what I am really just simply pointing out is the
fact that these individuals do in fact provide very effective
services and that we are in good stead, oftentimes, when they
are placed in those offices, although they have not been
permanently placed. And I guess it does help, though, to try
and speed up the permanent placement so that the individuals
have the security, themselves, of knowing what they are going
to be doing, what they are going to be expected to do. And my
point is simply that we should try, in as many instances as
possible, to make these permanent placements so that the
individuals are not just acting or have a level of uncertainty
about what their tenure is going to be in a particular office
or location.
So I thank you all.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Davis. Yes.
Chairman Issa. Just a question. And I am not trying to put
words in your mouth; I am trying to understand. So one of your
statements is that, to the greatest extent possible, if we
can't find someone else to put up, in many cases we probably
should urge the putting up of the acting IG who has been doing
a good job and see if that isn't a consensus candidate for the
Senate as one of the solutions?
Mr. Davis. Well, that is certainly a position that I take.
I mean, I have always been told that the proof of the pie is in
the eating. And if a person is doing a good job, there is
nothing to suggest that he or she would not continue to do so;
and I would certainly hope that the Senate would take that into
consideration when there is a need for a permanent placement.
Chairman Issa. Once again, when we talk about the
shortcoming of the Senate, we are always in agreement here in
the House.
Mr. Davis. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Now we recognize the gentleman from Indiana, the former
chairman of the full Committee, somebody who knows a great deal
about inspectors general, Mr. Burton.
Mr. Burton. Wait a minute. I was the chairman emeritus; now
it is the former chairman. Can you tell me the difference?
Never mind.
Chairman Issa. You know, if you have to know, then you have
been too long not the chairman.
Mr. Burton. Oh, I see, I am over the hill, part of the
OTHG, over the hill gang? Never mind.
Chairman Issa. Now, look. We look at your picture there.
Okay, you look great. You look dapper. You still look great;
you still look dapper. A rose by any other name, Dan. The
gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Burton. Are you guys enjoying all this?
Allow me to just start off, Mr. Chairman, by saying that we
have over a trillion dollars in deficits this year, and the
potential for over $1 trillion in deficits every year for the
next decade makes one wonder why there wouldn't be more concern
about oversight. I mean, the State Department is so involved
and so responsible for what is going on over in the Middle
East. I am not saying that the acting IG is not doing an
adequate job, but it just seems to me that one of the most
important things that the President would want to do,
especially in economic times like this, is get somebody in
there that is responsible for looking after the expenses in a
very thorough way. I mean, Afghanistan and Iraq have been just
such a drain on our resources over the past decade, it just
boggles my mind to think that the Administration hasn't moved
on getting a permanent IG. And also, you know, you wonder how
many things may have fallen through the cracks.
I know Mr. Miller out there has worked on the problems that
we talked about out in Las Vegas, those conferences and other
things, and that sort of fell through the cracks. They didn't
catch that until a lot of those things had been done, and there
is some question about the gentleman who was in charge of that
whole operation out there, whole area, might even have done
something that was of a criminal nature and that he might even
be tried before it is all over. It would seem to me that we
would want to catch those things in advance, instead of
catching them way after the fact. Or if not in advance, as
close to the problem as possible.
So I am not sure--you probably have already answered this
question, but let me just ask you a question that you might not
be able to answer, and that is can you give me an answer as to
why the President hasn't made a decision on this? That is
number one. Number two, are there not plenty of competent
people who have worked in this area of government that the
President could have nominated that would have been able to
take over and do the job?
Ms. Fong?
Ms. Fong. Well, as you know, the process to fill an IG
position is a complicated process; it involves a number of
players, it involves extensive vetting. It is an important
process. We----
Mr. Burton. Excuse me, Ms. Fong. Let me just interrupt real
quickly. The President has had three years to make a
recommendation, over three years, almost four, and it just
seems to me, after three and a half years, it would seem that
he could have at least recommended somebody so the vetting
process could start. But to wait for three and a half years,
and to know the costs that were involved, and an awful lot of
people have said there has been a lot of waste, fraud, and
abuse in Iraq and Afghanistan. It just seems they would have
had somebody all over that, instead of asking for money and
spending the money without proper oversight.
Go ahead.
Ms. Fong. Well, I think we can all agree that while acting
IGs do a very, very good job, these positions should be filled
as speedily as possible. I think that absolutely goes without
saying.
Mr. Burton. Well, if I were talking to the President--I
always frame my comments on the floor like this because we
can't talk to the President. But if I were talking to the
President, I would say you ought to listen to Ms. Fong, because
this should be done and should be done very quickly.
Mr. Miller, anybody else have any comments?
[No response.]
Mr. Burton. Well, listen, I am awfully glad you folks got
to see me; it has been a big thrill for you, I know.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Burton. I would be happy to yield to my colleague.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Following up on the acting, particularly for the IGs, but
also for Mr. Wiens, do you believe that legislatively we could
enhance vacancies that occur under both Republicans and
Democrats, enhance the ability to have some legitimacy and some
clout of the IGs by establishing procedures, perhaps under
CIGIE, where, for example, we have a pool of IGs and the
ability to move them without triggering a confirmation
automatically for a year, if you will, in the inaction of a
president within X amount of time for Congress to have a role
in choosing, the way we do for GAO, candidates?
There are a number of ideas that have been floated around.
Ms. Fong, I know you know many of them. The idea that you can
have no IG and then, for whatever reason, the deputy leaving,
and so you end up with, in the case of some agencies, they
simply grab some career person who doesn't even have a history
in the IG, and they throw them in as acting, and that is where
you sit until there is action.
Do you believe that Congress should at least evaluate
whether or not to have a role in preventing vacancies? For
anyone on the panel.
Mr. Wiens. My own perspective is that the process seems to
work pretty well most of the time. The overall number of
vacancies is one metric, but if you look at the particular
cases and look at how long they take, I think they take too
long. But the process should take time because you are vetting
candidates. I think in cases like the State Department,
hearings like this are incredibly important because it puts
pressure on those officials. But I do think examples like the
State Department are the exception rather than the rule, so I
am not sure that that would be quite necessary to do.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Miller?
Mr. Miller. Mr. Chairman, you may want to study any
constitutional impediments. Article II, Section 2, Clause 2,
the appointments clause, vests the authority to make
appointments of principal officers in the President. So it
would be worth having your counsel study that issue.
Chairman Issa. Sure. And I wasn't talking about a principal
officer. I am talking about the selection of an independent
acting, and I gave the example of an agency that today is not
headed by a confirmed individual, not headed by the previous
deputy, but in fact headed by a person who was never in the IG
position, simply a senior person at that agency, without
confirmation even of the commission. So, if you will, some role
in those situations to create an acting.
Ultimately, there is the whole question of what statutory
authority and constitutional authority you would have, and I
think that is a very good one. At the end of the day, if you
have somebody who has been selected by a chair of an agency or
commission who is not confirmed, not voted by that, but simply
thrown in there as the acting, you are so far removed from any
constitutional legitimacy that you would have to ask the
question of does Congress or should Congress, or even through a
process, an administrative process, be able to see that
somebody is selected that is not simply a yes person for that
entity.
Ms. Fong. Let me offer a few comments on that. I think this
situation does occur, it has occurred over the past few years.
The statute, the Reform Act doesn't specifically address what
do you do when you have a vacancy, who becomes acting. So
generally, within the community, I think many of us recognize
that one of the best practices for an IG office is to establish
a very clear line of succession protocol that is public so that
when an IG is incapacitated or gone, it is very clear that the
authority flows within the OIG to carry out that OIG's mission.
And in the best case scenarios that is what happens when there
is a vacancy.
Now, sometimes, in offices that don't have such a protocol
or in offices where the agency head may decide that they want
to get involved, we have seen different ways that those
situations are handled. I can think of a situation where an
agency head, meaning either a board or commission, has
appointed an acting IG from outside the OIG's office while they
recruited for a permanent IG; and in those cases we were very
fortunate. I think we established, CIGIE established a good
dialogue with the acting IG to educate and inform on the IG
role and how to carry out the mission, because there are some
inherent questions about potential conflicts of interest
dealing with audit independence and investigative independence,
and those issues need to really be thought through very
carefully; recusals may need to be thought about.
There have been other situations in the past where, when
there is a vacancy that arises, the appointing authority, be it
the agency head or the White House or whoever it is, on
occasion has reached out and asked for a detailee from another
IG office to come in and serve as the acting IG while a
permanent IG is being recruited; and again I think that is an
option that could be explored, depending on the situation. It
is something that we would be happy to dialogue on.
Chairman Issa. We appreciate that.
We now recognize the gentlelady from New York, somebody who
very well knows these issues, Mrs. Maloney.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you very much, and I want to certainly
welcome everyone on the panel, but particularly Mr. Miller, and
congratulate you for your truly outstanding, creative,
determined results-oriented work. You have really made all of
us proud of you on both sides of the aisle. Also, Mr. Miller,
you recently testified, I believe, before this Committee on the
GSA's 2010 outrageous conference in Las Vegas. Is that right?
Mr. Miller. That is correct.
Mrs. Maloney. And during the previous administration you
also conducted vigorous investigations related to the former
GSA Administrator, Lurita Doan. That is also correct, right?
Mr. Miller. That is correct.
Mrs. Maloney. So your work in rooting out waste, fraud, and
abuse seems to be just as vigorous, regardless whether there is
a Republican or a Democrat sitting in the White House. Is that
right?
Mr. Miller. That is correct.
Mrs. Maloney. Let me ask you this. Do you believe that you
would not have been able the results that you achieved if you
were an acting IG?
Mr. Miller. I don't believe that. I believe I--I would hope
I would do exactly the same things.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay, let me ask it in a different way to
make my point. You are a member of a community of exceptional
IGs, some of whom are in acting positions now, some of whom are
permanent. You meet with them, you consult with them, you work
and participate in many endeavors together, is that right?
Mr. Miller. That is correct.
Mrs. Maloney. Now, do you treat your colleagues any
differently if they are a permanent or an acting IG?
Mr. Miller. No, I do not.
Mrs. Maloney. Do you give more weight to the opinions of a
permanent IG, as opposed to an acting IG?
Mr. Miller. No.
Mrs. Maloney. Do you not decide to cooperate with an acting
IG on whatever their goal is any differently than a permanent?
Do you treat them the same?
Mr. Miller. I treat them the same.
Mrs. Maloney. During a hearing before this Committee in
2009, the IG of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation,
Rebecca Batts, gave very good testimony and she testified that
the absence of a permanent IG is mitigated by, and I want to
quote her statement because I think you're important,
``permanent senior executive audit and investigative staff who
remain in place throughout the transition from one inspector
general to the next.''
So she sees the independence and the continuity of the
professional staff as a really important aspect of the IG's
office. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Miller. I would agree.
Mrs. Maloney. And would you really basically agree with her
statement that the staff can make a difference and is a very
important part of getting the work done?
Mr. Miller. Finding well qualified staff is extremely
important.
Mrs. Maloney. Ms. Fong, would you also agree with Ms.
Batts' statement?
Ms. Fong. I believe that she has a very good point there,
and I would add that our acting IGs, by definition, are part of
that very qualified and experienced career staff with
professional expertise.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, in closing, I think we all can agree
that a permanent, Senate confirmed IG is preferable. But we
should not accept the idea that an acting IG and their staff
are not capable of performing excellent, vigorous oversight and
achieving results that are just as meaningful as permanent IGs.
Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
I thank the gentlelady.
Just in the nick of time returns the gentlelady from
California, my colleague, Ms. Speier, for five minutes.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I find this discussion kind of interesting and, with all
due respect, a little long-headed. The truth of the matter is
that all of us are temporary as members of Congress. We have
two-year terms. To follow this line of logic, then, none of us
can really be all that effective because we have temporary
appointments.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Speier. Of course.
Chairman Issa. But we cannot be dismissed, except for
felonious behavior, during that two-year period. We serve at
the pleasure of no one except the next election. So Mr. Miller,
for example, served under the Bush Administration, confirmed,
and then was in limbo, to use a Catholic term, until, I am
sorry, he was appointed both times, but he found himself going
from appointment to acting, and waited.
So my point to you, and I will give you back the time----
Ms. Speier. Good.
Chairman Issa.--is part of the discussion today is if you
serve, if you will, at the whims of the cabinet officer and
dismissal offends no one in the Senate because they didn't
confirm you, versus you have been put up, vetted, confirmed by
the Senate, and now a dismissal by the cabinet officer,
regardless of party, reflects directly on those people who
confirmed who typically the Senators want to know why. There
can be a huge difference in the dismissal perception between an
acting and a permanent, but I think the gentlelady's point is
right, which is that although IGs sort of have four-year terms
for good behavior, at most we only have two-year terms for good
behavior.
I will reset the clock.
Ms. Speier. All right. Thank you.
So I guess my bigger concern is that this discussion should
probably be directed at the Senate more so than at the
President, because it is the Senate that oftentimes takes a
long time to confirm individuals. And as I understand it, with
you, Mr. Miller, you waited 270 days before you were confirmed
by the Senate. But I don't believe that in any way damaged your
ability to do your job, did it?
Mr. Miller. I waited about nine months after I was first
nominated in October of 2004, and then I was re-nominated in
January 2005. I remained as a prosecutor and assistant United
States attorney during that time, until I was confirmed and
sworn in as inspector general.
Ms. Speier. So you were not acting during that time?
Mr. Miller. I was not acting, no.
Ms. Speier. I see. Okay.
Let me address Acting IG Mary Kendall, who is presently at
the Department of Interior. She has been there since 2009 in an
acting role and has suspended or debarred 78 firms or
individuals. She is also responsible for the investigation in
the Department's Mineral Management Service. So I don't think
we would at any point suggest that she hasn't done a good job,
in fact, a very effective job as an acting IG, correct?
Mr. Miller. I know Mary. I think the world of Mary and I
think she has done a great job.
Ms. Speier. Okay. Now, what I would like to concentrate on,
and I can't begin to tell you how important I think you are and
the roles that you play. I want to focus on what we should be
doing to make sure the recommendations you make are actually
implemented, because for the talk of billions of dollars of
potential savings that you are able to ferret out in any
investigation, unless the Department volitionally takes action,
there is no hammer. How do we give you more teeth is one
question? Two, to what extent do your recommendations typically
get embraced?
And all of you can answer that. Maybe Ms. Fong would like
to start, having been in your position for 10 years now, I
guess, is that right?
Ms. Fong. Let me offer a few comments on that. You are
right that the IG role is to make recommendations and it is the
agency's role to implement changes, to accept the
recommendations and move forward if they choose to do so. And I
recognize that this Committee has taken a real interest in IG
recommendations and agency actions. I think every year you ask
all of us to report to you on the status of our
recommendations, which ones have been accepted, implemented,
and which ones remain open; and I think, actually, in terms of
what can be done to move that process along, that is a
tremendous step. By the fact that you ask us to report on it,
we work within our agencies, we bring that issue up to the
front. The agency head becomes aware of your interest and we
see action happening as a result of that because the agencies
want to move along on those open recommendations, they want a
good report. I think that is very important.
Ms. Speier. What additional powers should we give you?
Ms. Fong. In general?
Ms. Speier. In general.
Ms. Fong. Well, I think you all have taken a huge step
forward with the Data Act that you just passed in the House of
Representatives. That includes a number of provisions that
would really help IGs in terms of computer matching, data
gathering under the Paperwork Reduction Act, and reforming some
of the IG Acts. We are hoping that those provisions that relate
to IG operations will get passed in the Senate as well. Those
are things that we have wanted as a community for a number of
years, so we are very heartened to see progress being made on
that.
Ms. Speier. Mr. Miller?
Mr. Miller. Well, when I was chair of the Legislation
Committee for the National Procurement Fraud Task Force, we put
together a white paper with a lot of recommendations regarding
additional tools for inspectors general, and I have previously
testified to other recommendations. I would be happy to share
those with you after the hearing.
Ms. Speier. All right.
And the gentleman from POGO?
Mr. Wiens. So we have done a number of reports on the
inspector general system, and in those reports we do have a
detailed list of recommendations that we would like to see
implemented. I don't have them in front of me, but I would be
happy to share with you later.
Ms. Speier. All right, my time is about to expire.
Mr. Chairman, I actually think that if we spend the kind of
money we do creating offices of inspectors general, that when
they make recommendations they should be required to be
implemented by the departments. When I think of the National
Transportation Safety Board and the good work they do, the
really remarkable work they do, and yet all they can do is make
recommendations, which can or cannot be actually taken up by
the industries that they are investigating. So I don't know
what we can do as a Committee, but I think it is a waste of
taxpayer funds if all of these recommendations that are being
made and the potential savings that are suggested in the $87
billion range, if we can't force these departments to take the
actions that the inspectors general suggest.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentlelady.
Without objection, Mr. Miller's and Mr. Wiens' additional
papers you referred to will be placed in the record as soon as
received. Additionally, we will take the collated
recommendations we have been collecting for the last four years
from inspectors general, make them directly available to you
and include them in the record, because it has been the policy
under both Chairman Towns and myself to collect those, catalog
them, because ultimately, even if they don't have the
authority, we do have the authority to see that the
Administration adheres to them, so I would love to work with
the gentlelady on that.
With that, in closing, we will go to the chairman emeritus
for a quick remark.
Mr. Burton. I just want to make it very clear that we have
outstanding people working in the IGs offices, and I wasn't
inferring that there wasn't any complaint with that. What I was
saying, and I think the gentlelady alluded to it, was that the
President has a responsibility when he becomes President to
make the appointments that need to be made, especially when
they have to be confirmed by the Senate. To leave a position as
important as the IG for the State Department open for three and
a half years is not a sign that that is a responsible move by
the Administration. The President, you can excuse him for six
months, you can excuse him for a year, or even maybe 18 months
under certain circumstances. But three and a half years, almost
to the end of his first term, assuming he has a second term, is
just too long. So I would just say one more time that whatever
president, whatever party, needs to be very attentive to making
the selections for the various appointments as quickly as
possible after his administration takes office.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We will now dismiss our first panel and reset for our
second panel. Thank you.
[Pause.]
Mr. Burton. [Presiding.] We will now start with the
Honorable Mr. Werfel. Thank you very much for being with us
today. You are Controller of the Office of the Federal
Financial Management for OMB, and you are recognized for an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DANIEL I. WERFEL, CONTROLLER, OFFICE
OF FEDERAL FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND
BUDGET

Mr. Werfel. Thank you, Congressman Burton.
Mr. Burton. Oh, excuse me, one thing. We have to have you
rise so we can swear you in.
Do you swear to tell the whole truth and nothing but the
truth, so help you God?
[Witness responds in the affirmative.]
Mr. Werfel. Again, thank you, Congressman Burton, Chairman
Issa, Ranking Member Cummings, and members of the Committee,
for the invitation to discuss the status of Federal inspector
general leadership with you today.
The IG community plays an integral role in enhancing
financial stewardship and accountability across the Federal
Government. Through audits, investigations, evaluations, and
inspections, the IG community provides critical analysis and
oversight that strengthens program integrity, helps to
eliminate waste, and holds our Federal projects and programs
accountable to the public.
In this era of fiscal constraints, the role of the IG is
more important than ever in helping agency leadership identify
and address management challenges and maximize the impact of
our limited Federal resources.
By way of background, the central role of the IG dates back
to the passage of the Inspector General Act of 1978, over 34
years ago. The IG Act established the offices of inspector
general within Federal agencies to conduct and supervise audits
and investigations in agency programs, and to provide
leadership and coordination for activities designed to promote
economy, efficiency, and effectiveness, and prevent and detect
fraud and abuse.
More recently, the IG Reform Act of 2008 established the
CIGIE, which is charged with, among other things, identifying,
reviewing, and discussing areas of weakness and vulnerability
in Federal programs and operations with respect to fraud,
waste, and abuse, and developing plans for coordinated
government-wide activities that address these areas.
Under the Reform Act, the OMB Deputy Director for
Management serves as the executive chairperson of the CIGIE,
focused on facilitating the exchange of information between
CIGIE and the agencies represented on it. However, this role is
properly limited, given the importance of preserving the
independence of the IGs and the CIGIE. That independence is one
of the most central and crucial qualities of the IGs, allowing
them to report objectively and directly to their agency heads
on potential areas of concern or deficiency; and critical to
this independence is the expertise and dedication of the civil
servants that support the IGs, armed with extensive and diverse
expertise in areas such as accounting, auditing, law,
management analysis, program analysis, public administration,
and investigations.
This Administration remains committed to supporting the
work of the IG community, while respecting its independence.
Beyond supporting the IGs, their indispensable work in
safeguarding and overseeing taxpayer funds is consistent with
the core commitment of this Administration to make the Federal
Government more transparent and accountable to the American
people than ever before.
As dedicated stewards of the taxpayer dollars, the
Government has a responsibility to provide information to the
public on how Federal funds are being spent and to work
tirelessly to root out and prevent waste, fraud, and abuse in
Federal programs. Working with the IG community over the past
three years, we have made tremendous strides towards these
goals and work together to create a more efficient, effective,
and accountable government across a number of areas.
In the area of technology, the IG community has examined
multiple facets of government-wide IT operations, complementing
the Administration's efforts to close over 1,000 data centers
by the end of 2015 and in establishing the TechStat program,
which has resulted in approximately $4 billion worth of savings
and cost reductions in IT investments.
In the area of audit and financial management, this year,
for the first time since the passage of the Chief Financial
Officer's Act over 20 years ago, 23 of the 24 applicable
agencies obtained an opinion from independent auditors on their
financial statements, and all but two of those opinions were
clean.
In contracting, the IGs have put a spotlight on suspensions
and debarments where appropriate. Agencies have done the same.
Armed with this new tool, the Federal Awardee Performance and
Integrity Information System, or FAPIIS, to provide broadened
access to information about the integrity of contractors,
agencies are making better use of suspension and debarment
authorities to ensure that contractors are playing by the rules
and have the requisite integrity and business ethics to do
business with the Government.
As a final example, there is the area of improper payments,
a leading priority in the Administration's campaign to cut
waste. Over the past two years, the Federal Government has
avoided $20 billion in payment errors by driving the improper
payment rate down in Medicare, Medicaid, Pell Grants, SNAP, and
other critical assistance programs. To complement our efforts,
in March of this year, the IGs completed the first ever review
of agencies' efforts to reduce improper payments and provided
critical recommendations that will help continued progress in
this area.
Overall, IGs have made significant contributions in
overseeing and improving the Federal Government's performance
and accountability over the past 34 years, and I am confident
they will continue to do so. In these challenging fiscal times,
the Administration recognizes the importance of maintaining a
strong, independent role for IGs, and we look forward to
continuing to work with the IG community to promote financial
stewardship and accountability across the Federal Government.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Werfel follows:]

Mr. Burton. Thank you very much, Mr. Werfel.
As I understand it, you and Mr. Zients are responsible to
coordinate between various controllers, investigators in the
government, is that correct?
Mr. Werfel. We have somewhat of a limited role on the
Council of IGs. We play more of an administrative role under
the IG Reform Act. The sweet spot for the role of OMB, myself,
and Acting Director Zients is to work with the inspector
general community to understand what they are seeing, what
trends they are seeing, what findings they are leading to to
help inform OMB on the right policies to issue across
government to help deal with those issues. That is the primary
focus of our work with the IGs, is to learn from one another
about how we can strategize as OMB to coordinate cross-
government activities. And the IGs can learn from us in terms
of what we are seeing so that they can focus their
investigations appropriately.
Mr. Burton. Let me ask you a question. Mr. Zients is the
acting head of OMB, right?
Mr. Werfel. That is correct.
Mr. Burton. Why hasn't the Administration sent his name up
for confirmation? Or have they?
Mr. Werfel. At this time I do not believe that his name has
been submitted for nomination. I am unaware of the
circumstances surrounding that issue.
Mr. Burton. Do know how long it has been since his name has
been submitted?
Mr. Werfel. Again, I do not believe his name has been
submitted. I do know that I believe that he became the acting
director in January of 2012.
Mr. Burton. And the State Department has an acting
inspector general.
Mr. Werfel. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Burton. The thing I can't understand is the President
makes a recommendation to the Senate and the Senate reviews
that, the proper committees, and then they either confirm them,
the full Senate, or they reject them. The Senate does not have
the opportunity to rule on that or to make a judgment unless it
is submitted to them. I just don't understand why, at this
point, we still have these people that are in acting positions
after three and a half years. I am not sure you can answer that
question, because you are in a coordinating capacity, as I
understand it, but it just seems to me that the responsibility
that is required by the Constitution in the confirmation
process is circumvented when the President has an acting
director of any of these agencies for a long period of time.
Do you have any idea, and I don't know if you do or not, do
you have any idea how many acting directors we have of various
agencies right now, besides these two?
Mr. Werfel. In terms of inspectors general?
Mr. Burton. Inspectors general or OMB or anything else.
Mr. Werfel. Well, in preparing for this hearing, I was able
to review the data and the information. I think as was reported
on the first panel, there are, across the entire IG community,
which is made up of 73 total Federal statutory IGs, there are
currently 10 vacancies, and I believe there is an acting IG in
each of those agencies.
Mr. Burton. Oh, I am sure. And I am sure that the acting
IGs are doing a good job. It is just that the--you know, Harry
Truman had a sign on his desk; it said the buck stops here. And
if somebody is a temporary or non-confirmed person, it seems to
me that the buck doesn't get to the top guy. Once the President
sends somebody up for confirmation and is confirmed, then the
responsibility for that appointment rests with the President.
So, as I said before, I would urge the President, or any
president, to move as quickly as possible on moving toward the
confirmation process and making the appointment as quickly as
possible.
I am not sure I have any other questions for you right now
other than what I have already asked, and that is why the
Administration has taken so long, particularly on the IG that
deals with the State Department. I mean, the amount of money--
the President is asking for $8.2 billion in extraordinary and
temporary funding in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, and this
comes on top of $43.4 billion proposed for the core budget for
the State Department USAID, which manages foreign aid. So all
this money is being requested and we are going to have to act
to make sure that those funds are there for those purposes. But
I know, for one, and I think the Chairman feels the same way,
we would like to have a permanent IG and other appointees as
quickly as possible, and not wait three and a half years.
And I am not saying this just because of President Obama. I
am saying this for any president. And there have been other
presidents that have delayed and delayed, and they shouldn't do
that.
Does the gentlelady have any questions?
Ms. Speier. I do, Mr. Chairman.
I guess, Mr. Werfel, I am kind of confused. The Office of
Management and Budget, what role do they have in terms of
appointing inspectors general?
Mr. Werfel. Congresswoman, we do not have a role in that
process. There is a process that was described in the first
panel in which the CIGIE, or the Council of Inspectors General,
has a committee that submits names for consideration to the
appointing official, which in this case is the President. OMB
does not participate on that committee. And then, once those
names are submitted, they are submitted into a personnel
process within the White House, again, a process that OMB does
not participate in. We, as I have mentioned, play a substantive
role in helping both coordinate inspector general activities
and working together in terms of analyzing both patterns and
trends across government and how to work collectively to root
out fraud, error, and waste, but in the specific narrow point
of the hiring and the appointments process, for that OMB does
not play a role.
Ms. Speier. So the purpose of this hearing is to discuss
the appointments process and why it is taking too long in
certain departments. So you have no role, your office has no
role in that.
Mr. Werfel. That is correct.
Ms. Speier. So why do you think you are here?
Mr. Werfel. I think I am here because the way the Inspector
General Reform Act operates, there is----
Ms. Speier. You don't have to answer that question.
Mr. Werfel. Okay.
Ms. Speier. It was more rhetorical. Let me ask you, though,
since you are here, you were confirmed by the Senate as
controller for the Office of Management and Budget.
Mr. Werfel. Correct.
Ms. Speier. And for a period of time you were acting
controller.
Mr. Werfel. That is correct.
Ms. Speier. Did you feel that you were doing any less of a
job because you were acting during part of that time?
Mr. Werfel. No, I do not.
Ms. Speier. Was your authority at all diminished?
Mr. Werfel. From my personal experience, no.
Ms. Speier. Now, as acting controller, you helped the
Administration achieve record levels of openness and
accountability throughout the Federal Government. So how
successful would you say the Administration has been at
fostering openness and transparency in the Federal Government?
Mr. Werfel. I think it has been a remarkable set of
accomplishments that I don't think get sufficient attention.
You point to something like the Recovery Act. That law was
enacted and demanded a set of accountability and transparency
that the government had not seen before; it required
information to be reported out to the public on spending of
taxpayer dollars at a timeliness and level of detail that had
not been seen before; and it required us to, in very quick
order, develop IT solutions, data definitions, coordinate
across multiple stakeholders, both grantees, contractors, and
all host of recipients to make those very, very tough demands
that both Congress and the President put on the Federal
Government to make the Recovery Act the most transparent bill
that has ever been enacted. It was a historic effort and really
set a new bar for the manner in which the public has
transparency into where Federal dollars are going.
Ms. Speier. Now, I, like the majority, am troubled that the
IG has not yet been appointed in State, and I hope that that
appointment is made soon. But I think it is important to state
for the record that the work of the IG's office within State
continues unabated and, in fact, if I am not mistaken, the
budget of the IG's office in State has more than doubled from
$31 million during President Bush's term to $65 million under
President Obama's term. So would you say that the office has
the resources it needs to get the job done?
Mr. Werfel. Congresswoman, I am glad you raised the
question. From my vantage point, where I sit at OMB, and my
work with the inspector general, and I have a very close
working relationship with Ms. Fong, there are a variety of
different areas where OMB is in a position to help the IG
community succeed. One of them is to work with them to better
understand the resource needs of the inspector general
community and to work with them to develop justifications that
can survive congressional scrutiny for the levels that the
President requests for the IGs.
I would note, as a global matter, that while the President,
working with Congress, has cut essentially $1 trillion in
discretionary resources in the budget, the IG community funding
level has remained constant across the IGs and has been
somewhat protected from the other discretionary cuts that we
are seeing. Specific to the State Department, the State
Department's enacted level in fiscal year 2011 was $59 million;
in 2012 that went up to $62 million; and the President's budget
request for 2013 is $66 million. This is the place where OMB
can step in and assist an IG in being as successful as possible
and understanding what that resource calibration needs to be.
I will add, as a final point, from where I sit, I think
that the inspector general community is as healthy and as
strong as I have ever seen it in my 15-year career at the
Office of Management and Budget, and I have not detected in any
way, shape, or form any diminution of those roles or
responsibilities or impact when there is an acting IG in place.
Ms. Speier. Thank you. My time has expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burton. Thank you.
My colleague, would you have any questions?
Mr. Connolly. I do. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would ask for unanimous consent that my full statement be
entered in the record at this point.
Mr. Burton. Without objection.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the Chair.
Welcome, Mr. Werfel. How long have you been in government,
Mr. Werfel?
Mr. Werfel. Fifteen years.
Mr. Connolly. Fifteen years. Do you think we have made
public service more and more attractive by the day?
Mr. Werfel. It is a challenging time to be a Federal
employee. I think I have two reactions to that question. On the
one hand I feel that the challenges our Country faces have
never been more critical and never been more important. When I
go to sleep at night, I think about the immense challenge that
the Federal workforce has before it and how important that work
is, and it is motivating and energizing to know that when you
are serving your Country by serving the Federal Government,
that that has real meaning and purpose, and it can be a truly
motivating factor.
At the same time, it is important that we are investing in
our people effectively and, by doing that, recognizing the
great work that they are doing, recognizing the important role
that they play. And there are circumstances in which sometimes
the Federal employee can be the punching bag.
Mr. Connolly. Well, let me just ask about that. Do you
think that an unrelenting verbal assault in the form of
disparagement about the value of public service about what
Federal employees do, about the Federal workplace itself,
coupled with a two-year pay freeze and the proposal of an
additional three-year pay freeze, and changing the terms of
pension, making it less attractive by requiring more up-front
payment and fewer benefits at the other end for prospective
employees to fund an unrelated piece of legislation, in this
case unemployment insurance, and then asking another one for
current employees the same thing, to fund an unrelated piece of
legislation, transit funding; and now this Committee, just the
other day, marked up its piece of the reconciliation, which
will cost Federal employees something in the order of magnitude
of 78, $79 billion.
That combined with hearings sometimes entitled Is the
Federal Government Too Big and Bloated? Are Federal Workers
Inefficient and Incompetent? Doesn't GSA's Recent Excess in a
Western Division Conference Sort of Characterize What We Are
Saying, That All Federal Employees Are Kind of Like That? Might
that have anything to do with morale and our ability to recruit
and retain skilled workers such as, oh, I don't know, IGs, for
example?
Mr. Werfel. Congressman, I think a couple of reactions.
One, the President has asked the Federal workforce to join
others around the Country in tightening their belts and making
certain sacrifices, given the economic challenges that we have;
and time and again the Federal workforce has reacted and
absorbed that belt-tightening in a manner that I think we can
all be proud of in terms of still staying focused and
passionate about what we do. I think the President wants to
make sure that any approach we have is balanced; any approach
we take towards deficit reduction is balanced; and that we are
not writing the entire cost on the backs of one segment of the
Country.
With respect to your question about morale, it is really,
really important for a healthy and sustainable Federal
workforce, in carrying out all the critical services that we
do, to make sure that we are recruiting effectively and we are
attracting talented and effective people into the Federal
workforce. So I understand your questions and I appreciate
them. I agree that it is very important that we recognize
Federal workers for their contributions and that we don't
disparage them unnecessarily, in particular if there is an
isolated incident that raises the type of concerns that----
Mr. Connolly. And I have one more question I am going to
sneak in that is a follow-up to to something the Chairman said
in his statement with which I agree, and that has to do with
maybe highlighting the dysfunction of the Senate as part of the
problem here.
We had one IG who was totally uncontroversial, Michael
Horowitz, at DOJ, and it took eight months to get his
confirmation through. And in looking at the record, luckily,
the number of vacancies in IG offices right now are comparable
to the number of vacancies in 2004, as President Bush was
gearing up for his re-election; and I think that perhaps
suggests something about how onerous and difficult the Senate
process has become, as the Chairman suggested.
If the Chairman will indulge, I just want to give the
witness an opportunity to answer that, and I am done.
Chairman Issa. [Presiding.] Do you have any comments
disparaging the Senate?
Mr. Werfel. I do not have any comments. On a personal
level, they confirmed me pretty quickly, so I am very
appreciative of the Senate.
The only thing I would remark is I would go back to Ms.
Fong's remarks in the first panel in which she talked about the
complexity of the process of bringing an IG on board. There is
obviously the Senate process; there is the desire to find
highly qualified individuals. So it is a complex terrain and
one which should probably be evaluated over time.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
I will recognize myself for more or less one question.
Mr. Werfel. Please.
Chairman Issa. The first panel, to my pleasure,
congratulated us for passing on a bipartisan basis the Data
Act. The Data Act is fairly extensive. OMB has not been the
greatest proponent of it under you and your predecessor. One of
the questions is do you have any concerns you would like to
share with us today? Obviously, Senator Warner, Mark Warner in
the Senate, is a lead sponsor of an identical bill. The Vice
President has been very supportive and been part of it at every
point. Chairman Devaney has been part of it. I want to put you
on the spot a little. I think Mr. Connolly did a good job of
going completely off of the first panel's discussions
brilliantly, and I would like to do that because I think the
Data Act deserves an understanding, if you are prepared to make
comments on challenges you see, if any, that need to be
addressed.
Mr. Werfel. Thank you, Chairman. I will make a couple of
remarks about that in response to your question. I would like
to first caveat my remarks by saying that we are reviewing the
bill. The process to review the bill involves getting input
from every agency and from a diverse segment within each
agency, including lawyers and accountants----
Chairman Issa. You can let the accountants and the lawyers
worry me.
Mr. Werfel. Well, we are evaluating, and we will certainly
be able to present to you a comprehensive reaction of both what
we find as promising and areas where we think more work is
needed.
Let me also emphasize up front, before I go into the
specifics, that the President and the Administration are in
complete agreement with the objective of advancing transparency
and accountability. The President played a critical role in
that when he served in Congress on the Senate and cosponsored
the Transparency Act, a bill that really had a monumental
impact in thinking about Federal transparency, and one in which
we are continuing to execute on today.
I raise that because--and there are a variety of different
other bills that we are executing on today that the President
has signed and supported, like the Gipper Modernization Bill,
as an example, and I already mentioned the Recovery Act
earlier. We continue to execute on these various transparency
bills, and in doing so we are investing in technologies, in new
solutions, in growing our Federal workforce to understand
better how to raise their game in terms of transparency. All
those activities are ongoing and I want to make sure that
people understand that we are not starting from scratch; we are
starting with a very important foundation that has been built
in advancing transparency. There is more information out there
on websites like USASpending.gov and Recovery.gov in where our
Federal dollars are going than ever in the Nation's history,
and I think that is an important starting point.
Now, with respect to the Data Act----
Chairman Issa. By the way, we would agree with you
particularly as to Recovery, which is really the only site I
know of that has recipient reporting in a verifiable way.
Mr. Werfel. It is really transformative, and we are proud
of the work that we did together with the Recovery Board and
Chairman Devaney in achieving some of the results there.
The final caveat is we are ready to roll up our sleeves and
work with this Committee and with Congress on solutions that
can further advance these important goals of transparency and
accountability. And while we will get you a more comprehensive
view on the Data Act, I think there are some important
questions that I would raise, and you asked me about concerns,
so I will start there.
A first concern would be the Data Act, as I understand it,
would create a new commission, and the question that we have is
in a time where government is looking to streamline the
complexity of our bureaucracy, is the way to move forward in
enabling transparency is to add an additional layer of
potential bureaucracy by creating a new organization? And it is
not just that that organization would exist and make government
bigger; it is the fact that that organization would have
regulatory authority to issue standards. And now, as I am a
recipient, already challenged by the complexity of having OMB
requirements and agency requirements and we work hard to try to
dovetail those together in an effective way, now you have added
potentially a third entity----
Chairman Issa. Well, let me just stop you for a second,
because I think that is a good point and it has been one of the
potential criticisms, along with push-back from those who would
have to report, who currently receive the money and have less
transparency because they don't actually have to tell us where
they spent it. But the reason for the commission in the bill as
it stands now is very straightforward: you haven't done your
job. If you look at the transparency created while OMB had the
authority to bring groups together, to provide the common
standard, to make it all happen, the authority already was
there. Congress, to a certain extent, is saying you can only
wait so long with people saying we are going to do it. When you
have a situation, as all of us on the dais, because most of us,
beyond even the people here today, we were here for the
beginning of Recovery Act. Chairman Towns was critical in
ensuring that there was greater transparency and helping us
ensure even that there was a portion of the Act that was
earmarked for investigations and reporting, where initially we
were just sending the money and then not giving them an
unfunded mandate. So all of that we went through.
The point is Chairman Devaney and the Recovery Act showed
us something that was a good model. We added on to it some
other reforms, but at the end of the day we believe that the
reason that his model didn't spread throughout the government
is that this Administration and this government, including
career professionals who work for and with you, simply have a
lethargic view toward making this transition.
Now, some of it may be that it is very hard to tell career
people at all these agencies you have to do it. My view would
be any bureaucracy that accomplishes its goal, if you then want
to reorganize to eliminate it because it now can be taken on by
a consolidation, that is great. But I would propose to you that
Senator Warner and myself are pretty strong, along with my
Ranking Member, that we don't see it happening if we simply say
thou shall do it, but you will do it by some sort of agreement
with existing assets.
Your comment?
Mr. Werfel. I understand that perspective. Obviously, I
would bring a different perspective to the table in terms of
our pace and our accomplishments.
The point that I was raising was simply a suggestion that
we look at different alternatives. You are in an environment
where the President has been pretty clear; he submitted a
proposal to Congress to give reorganization authority. We are
looking for different ways to streamline government. So I think
it is a worthy question to explore whether the types of
accountability that you are looking for can be achieved through
existing instruments and existing organizations within
government. Maybe so, maybe not. That is the type of dialogue
we want to engage with you because of the importance we are
placing on streamlining the complexity of government
bureaucracy.
Let me just add one more point. The other question I think
is worth raising, again, without having monopoly on what the
right answer is, but just a question worth raising, it has to
do with what measures can we take within a bill like this to
ensure that the impact and burden that is placed on the
community, State and local governments as an example,
universities, businesses that do work with the government, both
small, medium, and large, what kind of measures can we put in
place to make sure that we are balancing the important goal of
transparency with the regulatory or information collection
reporting burden that would be imposed on them as we advance
this objective.
Chairman Issa. Sure. I appreciate that.
Mr. Werfel. And that is the type of question that we would
want to----
Chairman Issa. And we look forward to working with you on
it.
My time has expired. I will say, of course, that although
we fully paid for the Data Act on this side, we are all aware
that we are asking, in very few cases, for all new reporting.
In almost every case what we are doing is saying we are going
to consolidate reporting so that if you do multiple reports, it
actually gets easier than it is because we are looking at not
having to report and report in different formats to different
agencies, which is one of the reasons for the Data Act.
With that, I believe we go to the chairman emeritus for
five minutes.
Mr. Burton. I don't think I will take the full five
minutes.
First of all, Mr. Werfel, I think you have been a very good
witness and I appreciate your forthcoming. We invited Mr.
Zients down and for some reason he couldn't make it, and, as I
understand it, he is responsible for handling the IG portfolio
for the White House. As I understand it, he is the executive
chairman of the CIGIE and the President's liaison to the IG
community.
What I would like to know is who makes the recommendations
for new IGs to the President. I mean, somebody has to say to
the President--and the reason I think we asked Mr. Zients to
come up here is because he is charged with the responsibility
of this coordination process. So I think that many of us
thought that maybe he was the one, or somebody working with him
was the one that made these recommendations to the President.
Do you have any idea who makes the recommendations? Because I
am sure the President, with the vast bureaucracy we have,
doesn't have time to go through everything and try to pick out
somebody that is qualified. So somebody is making those
recommendations. Do you know who that is?
Mr. Werfel. Well, first of all, let me clarify,
Congressman, that Mr. Zients is not the official within the
White House that makes recommendations to the President on
filling IG vacancies. As the acting director and leader within
the Office of Management and Budget, that is not within his set
of responsibilities.
Mr. Burton. Who does, do you know?
Mr. Werfel. As I mentioned earlier, and I think as Ms. Fong
testified, there is one of two ways, I think, in which
recommendations can be made to the President. One is that the
CIGIE, the Council, has a process that was developed under the
Inspector General Reform Act of 2008 to develop a list of
potential qualified candidates for the President to consider;
and then there is a Presidential Personnel Office within the
White House which recruits and explores a variety of different
candidates for positions throughout government, including
inspectors general, and they can identify candidates and make
recommendations to the President as well. So there is a
separate function within the White House that OMB is not
involved in, and particularly not with respect to inspectors
general.
Mr. Burton. Since you and Mr. Zients, since you folks work
in the coordinating process, between the various ones, you know
when a new IG is taking office and you know the process and
everything else. And I just don't understand this because I
have never been a president; I have never been in the Executive
Branch. When a president takes office and this vast bureaucracy
has to be filled with people who are appointed and being
confirmed by the Senate, I would presume that organizations
like CIGIE makes recommendations rather quickly so that the
President can get on with his job of being the chief executive.
I guess the thing I don't understand is how there could be a
number of vacancies, whether it is under Republican or
Democratic administrations, that go on for, say, three or four
years when these recommendations are made relatively soon after
the President is sworn in.
I don't know if you can answer that or not, but it just
seems to me that these recommendations are made by the Office
of Personnel Management, or OMB, or whoever it is, or this
organization CIGIE, relatively soon. So why is it that it takes
so long for the President to make a recommendation to the
Senate?
Mr. Werfel. Again, I don't have the particular subject
matter expertise or experience with respect to any given
vacancy because I am not involved in that role. What I will
say----
Mr. Burton. Well, when you coordinate and Mr. Zients
coordinates between various IGs, he obviously is working with
some who are acting and some who are permanent. If they are
acting, I just wonder if there is any question that ever arises
why haven't we picked a permanent person for this and gotten
them to the Senate for confirmation.
Mr. Werfel. I have never raised that question and I am not
aware and I can't speak for Mr. Zients as to whether he has. As
I testified earlier, I have not and never experienced any
diminution in the effectiveness of the IG, whether acting or
not.
Mr. Burton. I guess my final question is there is a list of
people that are vetted and they are recommended for various
positions like the--and they are presented to somebody, maybe
it is the chief of staff at the White House, who says to the
President, this is the guy that ought to fill this job over at
State. And you don't know who that person is?
Mr. Werfel. Me personally, I have never been consulted or
asked regarding a particular----
Mr. Burton. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that is one of the
things that we ought to find out at some point, who is making
the recommendations to the President and why there isn't any
action taken, especially after a period of two, three years.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Lankford. [Presiding.] Thank you.
With that, I yield to myself for five minutes.
Mr. Werfel, welcome back again. Glad that you are here. And
it is my same question on that. Why would we not try to press,
whether it be OMB or the Executive Office, not try to go back
and say, you know what, we haven't filled the post of the
Secretary of State's IG ever; been here three and a half years,
there has never been a nominee for that. The Interior position,
if I remember that correctly, it was a month after the
President took office that went vacant. There has never been a
nominee there.
What is the process of acknowledging we have a big hole
here? Who then takes it from there to make sure that gets
pressed so that gets done?
Mr. Werfel. It is an interesting question. I feel that I
can only speak for myself and my role at OMB, and I have a very
particular focus with respect to the manner in which I interact
with inspectors general. And believe me, I am very busy and the
inspector general community keeps me very busy in terms of
identifying new areas for me to be coordinating across
government. The mere fact and the practical reality is that as
part of that footprint it has not historically involved
advising on candidates. In some measure----
Mr. Lankford. Well, not just candidates; getting it done at
all. I am not saying that your office would select the next
person; just saying, you know what, this hasn't been filled in
three and a half years, we probably should get a person. That
is the watchdog for the organization.
And the reason I am bringing it up, let me just mention a
couple of things. When I was in Afghanistan last August and we
met with some folks from State Department and met with some
folks from USAID, one of the things that came out immediately
were some projects that are happening on the ground in
Afghanistan. For instance, a hospital that was constructed
that, after they constructed it they said, you know what, this
region needs a hospital; then they determined we really don't
have doctors or nurses to man this long-term, we don't have a
hospital administrator. So we spent millions and millions of
dollars constructing a building in Afghanistan that now can't
be used and they can't transition it over; a power plant that
can't be transitioned. So they said we have now shifted our
focus now from actually constructing to trying to just maintain
what we have constructed.
Well, that is really the job of inspector general to jump
into the middle of it and say we have an enormous amount of
waste that is happening by the millions of dollars in some of
our USAID programs.
We just had a hearing with the OGR several, three months
ago, discussing human trafficking that is happening with the
State Department and DOD. That is something uniquely the IG can
rise up and say, you know what, in some of our embassies with
State we have employees there that are actually in debt bondage
that we are bringing in from third-world countries and that are
coming into this spot. Now, no one denied it; it is just a
matter of what do we do with that.
Those are issues that we need an IG in place that can help
and go after that. The question becomes that is out there. We
know about those things. What do we not know about because we
have never had a permanent IG in those areas? And obviously you
can't answer that either, but there has to be someone to raise
the flag to say at some point we have to fill this position so
that we have a watchdog in place.
Let me just raise one other issue on it. The one that is
surprising to me, and I have obvious concerns on USAID, and
some of it is because of the strategy, the Forward strategy
that they have, and I am sure that has no political
ramifications for USAID to have a theme of Forward. But for
that program that is out there that intentionally is focused on
transitioning money to other governments and to non-
governmental organizations, 30 percent off of their budget, so
now we have USAID that doesn't have an inspector general
transitioning 30 percent of its funds in its new Forward
program to people that don't have a watchdog. We are in trouble
on that. We have a giant of an enormous amount of fraud and
waste that is happening with no watchdogs now in two layers of
that. Does that raise a red flag at all to you?
Mr. Werfel. Actually, it does not--I wouldn't characterize
it as a red flag, and here is why: because I challenge the
premise of the question that there is no watchdog. The
Inspector General's Office, as has been talked about throughout
this hearing, there are thousands of civil servant talented
individuals that step in and often step in with great
effectiveness in the event of the inevitable vacancies that
occur. My work as controller at OMB focused on a set of
activities, such as financial management, the financial
statements, improper payments, internal controls; and from my
reflection I have not observed any reduction in effectiveness
of the IG community. In fact, if anything, they are keeping us
as busy as ever in terms of the aggressiveness of their
approach. There were charts that showed the increasing nature
of their investigations and their----
Mr. Lankford. The Post Office things. I noted that.
Mr. Werfel. They are as effective as I have ever witnessed
in an IG community, and that is from the perspective that I
have as controller in terms of the specific areas that I focus
on.
Mr. Lankford. Right. I understand that. But I also hear,
every time that there is an issue that comes up in any
department and it is a position that the Senate is dragging
their feel on confirmation, the first thing the other side of
the aisle rises up and says is, you know what, this wouldn't be
an issue if we had a permanent chair in that spot, if we had a
permanent leader in that spot; this is a problem because we
have never confirmed someone. And now the flip side of it, if
no one has ever even been nominated, it is like, is trickling
along, it is doing fine.
So in some ways we are trying to have it both ways on this,
trying to say, when the Senate hasn't confirmed, that is really
the cause of this; going back to things even like ATF, saying
we have never had a permanent director there. We have all these
problems with ATF because we have never had a permanent
director. But now if we don't have a permanent IG, well, that
is fine. I just have a difficult time with that, looking at it
both ways, and especially with areas with the USAID Forward
program that is transitioning dollars even farther away from
us.
One other quick thought on it. I had a real concern on the
transition of the Department of Interior IG, that a month into
the Administration that goes vacant. We are dealing with the BP
oil spill; we are dealing with brand new regulations on
fracking; we are dealing with Bureau of Land Management. We are
dealing with some very controversial issues on how we handle
the future of energy with the Department of Interior and we
have no permanent IG there. Do you know when there is going to
be a proposal for a watchdog in an organization that much of
our energy future is dependent on what happens in this entity?
Mr. Werfel. Again, I am not involved in that process, so I
have no details.
Mr. Lankford. Okay.
With that, I would like to yield to Mr. Mica.
Mr. Mica. [Presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Werfel. I will yield
myself the remainder of the time here for some questions.
How long have you been in your position?
Mr. Werfel. I was confirmed by the Senate on October 13th,
2009, to be the controller at OMB.
Mr. Mica. So you have been there pretty much since the
beginning of the Obama Administration?
Mr. Werfel. Yes. And prior to that I served as a civil
servant within OMB as the deputy and acting controller. And I
started my career at OMB in 1997.
Mr. Mica. And who do you report to?
Mr. Werfel. Jeff Zientz.
Mr. Mica. And what is his position?
Mr. Werfel. He is the Deputy Director for Management and
currently the Acting Director.
Mr. Mica. But he is in an acting position?
Mr. Werfel. That is correct.
Mr. Mica. I'm very, very frustrated with this
Administration in particular. We had former Chairman Burton,
just a few minutes ago, lead this Committee. I have been on it
since I came to Congress, now 19, I guess going on 20 years.
Been through all kinds of administrations, Republican and
Democrat. I do have to say this is the most difficult one we
have ever had to deal with. The stonewalling is a great new art
form with these folks. I chair the Transportation and
Infrastructure Committee, and we have six subcommittees with
broad jurisdiction, DOT, FAA, GSA, which has been on the news
day and night. GSA isn't under our jurisdiction legislatively,
but we conduct oversight there too.
The other thing, too, is with the czars and some of these
positions that aren't approved. It has made it doubly difficult
to attain information. Our side is--and the founding fathers
wanted it this way, they wanted oversight. Actually, the
founding fathers, back in 1808, created this Committee. The
predecessor to this Committee, it is an interesting history
because they didn't trust the appropriators and they didn't
trust the authorizers who created the programs. They wanted
someone else to investigate, make certain that things went
right.
You have an important role, too, in making certain that
there is proper financial management, is that correct?
Mr. Werfel. Yes, that is my role. I coordinate financial
management policy across the government.
Mr. Mica. And since they don't cooperate and they stonewall
us, it has been almost impossible to get information. The only
recourse we have had was going to the inspector generals, and
now I see we have 10 vacancies, and I guess there are 4 of them
that might make some progress. I see why you wouldn't want to
have permanent people in place who are getting information that
could possibly be passed on to Congress.
Doesn't that sound like a pattern of further impediment to
the process? I have two investigators here that I have sent out
trying to get information. I have only been chairman for 14
months. Mr. Burton and I, we did Whitewater, we did Waco, we
did Travelgate. We did every hearing you could possibly think
of in this Committee because this is an important investigative
committee of Congress.
But never before have I ever seen an administration that
not only will not give you the information. We have demanded
time and time again. I could give you copies in the last 14
months trying to get information. The GSA fiasco, we did the
very first hearing in an empty building that sat empty two
blocks from the White House, asked for information about their
administrative expenditures. Mr. Dunham, my subcommittee
chairman, and I demand at every public hearing and in writing
information. Then the only way these people got caught was
through the IG.
Of course, we had Mr. Miller, the IG, and I wonder a little
bit about that, because when GSA held the outrageous, lavish
taxpayer-funded fiasco in Las Vegas, it was reported by a
former staffer of our committee that this was going on. The IG
began an investigation. This occurred in October of 2010; it
was reported to the IG in November; Mr. Miller went to work in
May; he finished the report; he briefed GSA and other
Administration officials in June; he briefed Kimberly Harris,
counsel with the White House. Do you know Kimberly Harris?
Mr. Werfel. I know Kimberly Harris, but I am not aware of
particular communications.
Mr. Mica. Well, that is another thing. I am wondering in
this flow, your job is financial management, improving this. Do
the IGs report back to you? Are you informed when there is
waste, inefficiency, corruption, or any of the above?
Mr. Werfel. As a general matter, I review IG reports----
Mr. Mica. Did you review the IG report for GSA?
Mr. Werfel. I have read the IG report.
Mr. Mica. Did Mr. Miller bring it to you also in May or in
June of last year?
Mr. Werfel. No, he did not.
Mr. Mica. He did not. So it went to Kimberly Harris is the
information we got. Then nothing was done with it. We didn't
see it; it was never given to us. Now I know why they only
wanted to give us one line. They gave us one line. That was
their total administrative cost.
Now, of course, we are not the brightest people in the
world, but we figured out if you are spending 300 percent more
in two and a half years, that would be a financial management
issue, wouldn't it be, Mr. Werfel, if you saw that increase in
administrative expenditures?
Mr. Werfel. I would----
Mr. Mica. It would light up a few lights. If it doesn't,
then there is something wrong; somebody doesn't have their
lights on up here. But we are supposed to be protecting the
taxpayers, you are at OMB in your position of financial
management. So, one, there is something wrong if you know this
person, if you are not getting the information. There is
something wrong here if, first of all--now, thank God we had
Miller there.
Now, Miller never turned over anything to us; it took their
whistleblower, our former employee, to go to Miller again, did
it not? Are you aware that she went back to Miller and asked
when, after the guy snubbed his nose, held a convention, the
situation was done. Plenty of time to do an investigation; we
had from November to May. Adequate time to do an investigation
on the funny business in Las Vegas. I think that was enough
time. They informed the GSA administrator at the time and other
officials; they never let us know. We kept asking questions;
show us what is going on to warrant these expenses.
Then only because this outrageous actor, who was a senior
executive service employee, thumbs his nose at everybody, he
decides to do, what was it, a 17-day South Pacific vacation,
Napa Valley? He picked the best locales. So he is off there and
she blows the whistle again. And so Miller does his
investigation. This is with an IG in place. I am not talking
about how many agencies that don't have an IG in place. So can
you imagine what it is like out there when there is nobody
minding the store? This is a very, very serious business.
I think we need to even look at the law and making certain
that----
Mr. Connolly. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Mica. No, not right now; I am on a roll. A little
later.
Mr. Connolly. Well, Mr. Chairman, I know you are on a roll,
but----
Mr. Mica. No----
Mr. Connolly.--we are still operating under the five minute
rule here, are we not?
Mr. Mica. No, not right now.
Mr. Connolly. You are clocking in at 8 minutes and 50
seconds, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mica. I am on a second round. I just granted a second
round. I will grant you the same, sir.
Mr. Connolly. I don't mean to interrupt, but I wanted to
make a point.
Mr. Mica. I am trying to make some points here, and I can
get some members to yield time. We can go through that routine.
And I would be glad to extend the courtesy to you or any
Democrat members because I think it is fair. And I am not
trying to harass him, but I am just trying to make a point
here.
Again, this is very difficult for us to get information,
even when there is an IG, is my whole point; and Mr. Miller was
then asked again to investigate. More of this funny business
was reported and the only way we found out about it was about a
month ago when that report did become public.
But don't you think, Mr. Werfel, that you should, or
somebody at OMB should, have their lights turned on when these
reports are done? If you are in charge of financial management,
which you are--and I don't care whether it is President Obama,
President Bush, Republican or Democrat.
That is not the issue here. The issue is something is not
working. And I just sent these guys down to Texas; stonewalled
again by TSA. The only way we found out was through a
whistleblower. The agencies give us the information. And I sent
the IGs down there, and if it wasn't for some of those guys
intervening and then this Committee intervening, they told us
they had 2800 pieces of equipment; it turned out they had 5700.
They told us that they were taking care of the situation; yes,
as our investigators are going in the front door, they are
moving stuff out the back door, giving us a bogus report.
So the inspector general in every administration and this
Committee play an important role, and I want you to report back
to the Committee or OMB and let us know would it be helpful,
should we put in the law--obviously we are not clicking here. I
go back and people say how can you let this go on?
Well, it is very hard for me to explain. I am trying to get
the information; I can't get the information. There is not IGs
in place to even help us. So you see the frustration, and we
have to do a better job. We have to restore faith in this whole
system. Just in the last few weeks, my goodness, people have
lost faith in the government.
Do you see my point, Mr. Werfel? Again, I hope we can make
something positive out of this hearing. If you need additional
help to move these along, anything we can do I would be glad to
do.
Mr. Connolly, did you seek recognition? Mr. Connolly is
recognized for 11 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. I promise, Mr. Chairman, I won't take that,
and I thank you.
First of all, let me ask you, Mr. Werfel. You are in OMB.
Did the Administration increase the budget for inspectors
general?
Mr. Werfel. In some cases, yes. So, for example, I
mentioned earlier the State Department inspector general budget
has gone from roughly $59 million in 2011 to $66 million in
2013.
Mr. Connolly. But, I mean, just looking at the global
figure.
Mr. Werfel. The global, it has increased. It certainly
hasn't decreased in any meaningful way. We were at $2.6 billion
for IGs in 2011, $2.7 billion for IGs in 2012, and roughly $2.7
billion is in the President's budget for 2013. I think that is
notable given that in just about every other area we are seeing
significant cuts in discretionary programs and there is clearly
evidence of ensuring that the cuts are not hitting the IGs.
Mr. Connolly. I would simply point out that many of my
friends on the other side of the aisle talk about government
costing too much, but there are some investments that have a
return on them. For example, we know the additional resources
being proposed for IG offices have a return on them, do they
not?
Mr. Werfel. Absolutely.
Mr. Connolly. And recoverable funds in increased efficiency
and in certainly uncovering waste, fraud, and abuse.
Mr. Werfel. And we saw statistics earlier in the hearing
that pointed to particular savings and accomplishments.
Mr. Connolly. Would that not also be true, for example, of
the General Accounting Office?
Mr. Werfel. Yes. The Government Accountability Office
certainly has that type of impact in terms of having a
positive----
Mr. Connolly. This Committee has received testimony that,
as a matter of fact, the ratio goes as high as $91 for every
new $1 invested in GAO in terms of recoverable amongst the
money; and yet we had GAO testify here that in terms of overall
size GAO is down to a level that we haven't seen since 1935.
And then a third agency I could cite, IRS, there is
something like $400 billion of owed taxes on the table, not new
taxes, not slashing investments, money that is ours, that is
owed the American people that is simply not collected for want
of resources. We know that every dollar we invest in a new IRS
agent has a direct return, is that not true, Mr. Werfel?
Mr. Werfel. And we have evidence of particular activities
within the IRS who have a clear positive return on investment.
Mr. Connolly. So it puzzles me sometimes that, despite our
rhetoric about wanting to reduce the debt and wanting to make
sure that we get government right-sized, we are not willing to
make the investment sometimes in proven entities that can
recover either lost revenue or avoid inefficiencies and
improper payments. You have testified before us many times, for
example, on the improper payment issue. Very little pain
associated with that; huge payoff.
Final point I want to make is, and then I will yield back,
Mr. Chairman, but the Chairman talked about GSA. I do not share
the clarity of the Chairman about some of the conversations he
cited with respect to the White House and Mr. Miller. A passing
reference have you seen an IG report or the IG report hardly
means or is to be construed as recognition that full knowledge
was made available.
But I will point out we had the IG from GSA here; we had
the outgoing administrator who fell on her sword and resigned
as a matter of honor, after firing two deputies and putting a
lot of other people on probation.
But the testimony we heard from the IG of GSA was that he
didn't uncover this excess; Susan Brita, the deputy to the
administrator, Martha Johnson, uncovered it. She is the one who
referred it to the IG. And I asked in questioning here. The IG
has been there since 2005 in place. He heard no evil, saw no
evil, smelled no evil, found no evil, even though we know that
this excessive celebration event preceded this Administration
and continued in this Administration.
But it wasn't the IG, with 300 personnel at his command; he
didn't find this at all. Only when the administrator staff
referred it to him, and then it took him nine months to come up
with a report that, frankly, I think almost anyone else even on
this panel could have written in half the time.
So yeah, having an IG is important, but I don't know that
the IG is entirely the heroic figure sometimes painted. In this
particular case, I think if he was doing his job, he could have
uncovered this years before and maybe avoided the embarrassment
of the situation. In any event, it was the appointed
administrator and her staff that uncovered that excess,
referred it properly to him, and he was able to investigate
that. Is that your understanding as well, Mr. Werfel?
Mr. Werfel. I wouldn't call myself an expert on all the
moving pieces, but it is my understanding that in this
particular case the deputy administrator referred the issue for
further IG investigation.
And if I could, I just want to make a broader comment about
OMB's role in inspector general report in response to both your
questions and Congressman Mica's. We take IG findings in their
reports extremely seriously; in particular those that affect
financial management. We work with other Federal agencies. Part
of our role is to bring, for example, chief financial officers
and other members of the community together to understand what
is going on in IG reports across government; what we can learn
from them.
The GSA report is no different. We need to understand
better what happened so we can prevent it from happening again,
and we need to explore with the broader community what steps we
can take to fix the issue and make government better going
forward.
That is the basic role that OMB has with respect to IG
reports, and I think it is a very critical one and one that we
have fostered a very strong relationship with Ms. Fong and
other IGs around that shared mission of better government.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the time.
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you.
And I do want to try to conclude the hearing today, but I
did again have this information that was provided on our
witness. It says Danny Werfel is the Controller of the Office
of Federal Financial Management within the Office of Management
and Budget. He is responsible for coordinating OMB's efforts to
initiate government-wide improvements in all areas of financial
management.
And again I used a GSA example, and we did in fact have a
former staffer who works at GSA blow the whistle and an
investigation was conducted, and properly so. That started in
November after the October incident in 2010. In May, GSA and
others were informed, the administrators. We had the witnesses
here. Nothing was done. In June the White House was advised.
You said you knew the counsel but didn't know the incident or
didn't read the report.
My whole point here was these were very serious allegations
of abusive use of taxpayer dollars. Okay, so it is reported.
Nothing is done. The guy takes off and launches another
wasteful scenario, and Susan Brita again blows the whistle and
the inspector general begins an investigation. But somehow all
of the cylinders don't seem to be clicking and you just got
through testifying to the gentleman from Virginia that you get
these reports and they are taken seriously. And my questioning
was do we require, is this required. Maybe we should require
that this goes to OMB and to you all. I guess you are just
doing this as a matter of course.
What I am trying to do is to get things to click so that
some action is taken. That had the potential, I think, even at
that stage for some criminal referrals. I don't know all the
details on it, but please, when it comes to financial
initiating government-wide improvements of all areas of
financial management, you have an agency spending money like
that, it raises questions. And my point was with an inspector
general in place.
But here we have other agencies, at least half a dozen, and
we have some with 1,000 days, that is three years, nearly
three, four years, four years at the State Department; huge
operations without somebody in charge on a permanent basis. I
deal with acting administrators and I am telling you it is
difficult. I have one right now in FAA and we have a tough
situation there.
So my point is not to give you a hard time, maybe a little
bit, but to see how we can improve this whole process. Make
certain you have the tools. I have no problem with giving you
additional funds. It was testified you are going from $2.6
billion to $2.7 billion. That is fine. You can have a good rate
of return when you are doing your job; it is an $18 return on
$1 spent, I believe. So I could double the money if I could get
more benefits back and better management, cut the debt and
spending for the taxpayer. So that is my point today.
We do have an important responsibility here, because
sometimes the authorizers don't get it right; sometimes the
appropriators just spend money and don't get it right. We are
that third entity that the founding fathers to make certain,
you look at other governments, they have somewhat of a similar
structure, but none of them have, again, this filter like our
Committee that keeps going after waste, fraud, and abuse, which
is so important keeping the system straight and making it work
better and more efficiently.
So with that commentary, I thank you for your
participation. I would like you to also provide the Committee
with additional information. We will be sending you written
requests and I wish you would respond.
The record will be left open for additional comments and
responses.
With that being said, and I see no further members here,
the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee will stand
adjourned, and I thank our witnesses for taking time to appear
before us today. This Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:43 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]


