- STATE AND MUNICIPAL DEBT: THE COMING CRISIS?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STATE AND MUNICIPAL DEBT: THE COMING CRISIS?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TARP, FINANCIAL SERVICES
AND BAILOUTS OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROGRAMS

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 9, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-40

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
68-362 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services and Bailouts of Public and
Private Programs

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire,      MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Minority Member
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               PETER WELCH, Vermont
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JACKIE SPEIER, California
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on February 9, 2011.................................     1
Statement of:
Gelinas, Nicole, Searle Freedom Trust fellow, Manhattan
Institute; Professor David Skeel, S. Samuel Arsht professor
of corporate law, University of Pennsylvania Law School;
Eileen Norcross, senior research fellow, Social Change
Project at the Mercatus Center; and Iris Lav, senior
advisor, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities............    14
Gelinas, Nicole..........................................    14
Lav, Iris................................................    43
Norcross, Eileen.........................................    28
Skeel, David.............................................    19
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Cummings, Hon. Elijah E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Maryland, prepared statement of...............    81
Gelinas, Nicole, Searle Freedom Trust fellow, Manhattan
Institute, prepared statement of...........................    16
Lav, Iris, senior advisor, Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities, prepared statement of..........................    45
McHenry, Hon. Patrick T., a Representative in Congress from
the State of North Carolina, prepared statement of.........     4
Norcross, Eileen, senior research fellow, Social Change
Project at the Mercatus Center, prepared statement of......    30
Quigley, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, prepared statement of...................     8
Skeel, Professor David, S. Samuel Arsht professor of
corporate law, University of Pennsylvania Law School,
prepared statement of......................................    21

STATE AND MUNICIPAL DEBT: THE COMING CRISIS?

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 9, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services and
Bailouts of Public and Private Programs,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m., in
room HVC-210, The Capitol Visitor Center, Hon. Patrick T.
McHenry (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives McHenry, Guinta, Buerkle, Amash,
Meehan, Walsh, Gowdy, Ross, Quigley, Maloney, Welch, Yarmuth,
Cooper, and Cummings (ex officio).
Staff present: Lawrence Brady, staff director; John
Cuaderes, deputy staff director; Peter Haller, senior counsel;
Christopher Hixon, deputy chief counsel, oversight; Robert
Borden, general counsel; Joseph Brazauskas and John Zadrozny,
counsels; Tyler Grimm and Ryan Hambleton, professional staff
members; Michael Bebeau and Gwen D'Luzansky, assistant clerks;
Molly Boyl, parliamentarian; Katelyn Christ, research analyst;
Drew Colliatie, staff assistant; Adam Fromm, director of Member
liaison and floor operations; Justin LoFranco, press assistant;
Linda Good, chief clerk; Laura Rush, deputy chief clerk;
Suzanne Sachsman Grooms, minority chief counsel; Jason Powell
and Steven Rangel, minority senior counsels; Davida Walsh,
minority counsel; Ronald Allen, minority staff assistant; Jesse
Feinberg, minority legislative assistant; Lucinda Lessley,
policy director; and Carla Hultberg, minority chief clerk.
Mr. McHenry. The committee will come to order. This is our
first meeting of the TARP, Financial Services and Bailout to
Public and Private Programs. I will begin by making an opening
statement.
I certainly appreciate the panel of witnesses being here
and taking the opportunity to be here. Today's hearing is an
opportunity to discuss growing concerns over the potential
fiscal crisis looming for States and municipalities. Over the
past 3 years, we have seen a culture arise where every
institution claimed it was too big to fail. An all-too-eager
President and an all-too-compliant Congress kept putting
taxpayers on the hook for trillions of dollars. Our budget
deficit has reached an all-time high and the national debt is
crippling our economy.
Now we are facing the consequences of bad government policy
in yet another way. State and municipal governments who are
preparing for aggregate budget shortfalls totaling roughly $125
billion this year are struggling under a trillion dollar burden
of unfunded pension liabilities, plummeting tax revenues and an
unforgiving bond market. We must understand the magnitude of
this problem to avoid the reactionary ad hoc decisionmaking
that fueled the Federal action of the 2008 financial crisis.
This is not about one analyst. This is about the looming
fiscal crisis in States and municipalities and the lack of
transparency in their pension obligations. Let's be clear about
this. The perfect storm is brewing. Already State and municipal
governments are coming to Washington hat in hand expecting a
Federal bailout like so many others. But the era of the bailout
is over.
That does not mean, however, that Congress must turn a
blind eye or a deaf ear to the crisis unfolding in State and
local governments. The beauty of federalism lies in the fact
that the National Government does not tell the States how to
manage their own affairs, at least ideally. The burden of
federalism is that when one State, or all 50 States, are in a
crisis, we must work together to solve them for the good of the
country. Since 1990, State and local government spending has
increased roughly 70 percent faster than inflation. The vast
majority of the States now find themselves in a fiscal
straitjacket caused primarily of the looming burden of paying
out trillions of dollars in lucrative public sector union
pensions and health care benefits that come at the expense of
taxpayers.
For the last 3 years, funding from the Stimulus Act has
masked the severity of the State fiscal challenges. In fact,
there was $140 billion in transfers from the total government
to the States included in the stimulus. States now say that
more money would help them through their current rough patch.
The reality, however, is that the money States receive from the
stimulus has, in many ways, made them worse off. A lot of the
funding comes with ``maintenance of effort'' requirements that
force States to keep funding programs after Federal funding
dries up this year. More money from Washington would just delay
the day of reckoning and only further complicate State fiscal
situations. Besides, we don't have any more money. And beyond
that the simple fact is that the government has outgrown our
capacity to pay for it.
There will be severe consequences for not changing course.
Young teachers fresh out of college and ready to give back to
their communities will be told that their school districts
cannot provide them with reasonable retirement benefits because
they are cash-strapped to pay for the exorbitant benefits of
others. Firefighters, policemen and other public servants
facing the reality that their vital jobs offer no promise of
rising standards of living for their family or benefits will
simply opt for a different career path.
In the end, people will recognize that their government has
failed them. But not only that, they believe that their
government has actively hurt them.
While we have the opportunity to change that, we are
responsible to try. This is why we are here today, to come to a
better understanding of the crisis at the State and local
government level, to assess its causes and to consider
available solutions. With that in mind, in this hearing and I
intend to shed light on how the States arrived at their current
predicament, what is the current extent of their fiscal
distress, and what needs to be done in terms of available
solutions.
My friend and colleague from California, Representative
Devin Nunes, has a proposal that would require greater
transparency at the point of most urgent concern, the pension
problem. I have been happy to work with him on this
legislation. I look forward to hearing from both sides on any
and all possible solutions, and that is why we have this great
panel here today.
Let there be no mistake though. Much is required to get our
fiscal House in order not just at the State and local levels
but here in Washington, DC.
But reckless spending fueled by bottomless borrowing and
guaranteed by endless bailouts is an unsustainable course.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Patrick T. McHenry
follows:]

Mr. McHenry. And with that, I now recognize the ranking
member, Mr. Quigley of Illinois, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman for holding this
extraordinarily important and timely hearing, and
congratulations on your new post as chairman. The record should
reflect that you and your staff have been extraordinarily
accommodating and cordial to myself and my staff. Obviously the
issues are too important to divide us in any light, and I also
thank you for doing that. Any time I take complimenting you
shouldn't count against my time to speak.
I want to thank our four witnesses for testifying today.
And I agree, it is really in a sense not about bailouts or
bankruptcies, because I don't think either one of those options
can work, or is optimal. But as you know, I'm from Illinois,
and you don't need to tell me about how bad its finances are
and how critical these issues are. Illinois has gone through
decades of bad financial decisionmaking under both Democrats
and Republicans. Illinois now has an $8 billion backlog in
payments, and a gaping $136 billion hole in its pension system,
leaving its pension less than 50 percent funded.
It should be no surprise then that the rating agencies has
downgraded Illinois bond issuances several times in the past
months. Last year Illinois bonds carried the worst credit risk
of any U.S. State and were only slightly less risky than bonds
from Iraq. According to Laurence Msall of the Civic Federation,
this bad rating was costing Illinois taxpayers $551 million a
year extra in interest payments. And total debt service in
Illinois is expected to increase by 33 percent between now and
the year 2017.
The only way Illinois was able to climb out from a bottom
rung was to raise State income taxes a whopping 66 percent, an
outcome no one wanted.
This tax increase brought Illinois's bond rating back up
and reduced borrowing costs, but only by passing those costs on
to Illinois taxpayers. Illinois has to reform its pension
system, but it also has to reform its whole way of doing
business which has left retirees vulnerable and taxpayers on
the hook. As Professor Dershowitz said of Harvard's shrinking
endowment after the 1990's boom, a lesson for all of us. People
forgot the story of Joseph in Genesis, during the 7 good years,
you save for the several lean years. Illinois didn't save for
the 7 lean years and now it has to deal with the consequences.
That said, what's going on in Illinois is not necessarily
what's going on everywhere else.
True, most States have recently rung up large deficits
thanks to a collapse in tax revenues during the recession. But
the short term fiscal problem will improve as our economy gets
going again. The real problem is an actuarial problem unique to
six to eight States, including Illinois which suffer from long-
term structural imbalances. The culprits are rising health
costs, underfunded pension plans, and poor financial
management.
Some of these pension plans look particularly bad right now
because of the collapse in the value of pension assets. But
even an appreciation in asset value will lead several State
pension plans underfunded.
The municipal bond market is now responding to legitimate
concerns about the long-term structural imbalances in these six
to eight States. But I believe we would be correct to
distinguish these bad apples from the other 40-some States that
have been relatively well managed and only have temporary
deficits. That is why a one-size-fits-all approach like
bankruptcy for States could do more harm than good.
What we have to avoid is any rash actions that would
contribute new risk factors to the bond market. State and local
governments across the country need to continue building roads
and bridges, and we don't want to make the financing any more
expensive than it already is. So we need to be crystal clear
that although there are national interests at stake, the onus
must be on those State governments to reform themselves. And
they need to reform sooner than later, a default on payments
would make it obscenely expensive for all States to borrow.
Taxpayers would bear the brunt of these costs either through
higher taxes or through reduced public services and a move
toward austerity.
Mr. Chairman I don't want an Illinois problem or a New
Jersey problem to become a national problem. These States have
to institute commonsense reforms to shore up their finances. At
the same time government's mission matters, and successful
reform will ensure that workers get the pensions they have
earned through their years of service. All we need is the
political will to get it done.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on this matter
and the discussions of the next possible steps. Thank you and I
yield back.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Mike Quigley follows:]

Mr. McHenry. I thank you, Mr. Quigley, and you certainly
have been wonderful to work with and we certainly appreciate
that. This certainly isn't a shirts versus skins or Republican
versus Democrat issue. I think trying to understand the depths
of this problem certainly behooves both the Parties and the
American people and their right to know. I want to begin,
before we introduce the panel, we have the mission statement of
the Oversight Committee, and at the chairman's request, I would
like to read that for all that are here today:
We exist to secure two fundamental principles: First
Americans have the right to know that the money Washington
takes from them is well spent. And second, Americans deserve an
efficient effective government that works for them. Our duty on
the Oversight and Government Reform Committee is to protect
these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to hold government
accountable to taxpayers because taxpayers have a right to know
what they get from their government. We will work tirelessly in
partnering with citizen watchdogs to deliver the facts to the
American people and bring genuine reform to the Federal
bureaucracy.
This is the mission of the Oversight and Government Reform
Committee.
So with that in mind, I would like to introduce today's
panel. Nicole Gelinas is the Searle Freedom Trust fellow at the
Manhattan Institute and a contributing editor of City Journal.
Gelinas writes an urban economics and finance, municipal and
corporate finance, and business issues. She is a Chartered
Financial Analyst, charter holder and member of the New York
Society of Securities Analysts. Her most recent book, ``After
the Fall: Saving Capitalism from Wall Street--and Washington''
was about the financial crisis of 2008 and was published in
November 2009.
David Arthur Skeel is the S. Samuel Arsht professor of
corporate law at the University of Pennsylvania Law School. He
is the author of ``Icarus in the Boardroom'' published in 2005
and ``Debt's Dominion: A History of Bankruptcy Law in America''
published in 2001, as well as numerous articles and other
publications.
Eileen Norcross is a senior research fellow with the Social
Change Project and the lead researcher on the State and Local
Public Policy Project. Her work focuses on the questions of how
societies sustain prosperity and the role civil society plays
in supporting economic resiliency. Her areas of research
include fiscal federalism and institutions, State and local
governments and economic development.
Iris J. Lav is a senior adviser with the Center on Budget
and Policy Priorities. Prior to joining the Center, she was
associate director of public policy for the American Federation
of State, County and Municipal Employees and senior associate
at a consulting firm.
Thank you all for being here today. Members will have 7
days to submit opening statements for the Record. It is the
policy of this committee that all witnesses be sworn in before
they testify.
Will you please rise and raise your right hands?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. McHenry. The record will reflect that all answered in
the affirmative. Thank you. And we will certainly begin, Ms.
Gelinas, with you. You will have 5 minutes to give your opening
statement. At 1 minute remaining, the yellow light will come
up. If you could summarize your opening statements, everyone
has that for the Record, and we will begin with you.

STATEMENTS OF NICOLE GELINAS, SEARLE FREEDOM TRUST FELLOW,
MANHATTAN INSTITUTE; PROFESSOR DAVID SKEEL, S. SAMUEL ARSHT
PROFESSOR OF CORPORATE LAW, UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW
SCHOOL; EILEEN NORCROSS, SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW, SOCIAL CHANGE
PROJECT AT THE MERCATUS CENTER; AND IRIS LAV, SENIOR ADVISOR,
CENTER ON BUDGET AND POLICY PRIORITIES

STATEMENT OF NICOLE GELINAS

Ms. Gelinas. Yes. Good morning, Chairman McHenry, Ranking
Member Quigley, members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify today on this important topic.
Congress is right to worry about the choice between bailing
out States and watching as they risk repudiating their long-
term obligations to bond holders and other creditors, including
union members. The good news is that Congress can still act to
avoid this difficult choice. The bad news is that a State
bankruptcy statute is not going to be the answer. Sometimes
arriving at a solution means eliminating the bad solutions. So
I will talk for a few moments about why State bankruptcy is not
the answer and talk for my remaining moments about what are
some of the answers.
Proponents of a bankruptcy statute for States say that
special interests have taken over the State budgeting process,
that there is no prospect of States getting their long-term
pension obligations, health care obligations to retirees and
debt obligations under control absent an external force outside
the State political process. Proponents believe that this could
be the external force. In this scenario, States could threaten
bankruptcy to wring concessions from their creditors,
particularly labor unions, changing future pension benefits,
health care benefits, and the like. Bondholders who would be
worried about this prospect would force States to do this
before they get into a crisis situation.
As a practical matter, though, bankruptcy is unlikely to
help States solve their fiscal problems and actually would add
new problems. One reason is how States have structured their
bond obligations. When many people think of money that a State
owes, they think of a State's general obligation bonds, bonds
against which the State has pledged its full faith and credit
to pay back its debt.
States do not issue only general obligation bonds, though.
They issue bonds through hundreds of public authorities. New
York State, for example, owes nearly $80 billion in debt, only
about $3\1/2\ billion of that is through general obligation
debt. The remainder is through hundreds of these public
authorities, special purpose vehicles and so forth. Each of
these authorities is its own corporation. It is not an agency
or an arm of the State. It has its own board of directors, its
own covenants with bondholders, its own legal and contractual
agreements with not only bondholders, but employees and
retirees.
There is no practical way for a State to pool all of this
debt together in one place along with pension and health care
obligations handed over to a judge and pare it back, at least
not without violating thousands of preexisting covenants,
contracts with bondholders and State laws. And this gets to
Congressman Quigley's points that the Congressman made in his
opening statements, changing the rules mid-game would affect
not only States that have gotten themselves into trouble with
their own decisions, such as New York, California, Illinois and
New Jersey, but also States that are not running these long-
term deficits.
Introducing a bankruptcy statute would force bondholders to
all States to question the legal regime. It would take many
months to sort out the uncertainty. During those months, it is
quite likely that States would have to pay more on their debt.
Another practical problem with bankruptcy is that States
are not like corporations where one person can be authorized to
speak for the State. In a corporate bankruptcy, you have a CEO,
an agent of the CEO and a small board of directors all speaking
as one. In a State bankruptcy, hundreds of State lawmakers
could not give their power to a Governor to speak in one voice.
If bankruptcy would not eclipse the normal processes of
democracy, you would still have hundreds of lawmakers speaking
in different voices before a judge, no way for a judge to
simply take over this process of democracy solve a State's
obligations from on high.
Another problem is that States do not owe pension benefits
for the most part. States administer pension benefits on behalf
of local governments, cities, towns and school districts. So
bankruptcy for the State would not take care of pension
obligations. Municipalities can do that through changes in
State law, require changes in State law but municipalities can
already declare bankruptcy if that is a way for them to deal
with their pension obligations. So this does not add a benefit
to municipalities who owe pension and health care benefits.
What are some of the other solutions that Congress can look
to to help States and municipalities pare back their benefits?
One thing is making sure to States that Congress understands
that States already have the tools to deal with these things
themselves. States can change their laws that govern pensions.
States can change their laws that govern contracts, health care
benefits. They do not need to look to Congress to do this for
them.
And with that, I will conclude my opening remarks. Thank
you.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Ms. Gelinas.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gelinas follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Mr. Skeel.

STATEMENT OF DAVID SKEEL

Mr. Skeel. It's a great honor to appear before you, and I'm
tempted to say everything that Nicole just said, ``not.'' Not
exactly that. But I will just make one comment at the outset,
and that is we have lots of experience dealing with complicated
bankruptcies. So the fact that it is a multitude of entities is
not news in the bankruptcy context. I'd be happy to address
questions about that or either of the other issues that were
just raised if folks are interested.
Currently, if a State's functional crisis spirals out of
control, we really only have two options: The first is that a
State might simply default on some of its obligations,
declaring itself unable to pay. The second option is for the
Federal Government to bail out one or more of the States as it
bailed out financial institutions like Bear Stearns, Fannie
Mae, Freddie Mac and AIG during the recent financial crisis. I
believe that both of these alternatives are deeply problematic
and that Congress should enact a bankruptcy law for the States,
not as a first resort, but as an absolute last resort in the
event that everything else fails.
The claim that we don't need a bankruptcy law for States
strikes me as a little bit like saying there's no need for a
fire department because most homeowners have never had fires in
their houses, if and one starts the homeowner can probably stop
it before the crisis gets out of control. Each of these things
is true, but we still need fire departments for the rare case
when a fire does burn out of control.
In the remainder of my discussion, I would like to make
three simple points: First, bankruptcy would provide several
enormously important benefits that we don't have in the absence
of bankruptcy. Second, it is constitutionally permissible, in
case you all are concerned about that, as well you should be.
Third, the law could be tailored to address any particular
concerns you might have about things like it being too easy for
a State to file or there be the bankruptcy law being too harsh
for particular kinds of constituencies.
So let me say, to the extent I have time, a brief word
about each. First the benefits that bankruptcy would provide
for a troubled State. One of the main benefits bankruptcy would
provide is a way to restructure some kinds of obligations that
probably can't be restructured outside of bankruptcy. And I
would include pensions in that. There are real limits on what
can be done with pensions outside of bankruptcy. I would
include bonds in that category as well.
The other huge benefit of bankruptcy is if it is necessary
as an absolute last resort, is it brings everybody to the
table. We don't just have one or two constituencies that get
singled out to make sacrifices. We get everybody to the table,
and we ask how can we distribute the sacrifices so that it
makes sense and we can put our finances on a fiscally
sustainable course.
My second point is that bankruptcy is fully constitutional,
even with respect to States. All that needs to be done there,
there are genuine State sovereignty concerns, and they need to
be honored, but they can be honored so long as we make sure the
bankruptcy law is entirely voluntary, meaning that a State
couldn't be thrown into bankruptcy against its will, and the
bankruptcy law would also need to ensure that State decision,
governmental decisionmaking functions were not interfered with.
All of these are things we already do with respect to municipal
bankruptcy.
My final point is that the law can be tailored to deal with
any concerns you may have. A lot of the discussion, a lot of
the criticism of State bankruptcy seems to assume there's only
one possible State bankruptcy law we can have, and it's going
to require us to cut everything down to zero. That's not the
case. If you're worried about States being too anxious to file
for bankruptcy, that there will be strategic use of bankruptcy,
I think that is a not really a serious worry. But if you are
worried about it, all you have to do is put some entrants
requirements on bankruptcy. We already do this with municipal
bankruptcy.
If you're worried about the bond markets, you're worried
the bond markets are going to be concerned because they're
afraid that bonds are going to be written down to zero, you put
restrictions as a prerequisite to doing anything with bonds.
So the final point is simply that we can tailor the
bankruptcy law to address any concern we may have. My bottom
line is bankruptcy is not a perfect solution. It would be
messy. It is an absolute last resort, but it's better than the
other last resorts which are States simply defaulting on their
obligations or a Federal bailout.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Mr. Skeel.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Skeel follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Ms. Norcross.

STATEMENT OF EILEEN NORCROSS

Ms. Norcross. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Quigley, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify today on this important topic. The recent recession
exposed several longstanding problems in State budgets that, if
left unaddressed, the underlying causes for these short-term
budget gaps, including public sector pension benefits and the
rising cost of health care, are certain to worsen States'
prospects for stability and economic growth. But with reform
today, States can mitigate the worst while meeting their
promises to employees and taxpayers.
The recent downturn is only one cause for recent State
budget gaps. State and local spending has grown faster than
States' own source revenues and the private economy over the
past several decades. The fastest growing area of State budgets
is Medicaid. States have avoided showing deficits in part due
to Federal funds, and an increasing reliance on debt finance,
and in some cases, by deferring their contributions to pension
systems, not funding health care benefits or borrowing to make
pension payments. These techniques help States show balance,
grow spending and pass the costs on to the future.
Without any changes, GAO anticipates State and local
governments will require an annual and sustained reduction in
spending of 12.3 percent or an equivalent increase in revenues
between 2009 and 2058, to close a projected $9.9 trillion
fiscal gap.
In addition, State and local governments face a large
funding gap in their pension systems. Governments report the
unfunded liability for State and local pensions at $1 trillion
but economists estimate it closer to $3\1/2\ trillion.
According to government accounting standards, the discount
rate used to value plan liabilities may be based on what the
assets are expected to return when invested, an average of 8
percent annually. This violates economic theory which says the
value of the liability is independent from how it is financed.
Choosing the discount rate requires matching that rate with
what's being valued, in this case, a public sector pension
which is safe, government guaranteed and thus should be matched
with a rate that reflects that safety, such as the yield on
Treasury bonds, currently at 4 percent.
The circular logic of government pension accounting
standards has had several consequences for pension funding. It
has lead to the undervaluing of pension promises and amount
necessary to be set aside to fund the promise, plans have been
encouraged to embrace more investment risk, including
increasing their risk exposure after the recent market downturn
to make up for losses.
Union leaders and politicians in negotiations in the 1990's
when the market was booming, often boosted benefit formulas
because plans looked overvalued on paper. Governments have
also, as mentioned, deferred payments to the system and issued
bonds.
When are plans likely to run out of assets? Economist
Joshua Rauh of Northwestern University estimates under the
generous assumption, the State's own assumption, of an 8
percent annual return on pension assets that by decade's end,
eight States will run out of assets to pay their beneficiaries.
Illinois will require $11 billion annually beginning to 2019 in
this scenario. New Jersey will require $10 billion annually in
2021.
A less dire scenario is offered by the Center for
Retirement Research at Boston College to remain funded by 2014,
Illinois will require 13 percent of its budget to ensure fund
solvency, New Jersey will require 12\1/2\ percent of its
budget. This requires choices these States have, to date, have
avoided making. Other economists and actuaries have reduced
equally dire scenarios as Dr. Rauh. But ultimately I stress it
is incumbent upon State Governors and treasurers to ask
actuaries to stress test their pension systems under a range of
assumptions.
I believe the biggest impact the Federal Government can
have in helping the States is in the area of Medicaid reform
and mandate relief. For State pensions, I have two
recommendations, first, transparent and accurate accounting.
Governments must stress test their pension systems and model
the cash-flows to determine what will be needed to set aside to
pay these promises. These scenarios should include the risk
free discount rate as recommended by economists. The data,
method and assumptions should be made available to the public.
Second, stabilize public sector pension systems, to pay
what has been promised by minimizing the burden on taxpayers,
States should consider freezing and reducing the cost of living
adjustment in current defined benefit plans, increasing the
retirement age, increasing contributions from workers and
importantly close the defined benefit plan and move workers to
defined contribution plan.
The last reform will allow workers more flexibility, shift
risk away from taxpayers and end the political and fiscal
manipulation of worker benefits which has turned what was
supposed to be a safe investment for public sector workers into
a gamble for both employees and taxpayers. Accurate accounting
will enable States to know the tradeoffs necessary today and
delay will only ensure what is a big problem turns into a
crisis by decade's end. Thank you. I look forward to your
questions.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Ms. Norcross.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Norcross follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Mrs. Lav.

STATEMENT OF IRIS LAV

Ms. Lav. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Quigley, members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to appear before you
today. I believe that predictions that States throughout the
country will have to bail out localities or that the Federal
Government will have to bail out the States are substantially
exaggerated, and I think they are producing unnecessary alarm
among policymakers and the public at large.
I would like to untangle some of these claims today about
cyclical issues, bonds and pensions.
First, cyclical issues. States are projecting large
operating deficits as you said of about $125 billion for the
2012 fiscal year, which begins in July in most States.
Unemployment remains high. Revenues remain below pre-recession
levels, and there is rising demand for public services due to
the weak economy and growing population. Figure one please.
Moreover, the fiscal relief provided through the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act in 2009 is ending. That's not
mine. That's someone else's.
It has been enormously helpful in allowing States to avert
potential budget cuts and tax increases. States have used the
fiscal relief to cover about one-third of their budget
shortfalls through the current fiscal year, but only about $6
billion will be available for next year, covering less than 5
percent of these shortfalls.
As difficult and painful as the choices are, States and
localities will balance their upcoming budgets through budget
cuts, tax increases and use of reserve funds. That's what they
do. And remember, it's a cyclical problem that will shrink in
size as the economy continues to recover and State revenues
continue to grow.
Second, bond. So there's no credible evidence of a bubble
or crisis in State and local bonds.
If we could go to figure 3 please.
First interest payments on State and local bonds absorb
just 4 to 5 percent of current State and local expenditures, no
more than they did in the 1970's. And the historical default
rates since 1970, through several recessions, has been about
one-third of 1 percent.
Finally, there's no large increase in bond issuance nor are
their exotic securities that hide the underlying value of the
assets against which the bonds are issued, as was the case with
the subprime mortgage bonds.
Third, pensions, which, of course, is a little more
complicated. There are shortfalls, we all said, in pension
funding for future State and local retirees. States will have
to address them over the next three decades or so.
Figure 4 please.
Pensions were fully funded in 2000 before the last two
recessions using standard accounting. The recessions reduced
the value of assets and some jurisdictions didn't make the
required deposits. So as was mentioned, the Center for
Retirement Research at Boston College finds that States and
localities have about $700 billion in unfunded liabilities.
That implies they have to increase their contributions on
average over the next 30 years from about 3.8 percent of
budgets to 5 percent of budgets. Now that's on average, it's
not Illinois. But changes to pension plans could reduce that
cost, and 3.8 percent to 5 percent is not a crisis.
The major controversy is over whether these traditional
accounting standards are appropriate. And that $3 trillion
number which comes from economists who measure future costs
assuming a riskless rate of returning such as in Treasury bonds
about 4 percent.
Figure 5 please.
But pension funds do invest in a diversified basket of
private securities. The average historical rate of return has
been about 8 percent, as you can see in that chart. It may or
may not be a little lower going forward, but it's quite
unlikely to be just 4 percent. So the $3 trillion numbers of
construct doesn't represent the amount that pension funds have
to invest to meet their obligations. The States in trouble are
basically those that skipped their payments.
To summarize, cyclical problems are serious but will abate
as the economy improves. The muni bond market is not in a
bubble or in danger of experiencing widespread default, and
pensions need attention but in most cases are not in crisis.
I see no need for Federal intervention in these areas.
States do not want or need the power to declare bankruptcy. Nor
is there a need, as Mr. Nunes has suggested, for Federal
legislation to require States and localities to report their
pensions on a riskless rate as a condition for issuing tax
exempt bonds. And I should note there's a process going on in
the Governmental Accounting Standards Board to reform already
going on 2 years to reform the way pensions are reported and to
put all States reporting on the same basis which would be a
transparency improvement, so you could see what's going on and
to have a reasonable actuarial method for reporting and Mr.
Nunes's proposal would short-circuit that. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Ms. Lav. I certainly appreciate
that.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lav follows:]

Mr. McHenry. And we will begin the questioning with the
vice chair of the subcommittee, Mr. Guinta of New Hampshire.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
each of you for coming and testifying before us today. I have a
couple questions for each of you so I'm going to try to be
quick. First with Ms. Lav. You had stated that there is no
impending or looming crisis at the moment. I guess the first
question I would have is how would you define a crisis if what
we are seeing with the States and their obligation requirements
at the levels they are at? How would you define a crisis?
Ms. Lav. I would define a crisis as something States had no
way of digging themselves out of. States have many, many tools
in which to do this. So if you have to raise your pension
contributions from 3.8 percent of expenditures to 5 percent of
expenditures, that's probably, you can accommodate that within
budget particularly after the economy recovers. And certainly,
they are cyclical deficits. States are finding ways to close
those cyclical deficits. We don't appreciate some of a lot of
the budget cuts States are making which are harming low income
people and residents, but that's what they do. States have
balanced budget requirements and that's what they do. They
manage their finances.
Mr. Guinta. I think the concern that I and others share is
that as States ``manage their finances'' they are spending an
extraordinarily higher amount of money percentagewise of
borrowed dollars to get us through these ``lean or
challenging'' economic times.
My State of New Hampshire has done that to pay expenses,
New Jersey has done that to pay expenses, which is not either
good GASB accounting standard practices, or it is just not good
business standards of practice. And I don't know that you had a
chance to touch upon it in your verbal remarks, but I note that
in your written remarks, you talked about the GASB standards.
My concern is, at some point, there is this potential of States
wanting to come to the Federal Government for a ``bailout''
because of what they define as an economic challenge that
they're having.
I would argue something a little bit different. Any
responsible Governor, legislature or administrator should be
anticipating these challenges, and it doesn't appear that has
been done in a responsible way.
So I understand your point. But can you speak to those
States that are borrowing money essentially to pay for ongoing
expenses? And I'm not even talking about stimulus money they
have received. I'm just talking about borrowing money.
Ms. Lav. Very few States borrow for operating expenses.
Illinois has borrowed a number of times, floated bonds to make
its pension contributions, which is very bad practice.
By and large, States borrow money for infrastructure, and
you don't see in the data any substantial run-up in borrowing
as a percent of gross State product. We have a chart there that
I provided some information to you behind my testimony some
graphics and State-by-State information on that. You don't
really see any run-up in borrowing. It isn't good practice for
States to borrow to pay their operating expenses. They should
borrow for infrastructure, because that is what makes sense to
do economically. So we don't approve of borrowing for operating
expenses usually. And in the longer paper that I refer to in my
written testimony, we do have, the whole last section does
suggest that States do have, as I believe Mr. Quigley referred
to in Illinois, some structural deficits and mismatch between
their expenditures and their revenues and part of that, and
they do need to take some steps to fix those mismatches. There
is no question about that. But a lot of that mismatch comes
from the rate of growth of health care costs in the economy.
States spend a lot of their money on health care, and health
care costs are growing faster than the economy, all throughout
the economy in the private sector and in the public sector and
so States which have revenues that very often go somewhat
slower than the economy because of the structure of their tax
system have a very hard time meeting their responsibilities to
provide health care to those people in the States that need it,
the elderly and the disabled and the poor.
Mr. Guinta. I would agree that States need to better manage
the pie in the budgetary challenges they are having. But it
sounds like you are making an argument now for bankruptcy when
in your comments, you suggest that it's not necessary at this
point because of the looming fiscal challenges that they're
having.
Ms. Lav. They don't need bankruptcy to fix these problems.
Mr. Guinta. I do want to ask Ms. Norcross if you would be
able to comment a little bit on the testimony we just heard.
Ms. Norcross. I would like to explain the discount rate
controversy a little more than by way of analogy and it's
important because it has informed decades of policy within the
pensions systems, which I believe we are seeing the results of
that today. And the analogy is this, the reason you can't
choose a discount rate based on what you think your assets will
return to value the liability is, if you consider you have a
mortgage and you have, let's say, a mutual fund, your broker
says, we think, I think you're going to return 10 percent
annually on your mutual fund. That doesn't enable you to slice
your mortgage in half. The bank doesn't send you a different
mortgage statement based on that.
So what that circular logic has produced over the years and
certainly, yeah, in the 1980's and the 1990's some of these
pension plans looked fine, A, they have undervalued the size of
the promise so they're sort of expecting that rate of return
will be taking care of the necessary contributions that they
should be making to fund the system.
And No. 2, when plans look overfunded on paper, it led some
States to grant these really generous benefit enhancements
without even doing the math. In New Jersey, in 2001, the State
granted a 9 percent benefit increase and didn't even figure out
what it would cost them. And that's one of the areas the
Governor is trying to address right now.
And remarkably, it violates another principle, which is you
can secure a guaranteed investment with a high risk stream of
investments, and in the short term, you're going to realize
more volatility in your investments, and yet that promise is
due within 15 years.
So they're basically trying to secure a guaranteed pay-out
with a high-risk investment, and that is the flaw of logic. But
Joshua Rauh, in his paper, he uses the 8 percent discount rate.
And he says even that, even if we grant you that, we're looking
at funds starting to run out of assets with 3 percent revenue
growth by the end of the decade. New Jersey's actuaries also
released a paper on their new reports on Friday using the 8.25
discount rate and they say we have 12 years in the police
officer's plan. So I hope those comments help.
Mr. McHenry. I thank you for your testimony. The
gentleman's time has expired. At the request of the
subcommittee ranking member he is deferred to the full
committee ranking member.
Mr. Cummings, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you and our ranking member, and I thank you for working
in a bipartisan way to address this problem.
Ms. Lav, it is interesting after listening to the vice
chairman of our subcommittee speaking just a moment ago, I find
it interesting that the National Governors Association, that
is, Republican and Democratic Governors through their chairmen
and vice chairmen, said this on February 4, 2011: ``Allowing
States to declare bankruptcy is not an authority any State
leader has asked for nor would they likely use. States are
sovereign entities in which the public trust is granted to its
elected leaders. The reported bankruptcy proposal suggests that
a bankruptcy court is better able to overcome political
differences, restore fiscal stability and manage the finances
of a State. These assertions are false and serve only to
threaten the fabric of the State and local finance.''
Ms. Lav do you agree with these Governors that the State
bankruptcy proposal threatens the fabric, and these are their
words of State and local finance? Can you be brief please? I
have several questions.
Ms. Lav. Yes, I do agree. States have all the tools they
need to manage their finances. Occasionally, one State doesn't,
but they have the tools they need.
Mr. Cummings. And what would you recommend as to how those
States might improve their fiscal situations?
Ms. Lav. I think there are many ways that States can
improve their fiscal situations. They can move to taking a
longer term look, many of them only look 1 year ahead or 2
years ahead. They can improve their revenue systems and be sure
their revenues match with their expenditures. They can have
processes in place where there are consequences of skipping a
pension contribution, which has caused a lot of the problems we
are talking about today.
There are many things that they can do to make it clearer
to policymakers and the public about their own situations and
allow some oversight. But I think that States themselves have
the ability to do that, and that this recession has just been
so very long and so very deep that some of the flaws have
become apparent, but it's not going to be forever, and I think
they will adjust their revenues and their expenditures to
manage these problems.
Mr. Cummings. Our House Budget Committee chair, Paul Ryan
and the Republicans proposed cutting the Federal budget
domestic discretionary non-military non-security spending
approximately $40 billion this year and much more in the
future. Wouldn't this significantly worsen the State and local
governments' fiscal problems because a lot of that money flows
to the State, is that right?
Ms. Lav. Yes. That's right.
Mr. Cummings. And this is no gift is it? It's not a gift to
the States?
Ms. Lav. No. It's not a gift. It's a penalty for the States
basically. It is about a third of non-security spending that
Mr. Ryan wants to cut is our grants that flow through to State
and local governments, and so depending we don't have the exact
number, but somewhere probably between about, don't hold me
exactly to it, but $10 and $13 billion would be money that the
States would have to scramble on top of their existing
deficits, additional deficits they would have to close because
of these cuts.
Mr. Cummings. Isn't most underfunding of State pensions due
to recent dramatic declines in the stock market which hurt
investment portfolios of almost all American investors
including hedge funds, regular working people, and probably
most lawmakers and staff, reporters and attendees here today,
given the recent emerging recovery market up turn and projected
future gains, don't you agree with the analysis expecting
future long-term gains equally over the next 30 years to smooth
out today's current problems?
And the reason why I raise this, and any of you all can
answer this, is that when the storm is over, I don't want to
see situations where our employees, by the way a lot of them
are working in this room today, may have lost their pensions
and now going to the States, State pensions have been
diminished, States come out of recovery, and then because some
States fail to make their pension payments on time, and you got
to keep in mind the employees, they pay, they have to pay,
right? They have to pay.
Ms. Lav. Yes. The contributions come in on time.
Mr. Cummings. So one of my concerns is when the storm is
over, then these folks have been locked out of a lot of money
that they were due. So I will start with you, Ms. Lav, and then
maybe some of the others may have a comment on that.
Ms. Lav. Of course the improvement in the economy and the
improvement in the market will have a lot to do with improving
the outlook of pensions over time, and for most States, that
have not provided retroactive benefits without funding them or
have not seen a pension payment contributions in the past, they
will be fine. So the vast majority of States will be fine when
that occurs, as that occurs.
Ms. Norcross. I would say that the only reason why workers
may lose some of the benefits that are promised is because the
investments have been treated as a gamble rather than secured
as they should have been secured. They've been misvalued and
therefore the investment strategies have not been appropriate
for the plan. I share the view that what's been promised has
been promised, and that people have worked for this and they
have contributed for it. I also caution, and as Ms. Lav
mentioned, every State pension system and every local pension
system has a little bit something different going on. We know
about the worst funded plans.
But I would caution that Josh Rauh's paper is extremely
important because again he is saying OK, I grant you 8 percent
returns and he shows you a time table of when if there is no
change to policies, these plans can expect to run out of
assets.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Ms. Norcross. The gentleman's time
has expired.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. I certainly appreciate that. And if
I could call up slide No. 1. This is a representation of the
difference between inflation, the 1950 baseline, the
difference, the blue line would be private spending increases
since 1950 to now versus State and local government spending
increases in the red line. Private spending has increased 5
times, but local and State government spending has increased 10
times. So it's not a question of a funding shortfall, it's a
spending problem. Would you concur with that Ms. Norcross?
Ms. Norcross. I would say that's a big part of it yes.
Mr. McHenry. Now in terms of the discussion about public
pensions, understanding the magnitude of the problem is one
thing we want to understand here today, if it is knowable. Ms.
Gelinas, you mention in your testimony a funding shortfall. Is
there a range, is there an agreement on what the funding
shortfall is for public pensions?
Ms. Gelinas. Thank you, Chairman. There's not an agreement,
a rough range would be $700 billion to $3 trillion as you can
see, that's a large range. This involves predicting things that
are very difficult, really impossible to predict. You have to
predict the performance not only of the U.S. stock market, but
of global equity and bond markets. You have to predict the
course of future inflation and also predict how long people and
their survivors are going to live.
Mr. McHenry. Ms. Norcross, do you concur with that range?
Ms. Norcross. Yes, well, under a range of assumptions yes.
Mr. McHenry. What would----
Ms. Norcross. Meaning the $700 billion would be under the
current assumptions of the 8 percent discount rate range.
That's why advocating for stress testing the pensions and
granting economists how they would value the plan.
Mr. McHenry. What is the upward end?
Ms. Norcross. $3\1/2\ trillion.
Mr. McHenry. OK. Now, to this point, Ms. Gelinas, is there
a--under current government accounting standards, is it
sufficient? Do we have enough transparency in understanding the
unfunded liabilities of these State and local government
pensions?
Ms. Gelinas. No, it's not sufficient. I would advocate
asking the States and large municipalities to report the
assumptions--report the liabilities under a range of
assumptions. Report it under a lower what used to be called a
risk free rate, maybe 3 percent annual return, report it under
the 8 percent return if they like to continue to do that and
allow investors to make up their mind.
I don't think there's a big--there's a problem with
disclosure, but it is not the biggest problem because investors
can do their own calculations on these liabilities. We've seen
Dr. Rauh and others do it on their own. If the investors do not
like what is reported, they can simply not invest in the debt.
So again, we should have more disclosure. But the problem
is not that we don't understand the magnitude of the issue. It
is getting the political will within States to change State
constitutions which govern pension benefits for future workers,
people who have not been hired, change State laws governing
collective bargaining, wages, health care and so forth.
Mr. McHenry. Would you concur with that Ms. Norcross?
Ms. Norcross. I agree.
Mr. McHenry. That's simple enough. That's reasonable.
Are the government accounting standards for pensions
similar or dissimilar to what public companies are required to
disclose? Ms. Norcross.
Ms. Norcross. They're a little bit different in private
sector defined benefit plans, they do use something closer to a
risk free rate, and they're valuable but different than the
public sector plans.
Mr. McHenry. Ms. Gelinas, would you like to add anything to
that?
Ms. Gelinas. No.
Mr. McHenry. Wow. Going pretty smoothly. So in terms of,
Ms. Norcross, in your testimony, you discuss that State
spending grew faster than States' own revenue sources in 47
States from 1977 to 2007. And to this point, can you explain
the danger of States reporting budgetary imbalances when they
are actually using Federal funds and debt to fund these
expenditures?
Ms. Norcross. I think that just highlights the pie and
what's in the pie, so you have States' own source revenue, you
have Federal funds debt and other, and a deficit if you're just
considering what a State can support on its own, that can be
papered over if you then sort of discount that they're getting
Federal funds which can stimulate sometimes greater spending or
cause a State to need to raise taxes to support that spending
and also the rising use of debt.
And I agree that debt is not a very large portion of
budgets, we've seen some techniques recently where States will
bond, they'll dump a trust fund bond to replace it and use that
to balance the budget. So maybe they're not bonding directly
for operating expenses, but they are.
Mr. McHenry. To that point, have States changed the nature
of what they use bonds for? The nature of rather than building
a road, are they changing it to plug a pension fund promise,
has that changed?
Ms. Norcross. We've seen more bonding for stuff like that.
Also the definition of capital can be pretty flexible.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you for your testimony. My time has
expired. And now Mr. Quigley, the ranking member, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So far the problems that we have seen with these States,
these 8 or 10 States that are in particular trouble, seem to be
self-contained. I would like to ask any one of you, if you can,
what the potential systemic risk are. I guess if the last
economic crisis taught us anything is that everything is
interconnected. In terms of the market or what have you, if
there is a big hiccup, and there certainly are threats with
some of these States, defaulting or having some other problem,
missing payments and so forth, the impact on other States, the
impact on bond ratings, but also the bond market itself. So
while there may be only 8 to 10 States, that is 25 percent of
the country's population. What are the impacts on the rest of
the States?
Mr. Skeel. I will jump in on that really quickly. I think
the risk of contagion is much less severe than it was in 2008
with the financial institutions. I think the bond markets know
the difference between the States that are in real trouble and
the States that are not.
Mr. Quigley. Do you think their investors do?
Mr. Skeel. I do. I do.
I think we have to have some confidence in the ability of
the markets to make those distinctions. That is my first point.
My second point would be that a lot of the problems with
the financial institutions was hot money. It was that they
depended really heavily on short term financing which was
subject to immediate withdrawal. States are not subject to
financing that is going to disappear instantly. They have tax
revenues coming in. They are likely to be able to continue
borrowing. So I think it is a very different kind of crisis.
Ms. Lav. It is possible to panic markets in the short term.
Meredith Whitney has succeeded in doing that in the municipal
bond markets by claiming----
Mr. Quigley. That is the first time the name was mentioned
today.
Mr. Skeel. You violated our rule.
Ms. Lav. Sorry about that. But in the long run, people
realize what the fundamentals are and you can see that there is
beginning to be some improvements in that markets now that her
comments have been put to rest.
So I think that there are distinctions among States. You
know, the last time a State defaulted was in the Great
Depression, and even in the Great Depression, only one State,
Arkansas, defaulted. Only four cities or counties have actually
defaulted since 1970. We are talking, you know, I don't think
we are going to have a major default crisis. I think that there
will be ways. You are going to have some sewer districts and
some revenues bonds that were tied to the housing bubble and so
forth that are going to have trouble paying, and those
districts are going to have some problems, and the States will
probably step in, as Pennsylvania stepped in in Harrisburg, and
sort that out in a reasonable way. I just cannot see a scenario
of major default and contagion.
Ms. Gelinas. If I may add to that, I would say one issue
that risks courting a bond market crisis would be changing the
statute to allow for Federal bankruptcy because if I am a bond
holder, and for example, take New York's Metropolitan
Transportation Authority, an entity with $30 billion worth of
debt, I have lent money to this entity based on a long list of
covenants, including a State law that says that for as long as
these bonds are outstanding, this entity will not declare
bankruptcy.
That is what New York lawmakers have determined under the
democratic process. If there is any question that you have a
new Federal statute that would somehow supersede that, or this
idea that you could take away promises made to these
bondholders to give to bondholders or unions at another State
entity, this risk would take many months to sort out.
I would also add maybe not the potential for an acute
crisis that we saw in September 2008, but the potential for the
risk of losses at banks where you don't need a default for the
market value of these securities to decline. You've got more
than $200 billion of municipal debt in banks, similar amounts
in money markets and insurance funds. If banks worry that the
value of these securities have declined, they may pull back on
lending to the rest of the economy, again, not a crisis or
panic, but makes the recovery more difficult. The question is
what are you getting for making it more difficult. You are not
getting much benefit because States have the tools to fix these
problems.
Mr. Skeel. I would just add one brief response, and that
is, this is all assuming that the States wouldn't default on
these bonds. I think the question we have to ask is what are
the possibilities? One possibility is no bankruptcy, they
simply default completely.
Mr. Quigley. Let me ask one other question to Ms. Norcross.
You talk about the rate of return and you advocate to reducing
it to what you judge is a much more realistic figure. The same
sort of question, a quick shift from perhaps 8.25 to 8.4 would
have to have some sort of impact, pretty traumatic obviously
from a fiscal point of view and how much the contributions
would have to be increased, but also within, again, the market
that looks at this, would you see this being done through a
slower period of time, an adjustment period, or how would you
see that work?
Ms. Norcross. Well, I agree with what Ms. Gelinas said, you
should probably grant a range of assumptions. But the liability
is the liability. So simply targeting a rate that makes it look
a little bit better, it only masks over the underlying reality
of what is owed. Also, if you're going to pay this out over 15
years, my concern is that in cases like Illinois where they are
going to take on more risk in their investment strategy to make
up for what was lost. So that is why I would caution you.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the ranking member.
Mrs. Maloney of New York is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank the chairman and ranking member for
organizing this important hearing and all of the panelists for
their thoughtful testimony.
I would like to gain a deeper understanding of the
magnitude of the challenge. I would first like to ask Ms.
Norcross and Ms. Lav to qualify and expand on a statement in
Ms. Lav's testimony where you stated that States and localities
devote 3.8 percent of their operating budgets to pension
funding. First, I would like to know where you got this number
from, and is this an accepted number universally. And if that,
in fact, is the correct number, based on this number, how can
you suggest that public pension costs are the large costs of
the State and local financial problems. As we know, we are just
digging our way out from the great recession that has impacted
our entire country and there are many costs there. Could you
comment first, Ms. Norcross, and then Ms. Lav.
Ms. Norcross. I believe Ms. Lav gets that figure from the
Alicia Munnell paper, and that is what her estimate is on what
States have been contributing on average. So that would be all
plans. She estimates if you use the 8 percent discount rate,
you would have to raise that to 5 percent of budget on average.
Ms. Lav. That is correct, we worked with the Boston College
people, Alicia Munnell, using our expertise on State and local
finance to help them come up with that figure.
Mrs. Maloney. So how can you suggest that this is the cause
of the local and State financial problems if the contribution
is just 3.8 percent?
Ms. Lav. It isn't. It isn't the cause. Pension
contributions come from general funds. And the big deficit
number is $125 billion that you are hearing about, is a general
fund number. But pension contributions, neither pension
contributions nor interest on bonds are the major component of
that. The major component of the deficits is the expenditure
States have--Medicaid, health care and education and so forth.
So that is why I said it is not a crisis to raise from 3.8
percent to 5 percent in the way that the State budgets, the
State and local budgets are put together. You can do that over
time. It is not a big crisis.
You know, all of this talk about the riskless rate, that is
one way to look at it. The Munnell paper says you have to go to
9 percent which would be a big problem if you use the riskless
rate. But there is a distinction between valuing the
liabilities and how much you have to deposit to make the
pension whole. I would say that those are two different things.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, on the riskless rate that a number of
you testified on, I would like some clarification from it. Is
it true that this rate is different from what the private
sector pension plans use? Is it different?
Ms. Norcross. Private sector pension plans admit they have
a little more risk because the company can go bankrupt. They
use the corporate bond rate to reflect the risk.
Ms. Lav. It is higher than the riskless rate. The corporate
bond rate is, I don't know, 5\1/2\ percent, 6 percent, that
they use.
Mrs. Maloney. Why should there be a different rate for
public pensions and private pensions?
Ms. Lav. Well, because private pensions have to be a little
more conservative because a private company can go out of
business and then they dump their liabilities for their
pensions on the Public Benefit Guaranty Corp. So ERISA, so the
Federal Government, doesn't have to bail out the private
corporation and pay those pension liabilities, insists that it
uses a more conservative rate. But a public entity is not going
out of business, and the public entity has taxing power and can
adjust its taxes and expenditures. It is going to be an ongoing
entity. You know, there have been GAO reports and other
observers, most people who look at this say you do not need as
stringent standards for a public entity as you do for a
private.
Mrs. Maloney. So would the riskless rate increase the
perceived pension shortfall?
Ms. Lav. Yes, substantially.
Mrs. Maloney. How does it increase it?
Ms. Lav. Well, 60 percent of pension assets come from
return on assets, from investment income. So if you are going
to say you only are going to get 4 percent on that investment
income, and you are projecting that 30 years into the future,
you make up a much larger hole that you have to fill. But if
you say you are going to get 4 percent and you continue to
invest in equities, you are saying something that is not true.
And you are sort of saying you have to overfund the pension in
the front end because you are saying it is only going to be 4
percent, but if you get 7 or 8 percent, you are actually going
to have more in it. That will be, I hate to say it, but it
could end up with even more temptation for an overfilled
pension fund to not have consistent contributions every year.
It is much more realistic to say what you are going to gain
and consistently contribute the amount you need rather than
having the feast or famine.
Mrs. Maloney. My time has expired, but would anyone else
like to comment?
Ms. Norcross. I would just like to add, if I may, the logic
behind that discount rate has again to do with the safety or
risk of what you are valuing. And so a private sector plan
reflects some of the risk involved that a company can go out of
business; whereas the government is guaranteeing 100 percent
saying you are going to get paid.
Again, the long time horizon gets back to the idea you have
15 years in which the majority of your obligations come due,
and you are securing that with high volatile investments where
you are lessening the likelihood that the money will be
available to pay it out.
Ms. Gelinas. If I can comment as to the magnitude of
pension liabilities, the reason they don't show up as much at
the State level is because these are the responsibility often
of the local governments. They are set by State law but paid by
the locality. For example, New York City will pay about $8\1/2\
billion in pension obligations this year. That is more than 10
percent of the entire budget, including Federal funding for the
city. So it is a much bigger problem at the local level than
the State level.
Ms. Lav. My figures were State and local.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
Mr. Quigley is recognized for a unanimous consent request.
Mr. Quigley. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to enter
into the record a statement from the Governor of the State of
Massachusetts.
Mr. McHenry. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Cooper is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cooper. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous
consent to insert into the record an article by Jeb Bush and
Newt Gingrich in the Los Angeles Times entitled ``Better Off
Bankrupt.''
Mr. McHenry. Without objection.
Mr. Cooper. I think in finance hearings, it is really
important to keep things simple. To my understanding, almost 80
percent of municipal bonds are owned by individuals in some
form; is that your understanding? These are more widely held?
Ms. Lav. The tax exempt bonds, yes. I'm not sure about the
others.
Mr. Cooper. Yes, the tax-exempt bonds.
And what most investors hate is a nasty surprise, a down
side surprise. So in markets that function well and you have
transparency, you have a heads-up on oncoming bad news, people
are usually less alarmed. I want to ask a couple of questions
about the transparency of these markets.
What are we missing today comparing these obligations
between States that would enable an investor, an individual
investor, to better evaluate these investments? It is my
understanding that some of these get packaged up in bond funds
and they just want a tax break. That is the way they diversify
their risk, but you don't want that bond fund to be harmed
either. What are we missing in terms of transparency between
the States?
Ms. Lav. With respect to bonds, I don't think there is
anything missing. I think the bond raters have a great deal of
information about the States and the financial analysts, and
follow them very closely. So I'm not aware of anybody
complaining about the transparency of bonds among the States.
Moody's just put out a new kind of analysis where they added
together the outstanding bond debt and the pension obligations
so you could look at it in one place. I think that is a good
thing.
With respect to pension obligations, I think there is a
problem of not being able to look at State-by-State pensions on
the same basis.
Mr. Cooper. Exactly what are those problems?
Ms. Lav. They use different standards. There are a range of
actuarial standards and it is pretty arcane as to how you
measure future liabilities and so forth. And States can choose
which ones they want.
I mentioned at the beginning of this hearing that the
Governmental Accounting Standards Board is very close to
issuing a new standard that no longer will allow that and that
will require----
Mr. Cooper. Then after GASB has a new standard, we will
have an apples-to-apples comparison between the States?
Ms. Lav. I believe so, yes.
Mr. Cooper. On pension obligations?
Ms. Lav. Yes.
Mr. Cooper. Do all the panelists agree with that?
Ms. Norcross. I believe that is so.
Mr. Cooper. So this is pending, it is about to happen, it
doesn't require legislation?
Ms. Norcross. If I might clarify, is that a rule that is
going to require them to use the ABO versus the PBO, or are you
referring to GASB 25? Because GASB is also working on the
discount rate rule, but I don't think that they have solved
that problem.
Ms. Lav. Yes, they are looking both together.
Mr. Cooper. So in the next few months, we will have greater
comparability between the States so an investor, an individual
investor, can evaluate the risk involved in the most complex
aspect of this which is valuing pension obligations?
Ms. Lav. That is my understanding. Of course, they haven't
put out the final rule yet; but they are working on it.
Mr. Cooper. Are all of the panelists equally hopeful that
GASB is about to do this positive step?
Ms. Norcross. I know they are looking at it, so I am
hopeful.
Ms. Lav. They have taken all the comments. They had a draft
rule in September, and they are very far down the line.
I think it is appropriate because all of the stakeholders
have had a chance to comment. It is not something that is being
imposed by fiat. Various people object to various parts of the
rule, but it is going to be a standard rule, and better than
the one we have.
Mr. Cooper. So does the Manhattan Institute and the
University of Pennsylvania Law School concur in this?
Mr. Skeel. I'm not following this that closely, so I will
be agnostic on this.
Ms. Gelinas. I will be as well. I have no prediction on how
they will come out.
Mr. Cooper. You mentioned earlier rating agency analyses.
The rating agencies don't have the credibility that perhaps
they once had prior to the housing crisis. Are the rating
agencies on top of these developments between and among the
States and municipalities?
Ms. Lav. I think they are. There are rating agencies, and
then there are a whole host of other financial analysts out
there that specialize in looking which are not the rating
agencies, which I agree have lost some credibility, who look at
this and who have specialists who spend all of their time
looking at State and local finance. I mean, I think they have a
pretty good handle on what is going on.
And to the one, which I cite in my report, they are saying
there is no major chance of a contagious default. If there are
a couple extra defaults, they are likely to be in small things,
like sewer districts and not in major areas.
Mr. Cooper. I see that my time has expired. Mr. Chairman, I
thank you.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the gentleman.
If it is OK with the panel, we have an opportunity to go
for a second round of questions if there are no pressing
concerns this morning. So with that, I recognize myself for 5
minutes.
So the definition of default is to fail to fulfill a
contract, agreement or duty. To fail to perform, paying or make
good. So if we look at default in the bond market, does the
bond market define that narrowly which is to make good on your
payment to me, or can we as policymakers define it more
broadly, which is failure to fulfill an obligation to the
people you are serving, to pension holders, for instance, and
not being able to pay pension holders? Or could it be not
making good so you have to sell a city or State asset in order
to pay bondholders, which is an interesting piece here. But
beyond that, as Federal policymakers, are we making the matter
worse through our transfer payments to the States? There has
been some point of reference in testimony here today that is,
in fact, the case. Ms. Norcross, your written testimony
includes some discussion of this. But to the tune of hundreds
of billions of dollars a year, there are Federal transfers to
States. There are also Federal mandates on the States that are
cost drivers to government. Can you touch on this and the
implications it has obviously for the bond market and
indebtedness of the taxpayers.
Ms. Norcross. Well, of course the most well-known
maintenance of effort would be currently with the Medicaid
requirements on the States. And there are many other grants and
aid that are handed out to the States that occasionally come
with maintenance of effort requirements or may encourage that
municipality or government to need to raise taxes to support
the spending.
I don't know if I answered your question.
Mr. McHenry. You did.
Now, there are certain States that are in difficult fiscal
situations. I know some research has been done on this. So does
that, the difficulty of policymakers to balance the budget,
does that have a bearing on their credit rating? Certainly it
does, one would believe.
Ms. Gelinas, in terms of your discussion of various sub-
groupings of the State, not the general obligation bonds, but
obviously the dormitory authority or a road authority, does
that have a bearing, the State revenue sources, whether or not
they are sustainable? Can you touch on that?
Ms. Gelinas. Sure it does. Without saying whether or not
the ratings agencies are right or wrong, either on the broad
issues or narrow credits, the ratings agencies do have a good
understanding that each bond is different even at the State
level.
So California, for instance, they have said very clearly
paying debt service on general obligation bonds, this is one of
two top priorities for the State. That even if California has
massive budget deficit, they pay these bonds first before they
pay anything else. So ratings agencies look at that, see the
structure of the law and precedents, and that goes into the
analysis.
Other States it may not be as high a priority, but it is a
very high priority in every State. And then when you look at
things like bonds that are tax secured where the State has said
we pledge this sales tax to pay bonds before we use the sales
tax for anything else. That is actually higher than a general
obligation bond. That gets AAA ratings in a lot of cases
because of that.
So you have to look at each of the payment streams, the
character of the State, the willingness of the State to pay the
debt. And sometimes, frankly, the willingness of the State to
make bad decisions.
We saw in Illinois, the State raised taxes to give comfort
to the bondholders. So trying to get more market discipline in
getting the bondholders to care more about the fundamentals, it
doesn't necessarily get you the good, long-term decision for
the State. If the response of the State is to raise taxes, it
may make the long-term situation worse, not better.
Mr. McHenry. I certainly appreciate that. And in today's
Wall Street Journal, there is a story about this hearing, and
they reference that California borrows billions of dollars each
year to cover seasonal shortfalls in its cash-flows. Illinois
is proposing to issue an $8.7 billion debt restructuring bond
to pay past due bills, and a $3.7 billion bond to make required
pension contributions to its pension system.
There is a larger discussion here about whether these
States will be able to afford higher interest rates on these
bonds following the end of quantitative easing and the impacts
that will have on their pension fund gap. So I can just ask the
panel to make comments on that briefly, and we would certainly
like to hear your testimony.
Ms. Gelinas. Right. Higher interest rates are certainly a
risk not having to do with the fundamentals of the municipal
bond market, but also how do global investors feel about the
prospects of inflation in the United States? If Treasury bond
rates go up, it is likely that municipal bond rates will go up
at the same time.
Mr. Skeel. I will just add those effects are likely and
already are disproportionately borne by the States that are in
big trouble. So California's interest rate is much higher than
other States' interest rates. That is what we would expect. And
I think in the long run, that is what we want. That is what we
want the bond markets to be doing.
Ms. Norcross. I concur with what Professor Skeel said.
Ms. Lav. I would distinguish those different things.
California issues revenue, and a few other States issue
anticipation notes. They pay them back within the same year.
That is not borrowing for operating expenses, it is just
changing the timing of their borrowing; whereas the Illinois
bonds are actually borrowing for operating expenses, which is a
big distinction.
Of course, the expenses will go up if interest rates go up.
And as I showed, that total interest on bonds are, depending on
the source used to calculate, only 4 or 5 percent of total
State and local expenditures. So again, this is not something
that is going to break the bank if it goes up from 4 percent to
5 percent to 6 percent of expenditures. It is on the margin.
They will have to accommodate it, but it is not going to break
the bank.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
Mr. Quigley is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Again, thanks to our panelists and the
chairman for participating in this. It is a very good first
step by the chairman and the committee on an important issue.
Before I ask you my last question, the thoughts for local
governments, State and local governments, is, from my point of
view, the mission matters. We often hear so much that people
don't like government. But when it comes to local government,
when they call 911, they want a fireman or an ambulance or a
police officer to respond, and they want to know that when they
cross a bridge, it is safe.
So much of local government strikes so close to home. It is
where the wheels hit the streets. So what we are talking about
today is so important because poor financial management can put
all of those things at risk. So beyond the financial management
dealing with pensions and so forth, it is really the notion
that governments need to look at themselves and reinvent
themselves. And I am not just speaking as a Congressman, but I
was a Cook County commissioner for 10 years. All local
governments need to reinvent themselves, streamline and
consolidate, not because they don't matter, but because they
matter very, very much. So there is a lot at stake here.
I want to commend the panelists. With one exemption, you
kept your bond that you weren't going to mention the name, and
shall not be mentioned. But it is still a big question. The
public wants to know to what extent could there be significant
defaults or significant bond defaults in the year 2011 or 2012?
Ms. Lav. I don't think there will be a city or a county
that defaults. I think there will be some defaults in special
districts and on revenue bonds. So, for example, in Florida,
there were bonds issued for sewers in a development that never
got built because the housing bubble burst. Well, there is no
way--you can't pay back those bonds because there is no sewer
revenue coming in. There are those kinds of things around the
country that are going to be a bit of a problem and there could
be defaults or restructuring.
As the chairman said, the term ``default'' is being used in
a number of different ways. I use it as you don't make the
interest payment on the bond, not that you find some other way
to provide it. Again, there are always some projects that go
back in a bad economy. But I don't think there will be any
major, large city or county that defaults. And I think by and
large, that even for smaller ones that the States will step in.
And, you know, we have a control board now in Nassau County,
New York. We will see quite a number of control boards, I
think, where States come in and impose control boards on
localities that are trouble and make them figure out a plan for
working their finances out.
Mr. Skeel. I also don't think there will be 50 to 100
defaults. But I think it is really important to keep in mind we
don't know. Probably 50 States will survive, but if only 48
States survive the current crisis, we are in trouble. And I
think we really need to plan for that. We need to plan for
surprises in a way that 2008 we had not planned for surprises.
Ms. Gelinas. As a democratic people in each State, we don't
have to wait for the bond market to make commonsense decisions
today. We know State by State and for the Nation as a whole, we
have to control our health care costs for public employees, as
well as other people as well; retiree pension liabilities.
These are all things that if we do not get a handle on them, we
will not be building or repairing roads, bridges, transit
because we are paying these growing retiree costs. These are
things we can fix today. We shouldn't and don't have to wait
for bond markets to tell us what we should be doing already.
Ms. Norcross. I would concur with what Ms. Gelinas said.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Cooper is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
you again and the ranking member for this excellent hearing.
Back to the question of individual investors. If I am an
individual bondholder today or a local taxpayer who is thinking
about maybe buying some of these bonds, what is the easiest way
for me to find, on the Web or another source, the credit
status, credit rating, financial soundness of the entity in
which I am investing or am living?
Ms. Lav. Bond prospectus have a whole lot of information
about the finances of a State or locality. It depends.
Mr. Cooper. A prospectus is a big, long, legal document,
sometimes hundreds of pages. It is very different for the
average person. What is the best way for a consumer who is
maybe at the broker's office saying I want a tax-free bond,
tell me what I should buy? How do you find out that
information? How do you tell whether you are living in a
creditworthy jurisdiction or not? This is the information age.
Is there a Web site that you can go to and find out with
relative ease, small town U.S.A., is it worthy or not?
Mr. Skeel. I think it is fairly difficult. You have to
piece together information. But all of the brokerages publish
reports or put out reports on individual bonds. Certainly if
you go to a broker, you can get that kind of information. But
to assemble it together yourself, I think, it is difficult.
Ms. Lav. That is why most people do rely on financial
advisers and on brokers rather than make their own decisions.
Or at least for information.
As Ms. Gelinas said, it depends on what kind of a bond it
is. You may be wanting to know about the possibility of are the
tolls going to pay back the bond on this highway. Or it may be
full credit, in which case you need to have some sense about
the budget of the entity and its long-term prospects.
Mr. Cooper. When Ms. Gelinas said earlier that individual
citizens should take it upon themselves to get ahead of the
bond markets and anticipate bad practices, it is very difficult
to do that. You really have to be a student of this to
understand what is going on.
Ms. Lav. Right. And I think people, just like I go to a
lawyer or I go to a doctor. I mean, I am a public finance
person, but everybody isn't and they need to go to an adviser.
Mr. Cooper. But for the individual investor, it should be
made relatively easy. And it is my understanding that some of
the brokerage houses may be affiliated with investment banks
that help underwrite the bonds, and they have an interest in
making those bonds look good.
Ms. Lav. Yes, that may be the case. You know, there is not
a lot of ways that an individual can investigate. Most towns
have their budgets on the Web site. I can find them, but it may
not tell you everything you want to know.
Mr. Cooper. We can compare almost everything else in life
through easily accessible Web sites. These important financial
instruments, why can't we get an easy handle on these?
Ms. Lav. There are 80,000 jurisdictions in the United
States--some people say 90,000--that issue bonds. It is quite a
large undertaking and one that maybe somebody would want to
undertake. But it would be a big deal.
Mr. Cooper. Perhaps a more relevant question is so many
people buy a bond fund, which may have a few bad apples in it.
How do you tell what is in your bond fund? It is my
understanding that with the housing crisis, they bundled
subprime credits and when a few more went under than expected,
that tainted the whole package.
Ms. Lav. That was a different kind. Those were kind of what
people call sliced and diced securities where people couldn't
know what the origin is.
Mr. Cooper. That is not done with muni bonds?
Ms. Lav. No. Never. It is not done ever.
Ms. Gelinas. The bond funds, without endorsing or not
endorsing them, there is at least something there, unlike with
something like a collateralized debt obligation built on
mortgage bonds built on more mortgage bonds. Some of these
things were rated AAA. They ended up being worth literally
nothing. I don't see how that would be the case here, even if
we did see small scale municipal and project defaults. It is
hard to conceive waking up and having a AAA rated municipal
bond fund being worth nothing.
However, I think your other point is very important, that
individuals own these bonds, but they don't own them directly.
They own them through money markets, $300 billion worth of
State and local debt in money market funds, and there is an
issue here of financial intermediation and the dealers
responsibility, that these are the large investment banks. They
run these funds, they hold many holdings on their own books.
And if we haven't succeeded in getting financial discipline
into these firms that still believe, in many cases, that they
are too big to fail, they are not going to be worried about
State and local debt because they think Congress will bail them
out, not the States.
Mr. Cooper. Would any of you invest today in a bond fund in
the hunt for yield with higher tax-free interest rates of
project funds in Nevada, southern California, Florida? Would
you put your lifesavings or your pension fund in a fund like
that, especially since it is apparently quite difficult to find
out about the merits of each individual project?
Mr. Skeel. I would be careful, but I certainly wouldn't
steer away from the muni market.
Mr. Cooper. I asked about project funds because those would
be most likely to have problems.
Mr. Skeel. You would have to look at the project.
Mr. Cooper. But apparently, that is almost impossible to do
unless you are a bond lawyer and are willing to read 200 pages
per project.
Mr. Skeel. Well, I mean, if you are going to invest in a
particular project----
Mr. Cooper. But this would be a bond fund with lots of
these projects. It just seems to me that we are not giving
consumers, individual investors, enough information here. At
least that is easily accessible. But I see that my time has
expired. I appreciate the chairman's patience.
Mr. McHenry. I certainly appreciate the gentleman's line of
questioning. If the panel wants to go through, the question
was: Would you invest in State municipal bond funds; you,
yourself? Yes or no; maybe, if you all want to answer, that
would be great.
Ms. Gelinas. I think there is a very real problem with
trust, people's trust in the financial industry and in trusting
their financial advisers and trusting the managers of these
bond funds, and that issue is not going away any time soon.
Mr. McHenry. Ms. Norcross.
Ms. Norcross. I would probably ask my financial planner.
Ms. Lav. I have never actually invested in municipal bonds.
It is just not my style of investing.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the gentleman from Tennessee for his
line of questioning.
With that, we will go to Mr. Walsh of Illinois.
Mr. Walsh. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
holding such an important hearing. Like the ranking member, I
am from Illinois as well. Illinois is a mess. We all know that.
No way is the Federal Government going to bail out my State. My
voters, our constituents won't allow it. I feel like I left the
movie right before the good part, and I am sure the case was
being made that bankruptcy is not feasible. So no bailout.
Bankruptcy isn't feasible.
Let me start out with a quick round-robin question. Give me
your 20-second solution just so I can walk out of here with
that take away. We are not going to bail you out. Bankruptcy is
probably not feasible, so what are the States going to do? Give
a quick one to that.
Ms. Gelinas. Well, I think voters in many States are
already doing the right thing. We have new Governors from both
parties that are starting to address what do we do about
pensions for future employees? What do we do about Medicaid
costs? Something Congress can certainly help with. These are
questions for voters in the individual States pressuring their
own lawmakers to change State laws and, in some cases, State
constitutions, not something that the Federal Government can or
should do for them. So in some ways the system is working, if
imperfectly.
Mr. Walsh. I guess my question is if there is going to be
no bailout from us and a bankruptcy is not feasible, a State is
falling off the cliff, let's imagine that one in the next 3 or
4 months literally is going to fall off the cliff. We can
change laws that will impact things in the future, but what do
you do for that State that has just fallen off the cliff?
Mr. Skeel. My answer is going to be I really think we need
to put a bankruptcy regime in place to deal with precisely that
problem. That is the only problem we absolutely need bankruptcy
for. I would add one thing to that: I agree that States are
doing the right thing. I hope the optimism that we have heard
today is correct, that most of them can muddle their way
through. But some measures are a lot tougher than others. For
instance, pension reform in a State, while there is a lot of
debate in Illinois about what can and can't be done right now,
but in many States it does require a constitutional change. I
think that is pretty unrealistic. So some of the options are
more feasible than others.
Mr. Walsh. Ms. Norcross, your State is falling off a cliff;
what are you going to do?
Ms. Norcross. I would say close the defined benefit plan
and figure out how you are going to pay out what has been
accumulated.
Mr. Walsh. Ms. Lav.
Ms. Lav. I think States can use their normal processes of
dealing with their taxes and their expenditures to set
themselves on a right path. Illinois has a particularly deep
hole. I have been writing and talking about Illinois' problems
for the last 25 years of its fiscal mismanagement. I am a
native Chicagoan. But it just needs to do those things it needs
to do to get out of it and to bring itself back to balance. It
has the tools. It just needs to use them.
Mr. Walsh. Thank you. In my remaining time, let me quickly
ask one quick question about market risk. Bill Gross who
manages PIMCO, one of the largest mutual funds in the country,
he stated that a low or negative real interest rate for an
extended period of time is the most devilish of all policy
tools. It is interpreted to mean, what he is saying is that the
Fed's action to lower interest rates helps our debtors, such as
States and municipalities, while harming all those who worked
hard and saved money.
Ms. Norcross, Ms. Gelinas, quickly, in effect, the Fed is
enabling debtors to reduce their debt on the backs of those
that saved money; is that right?
Ms. Norcross. I would hesitate to say that right now.
Mr. Walsh. Ms. Gelinas.
Ms. Gelinas. There is complacency. States and cities have
borrowed at very low rates not just for the past couple of
years in extreme conditions, but really for two decades now. If
rates go up, including possibly way up, they will have to get
used to a very different environment very quickly.
Mr. Walsh. Could you argue that the Fed's quantitative
easing program is in effect, has in effect been a bailout for
States and municipalities?
Ms. Gelinas. Sure this is a bailout for anyone who owes
money. States and municipalities may not be the biggest
proportionate benefitter from this, but it certainly helps
them.
Mr. Walsh. Ms. Norcross, you concur?
Ms. Norcross. I concur.
Mr. Walsh. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. Ms. Buerkle from New York is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for hosting this very
important meeting. Coming from New York State, as you can
imagine, this is a concern on many of our minds. I apologize,
we've had a number of hearings today for being in and out. I
appreciate your time this morning.
The first question I want to ask is regarding actually the
stimulus money and the fact that so much of it was paid to the
States. Do you think that was a way the States were sort of--it
put the States off, they didn't have to really face these
issues head on, and so it actually delayed and now the States
have to reckon with the situation? That is a question for any
one of you.
Ms. Lav. I am happy to respond to that. When that money
first came out in 2009, we would have seen it covered about a
third of the State's deficits. In that year, we would have seen
very sharp cuts in education and health care. We would have
seen millions of people losing their health insurance, and the
States were poised to cut people. We would have seen many, many
more layoffs of teachers and other public employees, which
would, in fact, have potentially delayed recovery because you
take that demand out of the economy, and the stimulus actually
provided a boost to the economy that was very important.
So now, as the stimulus is ending, at least State revenues
are beginning to grow again. They are still below 2008 levels,
but they are beginning to grow again. So States have a little
more ability to absorb the end of the stimulus. They are
proposing very major cuts in budgets this year. But it is
probably better that they are doing it now as the economy is at
least on something of a growth path than if they did it in the
depths of the recession which could have been very damaging to
the economy.
Ms. Buerkle. But it seems to me those decisions they are
making now, they should have made a year ago and actually got
their fiscal houses in order. It appears the stimulus just
delayed reckoning with the reality of the situation. Mr. Skeel.
Mr. Skeel. I agree. There is some case for some of the
stimulus money going to the States, but there is no question in
my mind that it has delayed the restructuring.
Ms. Gelinas. Yes, I would agree with that. There was a
missed opportunity in that Congress might have considered
saying to the States: we will give you a dollar today in 2009
if you take steps to cut your future liabilities by a dollar 10
years from now. So fix the pensions, fix the health care and
Medicaid costs, give them operating aid now, but use it as
leverage to work on the long-term problems. That was something
that was not done.
Ms. Norcross. I would add to that some of the stimulus
expanded some spending and is leading to cuts that need to be
taken today. States, Virginia, New Jersey, deferred their
pension payments. They were not making the tough choices.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you. While I still have some time, if I
could ask another question.
Mr. Skeel, regarding the possibility of bankruptcies in
some of the States that are so financially strapped, if, in
fact, they did declare bankruptcy, would that affect the
borrowing abilities of healthier States? Does that impact a
State that kept its fiscal house in order, and now they are
going to be impacted by some of the States that did not?
Mr. Skeel. I think the impact would be very limited. As I
was saying a few minutes ago, the bond markets have the ability
to distinguish between States that are in good fiscal shape and
States that are not. It is really not like the big banks in
2008 which were really connected to each other, had the same
kinds of assets, the same kinds of problems. The States really
are independent. So I think a State that is in good fiscal
health would continue to be able to borrow just fine.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
Ms. Gelinas, I think in your opening statement you
addressed that. Would you like to address that issue as well?
Ms. Gelinas. Sure. I would respectfully disagree. Markets
can distinguish among States, but they cannot do it
instantaneously or even in a few weeks or even months. So
changing the law in this way, really sweeping away half a
century's worth of precedents, it would take a long time for
markets to adjust to that and healthier States would suffer
during that timeframe as well.
Mr. Skeel. If I may add one last remark on that, when you
look at countries that have run into trouble, Argentina, for
instance, which is about as profligate as you can get, it is
remarkable how quickly they can go back to the markets. I
really believe markets respond a lot more quickly than people
tend to think.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you so much for your line of
questioning. I have just three more questions that I wanted to
pose to the panel, if that is all right with you all.
If you look at the public sector employee unions versus
private sector employee unions, the public sector unions now
account for more than private sector unions. It is an
interesting crossover we have had just in the last 2 years. On
average, public sector workers make $14 more per hour in total
compensation, wages and benefits, than their private sector
counterparts.
Ms. Gelinas, you have written about this, I know, but if
you can testify and say here today, it seems to me that public
sector employees and private sector employees are living in two
separate economies. What are the ramifications of that, and
what is really the root cause of that disparity?
Ms. Gelinas. Yes, and I should be clear that it differs
from State to State. Some States, particularly the northeastern
States, Illinois, California, offer much greater power to
employees to collectively bargain. Their benefits are
commensurately much higher. Generalizing the problem, it would
not be so much the wages as it is the benefits because these
are open-ended liabilities that States and localities are
taking on. Right now they are uncontrolled.
So one aspect of getting these under control is to start to
switch new civilian employees, a good first start, into 401(k)-
style pension plans, just as the private sector has. So you are
getting rid of an open-ended liability for the State in the
future.
The same thing with health care benefits. In many
municipalities, certainly not all of them, workers do not pay a
share or anywhere near the share of their own health care
benefits that private sector workers pay. Asking workers to pay
more for their own health care do much to help States and
cities with these liabilities.
Mr. McHenry. So you mention switching from a defined
benefit plan to a 401(k) style which most Federal employees
have, for instance, just as a for instance. That is one policy
change that we could--that the States could enact. What are the
prescriptions that the Federal Government can take action over
to help stem the tide that we see coming? Ms. Lav talked about
the loss of revenue, and the fact that stimulus funds sort of
relieved the States of that burden of having to lay off
workers. But if you look at local school boards right now, with
the loss of stimulus funds, you are having hundreds of people
show up at school board meetings because they are talking about
layoffs.
What I believe I saw and I believe a lot of folks saw was
that the day is coming, the day of reckoning is coming when
those stimulus funds run out. And rather than realizing it 2
years ago and making changes, they are having to do it now.
What are the things that we here in Congress, what policy
changes can we make to help stem this crisis? I will pose that
for everyone. We will start with Ms. Gelinas.
Ms. Gelinas. One area where it may be most straightforward
for Congress to help States is in Medicaid because this is not
an issue where Congress would be telling States you have to
change your pension plan; you have to change the way you govern
yourself. Medicaid is currently a program that encourages
States to spend more, because when a State spends a dollar
more, sometimes it gets more than a dollar back from
Washington. Gradually changing Medicaid into a block grant
program where you offer a set amount of money, increases on the
set formula, and the States are encouraged to innovate and cut
costs within that, reward them for cutting costs rather than
raising costs. This would approach another big chunk of their
costs, current and future.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Skeel.
Mr. Skeel. I agree that Medicaid is the most obvious place
to do things. There are real limits on what you all can do say
with pensions and things of that sort simply for State
sovereignty reasons. So places where there is already Federal
funding are the places where I think you look first.
Mr. McHenry. Ms. Norcross.
Ms. Norcross. I concur that Medicaid and other areas, K
through 12 education and where there are mandates that increase
fiscal pressure on States.
Ms. Lav. I don't think on the areas we are talking about
today that there is any need, as I said, for Federal
intervention.
Mr. McHenry. Other than money?
Ms. Lav. Well, I am not asking for the extension of the
stimulus. I mean, it was unfortunate that it was designed so
that the economy be recovered when the stimulus ended. Revenues
are still below their 2008 levels, so of course, at the end of
the stimulus, States were not able to get back to where they
were. So helping the economy, there is not much you can do to
help the economy right now either, necessarily.
But with respect to Medicaid, I think you can easily talk
about a block grant, but Medicaid is actually more efficient in
many ways than private insurance per individual matched for
health conditions. So I think that the best thing would be to
figure out how to control the rate of growth of health care
costs in the economy wide.
Those scary GAO numbers that Ms. Norcross mentioned are
entirely driven by the rate of growth of health care costs. If
health care costs continue to grow faster than GDP, States are
going to have trouble coping with that. So will the Federal
Government. It is a major driver of the Federal deficit, and
figuring out how to bring them under control is the best thing
to do.
Mr. McHenry. The final question of the day, and this is
something that I intend to ask future panels as well. We are
going to have a series of hearings about this fiscal crisis at
the State level and the ramifications of not addressing it, and
this is the opening of it. We wanted to hear from informed
individuals to start this process. But I would like for you
all, if you could, I'm asking you on the spot, but in the
future as well, tell us who we should hear from next: bond
market participants, credit rating agencies, pension holders,
unions? If you could, tell me one, two, three people or
entities we should hear from. Ms. Lav? We will go right down
the line.
Ms. Lav. Yes, that was a pretty good list. Financial
analysts. There are several who have a very good handle on
this. I can suggest a few and send them to you. And of course,
unions have a major stake in this. You should hear from them. I
mean, I think you also should listen to the Governors and the
mayors.
Mr. McHenry. Ms. Norcross.
Ms. Norcross. I concur, that is a good list to start with.
And also consider calling those who are involved in education
finance and financing other policy areas.
Mr. Skeel. I would just add, I think you all should talk to
pension lawyers because these issues are both economic and
legal. I think you need to see the whole picture.
Ms. Gelinas. All of those people, and I would also suggest
speaking with infrastructure people, because the other side of
this is that States have to grow. The private sector can't
create jobs when we have infrastructure that is decaying, and
so how can States spend Congress' money and their own money,
get the biggest bang for their buck in infrastructure and help
grow States so these liabilities can be better controlled from
that end as well.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. And I certainly appreciate your
testimony, and I appreciate the opportunity to hear from you.
Thank you for your time. Thank you for spending the morning
with us. Thank you so much. And this meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:25 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[The prepared statement of Hon. Elijah E. Cummings
follows:]


