- HHS AND THE CATHOLIC CHURCH: EXAMINING THE POLITICIZATION OF GRANTS (MINORITY DAY OF HEARING)

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HHS AND THE CATHOLIC CHURCH: EXAMINING THE POLITICIZATION OF GRANTS

(MINORITY DAY OF HEARING)

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 14, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-104

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
73-162                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on December 14, 2011................................     1
Statement of:
Burke, Florrie, consultant, Anti-Human Trafficking/Human
Rights/Collaborations, Chair Emeritus, Freedom Network USA,
UNODC Global Training Initiative; and Andrea Powell,
executive director and co-founder, Fair Girls..............    10
Burke, Florrie...........................................    10
Powell, Andrea...........................................    21
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Burke, Florrie, consultant, Anti-Human Trafficking/Human
Rights/Collaborations, Chair Emeritus, Freedom Network USA,
UNODC Global Training Initiative, prepared statement of....    13
Connolly, Hon. Gerald E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia:
Letter dated December 14, 2011...........................    46
Prepared statement of....................................    51
Cummings, Hon. Elijah E. Cummings, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Maryland:
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Prepared statement of Comprehensive Reproductive Health
Information and Services for Victims of Trafficking....     3
Powell, Andrea, executive director and co-founder, Fair
Girls, prepared statement of...............................    24

HHS AND THE CATHOLIC CHURCH: EXAMINING THE POLITICIZATION OF GRANTS
(MINORITY DAY OF HEARING)

----------

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 14, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:08 p.m. in room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Darrell E. Issa
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, Platts, Labrador, Meehan,
Gowdy, Cummings, Towns, Norton, Connolly, and Quigley.
Staff present: Alexia Ardolina and Drew Colliatie, staff
assistants; Michael R. Bebeau, assistant clerk; Robert Borden,
general counsel; Molly Boyl, parliamentarian; John Cuaderes,
deputy staff director; Linda Good, chief clerk; Christopher
Hixon, deputy chief counsel, oversight; Sery E. Kim, counsel;
Mark D. Marin, director of oversight; Christine Martin,
counsel; Ashley Etienne, minority director of communications;
Jennifer Hoffman, minority press secretary; Carla Hultberg;
minority chief clerk; and Cecelia Thomas and Ellen Zeng,
minority counsels.
Chairman Issa. Good afternoon. A quorum being present, the
committee will come to order.
Today's hearing, a minority day, is on HHS and the Catholic
Church: Examining the Politicization of Grants, a minority day
hearing.
The Oversight Committee's mission statement is we exist to
secure two fundamental principles: First, Americans have a
right to know that the money Washington takes from them is well
spent; and second, Americans deserve an efficient, effective
government that works for them. Our duty on the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee is to protect these rights. Our
solemn responsibility is to hold government accountable to
taxpayers, because taxpayers have a right to know what they get
from their government.
We will work tirelessly in partnership with citizen
watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American people and bring
genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy. This is our mission
statement.
Pursuant to the request by the minority, today is a
minority hearing. For that reason, I will ask the ranking
member to begin by making his opening statement. The gentleman
from Maryland is recognized.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you very much for agreeing to hold today's minority day
of hearings so quickly after our full committee hearing on
December 1st.
I would also like to extend my thanks to your staff for
their cooperation in scheduling this hearing, and working with
us to accommodate today's witnesses.
I am very grateful for all of these efforts. The reason I
feel so strongly about today's hearing is because I want to
make sure our committee gives a voice to the victims of human
trafficking, forced prostitution, and sexual slavery.
In our last hearing, we invited only witnesses from the
Department of Health and Human Services, who discussed the
formal procedures for grant applications. We were missing
witnesses who could testify in more detail about who these
victims are, what they go through, and why reproductive health
services are so critical for their recovery.
Unfortunately, at the last hearing, several Members of the
Republican side accused HHS of having an anti-Catholic bias.
They argued that HHS should have awarded a grant to the U.S.
Conference of Catholic Bishops, even though the bishops refused
to allow any grant funds to be used for family planning
services, such as abortion and contraceptives.
At the last hearing, George Sheldon, the principal HHS
witness, testified that he made his decision based on what was,
``in the best interests of these victims.'' He explained that
referrals for reproductive health services were critical for
these victims. He stated, ``I have talked to victims, as well
as experts in this field, who have indicated that referral for
the full range of gynecological services is an appropriate
requirement for these individuals who have been victimized and
forced into prostitution.''
He also said this: ``Ultimately, it is that victim that we
are trying to empower. It is the victim that will decide what
services they will avail themselves to or what services they
will deny.''
If our goal is to analyze this grant program in a
responsible manner, we cannot ignore the voices of these human
trafficking victims, many of whom are very young women who have
been exploited and raped by their persecutors.
For these reasons, I am very thankful that Ms. Florrie
Burke and Ms. Andrea Powell are here today to share their
experiences in helping these victims escape their exploitive
conditions and put their lives back together. They will explain
why these victims need a full range of referral services that
includes reproductive health services, and they will explain
why limits placed on those referrals fail to meet the needs of
trafficking victims they serve on a daily basis.
I would also like to enter into the record, with unanimous
consent, a statement that was submitted by a coalition of
nearly two dozen organizations in support of comprehensive
reproductive health information services for female victims of
human trafficking. These organizations all fully support HHS's
decision.
Chairman Issa. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.003

Mr. Cummings. Finally, Mr. Chairman, at the broadest level,
I believe Congress should do as much as possible to enhance
efforts to combat human trafficking and sexual exploitation.
Indeed, at our last hearing, you stated that this is an
area where, ``there is never enough attention by Congress.''
And I really do thank you, because I know you are very
concerned about this issue. And I know of your work in the past
with regard to it. And I hope we can work together in a
bipartisan manner.
And I believe I speak for the entire committee when I
commend our witnesses for the work that each of them performs.
With that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Elijah E. Cummings
follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.005

Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman. I will now recognize
myself for an abbreviated opening statement.
I join with the ranking member in believing that in fact
victims deserve the best services providers can offer. On
December 1st, our hearing focused on the action by HHS
political appointees in what we believed to be an abuse of the
grant process.
It may well be, as your unanimous consent indicates, and
many of the statements made last week, that a full range of
health care reproductive health care solutions may be needed.
Notwithstanding that, the previous hearing showed clearly that
in fact in the grant process HHS, knowing full well that under
Catholic theology, they could not provide those services, that
they ultimately decided to deny the grant on. That is why the
committee's hearing did concentrate on Catholicism, a religious
belief, which includes a prohibition on contraception or
abortion, found themselves rated with an 89, with 5 years of
successful--and we may hear differently today, but we didn't in
previous weeks--successful execution of this contract.
Having said that, the law is clear, denying based on
religious beliefs is prohibited under the law. Two weeks ago,
the grant process abuse appeared to clearly deny based on that.
There certainly were well demonstrated opportunities for HHS to
find work arounds, allowing for those individuals to receive,
when they were receiving ordinary health care treatment from
licensed physicians, to receive referrals or some other
accommodation. That was not explored. It did not come to mind.
And ultimately, the process was left to ask Catholic Bishops to
say how they would pay for abortions and pretend not to.
Ultimately, they could not do that. It would be outside the
teachings of their faith and prohibited.
Therefore, today's hearing, although it will concentrate
on, and rightfully so, shedding light on these victims--and I
approve the wide variety of questions that will undoubtedly be
asked, and I have seen the witnesses' opening testimony, and I
understand that it will concentrate on the victims. This series
of hearings on grant abuse will continue asking not whether a
particular policy or ideology is the case, but rather, under
the current law, was a grant properly executed based on a
system that is predictable and accountable to the taxpayers?
Having said that, although I don't believe that will be the
case, and nothing will change that today, I join with the
ranking member in recognizing that we have a panel of human
rights advocates who are here today to inform us further on a
problem which this committee, on a bipartisan basis, wants to
explore.
With that, I yield back, and would now like to recognize,
without taking a breath, our first panel.
Ms. Burke is a consultant for anti-human trafficking, human
rights, and collaborations, and is chair emeritus of Freedom
Network USA.
Ms. Andrea Powell is executive director and co-founder of
FAIR Girls.
Ladies, pursuant to the committee rules, I would ask that
you please now rise to take the oath. And please, raise your
right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Issa. Let the record indicate both witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Please take your seats. I am going to tell you this is my
first minority hearing. But fortunately, it is not my first
time to the rodeo. Everything is the same in a minority hearing
as it is in any other hearing.
So you will have a green light in front of you, a
countdown. Please understand that both of your opening
statements will be placed in the record completely. So
abbreviate, go off of it. Quite frankly, extend or tell us
things that were not in your statement and you will be adding
to the information we have. When it gets to the end of 5
minutes, please try to wrap up as expeditiously as possible.
Ms. Burke.

STATEMENTS OF FLORRIE BURKE, CONSULTANT, ANTI-HUMAN
TRAFFICKING/HUMAN RIGHTS/COLLABORATIONS, CHAIR EMERITUS,
FREEDOM NETWORK USA, UNODC GLOBAL TRAINING INITIATIVE; AND
ANDREA POWELL, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND CO-FOUNDER, FAIR Girls

STATEMENT OF FLORRIE BURKE

Ms. Burke. Chairman Issa, Representative Cummings,
distinguished Members of Congress and staff, thank you for the
invitation to provide testimony regarding the reproductive
health needs of survivors of human trafficking.
Thank you also for your interest and ongoing commitment to
the services for victims.
I have been working with these survivors since 1997. Since
that time, I have worked providing direct services, creating
programs, supervising staff, and now as an independent
consultant to both governmental and nongovernmental entities.
I also serve as an expert witness and am asked to testify
on the psychological impact of human trafficking and the
climate of fear that surrounds the victims of this horrendous
crime.
Additionally, I provide training on victim-centered care,
both nationally and internationally.
During the various aspects of my work, I have had the
privilege of interviewing hundreds of survivors of human
trafficking. And it is this direct experience that informs the
remarks I will make today and in my written testimony. My
intent is to convey the accounts provided to me by survivors in
their own words, not based on theory, supposition, or ideology.
I have not experienced trafficking myself, but these
survivors have, and their stories have made a lasting
impression on me. I think it is imperative that the
distinguished members of this committee understand the import
and urgency reflected in the physical and mental health needs
of survivors. I am not a medical expert. But as a licensed
mental health clinician with advanced degrees in clinical
psychology, I am considered an expert in the mental health
needs of victims and the efficacy of victim-centered care.
I have worked with survivors who have been enslaved for
days, months, or years. It is rare that traffickers will allow
their victims to receive any health care during the period of
enslavement. A more common occurrence is that after victims are
rescued or escape, they come into contact with service
providers.
Case management programs are tasked with assessment and
referral as well as providing practical support. It is their
job to assist the survivor in determining what a trafficked
person needs in all areas. If the screening assessment of case
management programs reveals the need for health care services,
referrals are made.
A victim-centered approach means that all necessary
information and options are provided to the survivor, who then
makes decisions for him or herself.
The age range of trafficked persons is staggering, from
very young children to elderly persons. All are vulnerable to
serious health consequences. To illustrate, I would like to
cite a few examples from my experience. Two teenagers were
forced to work in a brothel, and I was introduced to them the
day after their escape, when they went through the back door of
a clinic the trafficker had taken them to when one became ill
and couldn't work.
They told me they had been subjected to multiple sex acts
without condoms and were fearful of disease. The young woman
with the infection told me she was not given medication. This
seemed odd to me. And upon further questioning, she did produce
a crumpled up prescription. Due to the language issues, she
hadn't understood that this was an order for medication.
Another group of teenage girls were brought into this
country and forced to work as bar girls. This included
commercial sex acts and rape for many of them. One became
pregnant and was given liquid and pills by the trafficker to
force a miscarriage. These means were not effective until late
in the pregnancy, when after repeated forced ingestion of this
so-called medication, she endured a very painful and dangerous
forced abortion at the hands of the traffickers.
The other women were coerced into observing her and
instructed that the same thing could happen to them. The young
woman was then subjected to psychological torture by being
forced to keep the result of the late-term miscarriage in close
physical proximity for several days.
When the young women from this case were finally rescued,
this individual was hospitalized for physical and psychiatric
care. She was suicidal and remained in care for several years
to deal with the trauma of the abuse of the traffickers, the
painful forced abortion without medical care, and the resulting
situation.
Another survivor who was older had been forced to work as a
domestic servant for up to 6 years. She was repeatedly raped by
her employer, her employer's son, and some friends of the
employer's. At no time were condoms used. When she was finally
free, she told these experiences to the case manager and was
referred to a clinic for a complete gynecological workup.
The clinic staff determined that because of longstanding
untreated STDs, she had sustained permanent damage and probable
loss of fertility. The case manager had to provide support and
seek counseling for this woman to help her deal with this
devastating diagnosis.
Those of us in this room cannot know the feeling of
individuals forced into degrading and physically and mentally
dangerous situations like those I have just described. We
cannot imagine the stress of knowing something is wrong but
being powerless to get help, to get information, to get
treatment, to get care.
These crimes are taking place here in our country, to our
citizens and to others who have come here in pursuit of a
better life. Our laws are designed to protect and punish.
The TVPA has done much to aid in the care and protection of
victims and the prosecution of traffickers. The law states that
victims are entitled to social services. This must include the
full range of services in order to mitigate the harm of what
has occurred.
Chairman Issa. Ms. Burke, I see you have many more pages,
and you are already 2 minutes over.
Ms. Burke. Not too many.
Chairman Issa. Can you wrap up? Like I say, you are heading
toward twice the allotted time, if you don't mind.
Ms. Burke. Okay.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Burke. Yes, sir.
We must provide information about, and people will make
their own choices. We must protect them, not punish them
further by withholding options that might aid in their recovery
and health. I was going to speak about the HHS grants.
Chairman Issa. I am sure we will get to that. I appreciate
it. And your entire record is placed in the record.
Ms. Burke. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Trust me, it will be cited many times in the
days to come.
Ms. Burke. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Burke follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.013

Chairman Issa. Ms. Powell.

STATEMENT OF ANDREA POWELL

Ms. Powell. Thank you. Chairman Issa, Representative
Cummings, and Oversight and Government Reform Committee
members, staff, and others who are here today, I appreciate and
am honored to have the opportunity to speak to you about the
complexities of the social service needs of human trafficking
victims here in the United States.
I would particularly like to thank both Chairman Issa and
Representative Cummings for their dedication to the needs of
victims of human trafficking, including victims of forced labor
and sexual servitude.
Since the passage of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act
in 2000, the U.S. Congress has advanced policies to ensure that
victims of this horrible crime of human trafficking are offered
comprehensive services that are designed to protect their
rights and restore their dignity.
I am the co-founding executive director of FAIR Girls,
formerly known as FAIR Fund. We are a nonprofit agency based
here in Washington, DC. We have offices and programs in Bosnia,
Montenegro, Serbia, Russia, and Uganda. We serve adolescent
girls between the ages of 11 and 21, to provide them both
prevention education and long-term compassionate care, so that
they can stay safe from or overcome situations of sex
trafficking, forced labor, and other forms of exploitation.
The majority of our clients who have been trafficked for
labor and all of our clients who have been sold for sex have
been raped, resulting in serious medical and emotional trauma.
It is for them that I am acting as their voice today before
you.
In addition to our direct services, FAIR Girls offers
prevention, education, and training to social service providers
and law enforcement and others who should be able and are able
to identify victims of trafficking.
I wanted to make four key points, and then I am going to
elaborate on some of the case examples that I shared in my
original written testimony. First, I would like to state that
all victims of human trafficking need medical services,
particularly women and girls forced into sex trafficking
situations.
Second, victims of human trafficking are denied this
medical treatment during their enslavement, thus making access
to immediate medical care critical and urgent, and frankly, one
of the very first things that we do as an agency.
Third, and I think this is very important to keep in mind,
victims of forced labor trafficking also need medical attention
for harm as a result of hazardous labor, long hours and, in
some cases, sexual abuse and rape by their traffickers. Their
traffickers do not look at the situation as I am only
trafficking for a certain purpose. If they believe they own an
individual, particularly a vulnerable child, they are going do
whatever they want with them. And that often includes rape.
Finally, service providers for victims of trafficking are
there to restore the dignity and freedom of our clients. We are
not there to prescribe any type of judgment or to force our own
opinions and beliefs on our clients. We are there to be, if you
will, the door to open them to dignity and restoring their life
as they would like to live it.
I wanted to speak just a bit to the complexities of the
issue of human trafficking. Under the TVPA, the definition of
the severe forms of human trafficking is categorized into two
areas, labor trafficking and sex trafficking. I would like to
point out while forced labor trafficking always needs to have
the element of proving force, fraud, and coercion, any young
person under the age of 18 induced to commit a commercial sex
act, whether they are seemingly giving consent or not, is
automatically considered a victim of sex trafficking.
Traffickers prey upon the vulnerability of victims. And in
fact, when we do outreach education to kids in the schools here
in the D.C. area, we have them learn two main words,
vulnerability and exploitation. Traffickers know who to take
advantage of. Victims are predominantly already victims of
exploitation, poverty, homelessness, and other forms of abuse.
I now want to share a few of our case examples that I
believe are very important. Two years ago, we were reached out
to by a local hospital that had one of our outreach brochures.
They identified a teenage girl who they believed to be
pregnant, who they also believed to be a victim of trafficking.
We found out that her trafficker was able to sell her to up to
20 men a night by utilizing online Web site advertising
companies, like Backpage and Craigslist. Therefore, she was
being forced to be raped and exploited day in and day out, to
the point that she wasn't allowed to eat or sleep.
This young woman, when she came to us, did in fact appear
to be pregnant. We were able to get her a full medical
assessment that day. And we found that instead of being
pregnant, her trafficker had stuck a kitchen sponge inside her
body to keep her from bleeding during menstruation. It had
grown to the size of a football. And the toxins inside her body
nearly killed her. Had we not had the capacity and the
resources that we pulled together from our own agency's general
fund to protect this young woman, it is very likely that she
would have died in the next few days.
In another case, to illustrate the connection between labor
trafficking and the importance of reproductive health care, we
had a young woman come to us a couple of years ago who was the
victim of forced labor trafficking. We noticed that when she
was speaking to us in the initial assessment that she was
holding her arms in a very protective way. Eventually, she
showed us all of the bruises and the scrapes and the battering
that had gone on on her arms and her back. What had happened
was her trafficker had beaten her several times because she had
fallen asleep on the job. The wounds had become infected
because the clothing had become embedded inside of her wounds.
She also had been raped multiple times by the owner of the
establishment, as well as many of the friends. This young woman
suffered several sexually transmitted diseases and many more
emotional and mental health scars that we cannot even begin to
understand as we are not ourselves in that situation.
I would like to finally summarize with one key point. In
the United States, many of us are well aware that when there is
a victim of rape, not just sex trafficking but any type of
victim of rape, the first thing that we think is they need to
get to the doctor. They need an assessment. What are the
injuries? Do they have sexually transmitted diseases? Law
enforcement takes them there. Social service providers take
them there. It has become the norm.
It is very important to understand that when a victim of
trafficking is forced to have sex, this is also rape. It should
also be the norm that any young person, old person, anyone who
is a victim of trafficking should have the access that they
need to make sure that they get an entire medical workup so
that they can get on with recovering, as well as make sure that
they address any long-term consequences.
I appreciate the opportunity today to speak before you. And
there are many more stories that I would like to share, as I
believe passionately in the rights of the young people that we
serve at my agency. And I am very open to questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Powell follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.020

Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Thank you both for your testimony.
Because of the nature of today, I am going to ask the
ranking member to go first. I will hold my questions probably
until the very end as part of a summary.
And with that, I recognize the ranking member for his
questions.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Powell and Ms. Burke, thank you for being with us
today.
I have heard these victims' stories, and they are indeed
heart-wrenching. And they have been horribly exploited. And I
commend you both for the work that you are doing.
Let me pose a fundamental question and let you respond.
Your organizations both work with these victims directly. So
you have this firsthand experience with their needs, as well as
understanding of the treatment and services that work.
Ms. Burke, can you please tell us why, in your opinion, it
is to important to ensure that these victims have access to
referrals for reproductive health care services?
Ms. Burke. I think from the case examples that the two of
us have given, it is obvious the critical needs that
trafficking victims present when service providers meet them.
Whether they have been enslaved in sex trafficking or labor
trafficking, it is a common occurrence that rape is used as a
means of control and exploitation.
And when sexually transmitted disease or untreated
infections are allowed to go on, permanent damage, health
damage can go on, not only to cause harm to them but to others.
And contraception is almost never provided by a trafficker. And
yet these young women and older women are expected to endure
rape 10, 20 times a day, without any kind of protection or
medical care. And so we feel that it is so important that
people be given information.
And what service providers do is provide a referral to
people who are experts in providing education, information, and
services, so that survivors can make informed choices for
themselves.
They have had all ability to make a choice about anything
taken away from them by the traffickers. And we need to restore
this sense of personal freedom and choice about what is good
for them and what they will pursue.
Mr. Cummings. Ms. Powell, what about you, your
organization?
Ms. Powell. Absolutely. I believe that it is very important
for all victims of human trafficking, regardless of what type
of trafficking, to have immediate access to the reproductive
health services and full range of medical services that they
need.
In fact, just yesterday, I was sitting before a new client,
and within the first 5 minutes she asked me if I could get her
to a doctor as quickly as possible because she was terrified of
the consequences of being forced to have sex with dozens of men
a day.
This is not something that happens just on occasion. It is
not a rare occurrence. Every single client that comes to us,
whether referred by law enforcement in the middle of the night
or being someone that was referred to us by child protective
services, they all want and they all need this service.
And furthermore, I would like to point out that I am not a
medical professional, and most of my colleagues who are social
service providers are also not medical professionals.
Therefore, it is not in the best interests of our clients, nor
is it ethical for us to presume what may or may not be going on
with a client's mental or physical health. It is absolutely
important that we utilize the medical community to give that
comprehensive services to the victims.
Mr. Cummings. At the previous hearing, some committee
members suggested that organizations that receive taxpayer
funds to help these victims should be allowed to prohibit these
types of referrals.
Ms. Burke, you have a chance right now to talk directly to
some of those members and make your case. Based on your
experience, should these types of referrals be prohibited? Or
if not, why not?
Ms. Burke. I definitely feel that services need to be
comprehensive. Our law allows for a victim-centered approach
for protection, prevention, and prosecution. And we are not
protecting victims if we are not referring them for a full
range of services.
The early HHS grants, which first were awarded in 2001,
were awarded directly to case management programs. And these
grants provided for referrals for all necessary services,
without restrictions. It was not until 2006, when the U.S.
Conference of Catholic Bishops received the contract, that
restrictions around reproductive health care would not allow
these very same agencies that received initial funding to
continue to provide the same inclusive referrals for care.
It is important to understand that HHS funding is often the
only funding that a service program has. The health and well-
being of clients was compromised when USCCB denied the ability
of case management programs to refer for these services. The
restriction stands in the way of health and healing of
countless victims, and it denies the option of choice,
something that had previously been denied by traffickers and
enforcers.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
I see my time has expired.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Idaho, Mr. Labrador, for 5 minutes. See
what happens when you come back early?
Mr. Labrador. I came about back a bit early. I yield my
time to----
Chairman Issa. Okay.
I will go to the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Gowdy.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank my friend and colleague from Idaho.
Ms. Burke, do you know what the composite score was for the
Catholic Bishops' grant application?
Ms. Burke. I really have no idea about the grant
application process, the scoring process.
Mr. Gowdy. All right. They had the second highest composite
score among all who applied for the grant. And I think the
record will support that they had this grant or contract for a
5-year time period. I can't recall a single witness ever
providing any evidence that any of the victims who were helped
by the Catholic Bishops were dissatisfied with their 5-year
tenure.
So I think what strikes some of us--and let me say at the
outset, I am a former State and Federal prosecutor who has as
little tolerance for crimes against any group, especially the
voiceless and the defenseless, as anyone. So I appreciate and
applaud what you all do on behalf of the people who cannot
stand up for themselves.
But I am concerned that an entity with a sterling 5-year
track record of providing services also had the second highest
composite score in a grant application and, nevertheless, was
not awarded the grant. It just strikes me that they should have
been disqualified, they should have been told up front because
of your religious views on abortion, you are not going to be
eligible to apply for this grant. But to go through the ruse of
letting them apply, have the second highest score, a 5-year
track record, and no complaints from victims, and then not
award them the grant just strikes some of us as being
excessively politicized.
What do you think?
Ms. Burke. I really can't comment on the grant-making
process. I just am not aware. But I would like to address your
question about victims' satisfaction or dissatisfaction, if I
may.
Mr. Gowdy. Okay.
Ms. Burke. You said that you have not heard any evidence of
victim dissatisfaction with the work done under the USCCB
contract. Was that correct?
Mr. Gowdy. Well, I asked the last panel that was before us
if they had bothered to interview any of the victims to gauge
their level of satisfaction. And they had not even gone through
the process of interviewing the very people that we are trying
to help.
Ms. Burke. I would like to address that, if I may.
Mr. Gowdy. Okay.
Ms. Burke. I would like to try to. I think that if you
asked victims about a contract with USCCB, very frankly, I
don't know that they would understand the nuances of that
contract. They are interested in the services that are being
provided. They are seeking services from a case management
agency. It would be the providers who would express the
satisfaction or dissatisfaction with the contracting
restriction.
Mr. Gowdy. Let me stop you there, because unfortunately,
despite the very serious nature of this topic that we are
discussing, we are limited to 5 minutes.
You would have no aversion to the Catholic Bishops being
able to handle male human-trafficking victims, so this would
not be an issue. I assume, because of their sterling track
record, that if HHS had the foresight to divide it between male
and female victims, there is nothing disqualifying about the
Catholic Bishops with respect to male trafficking victims.
Ms. Burke. I think that that would create a terribly
awkward system of divisiveness in deciding who is a victim and
who is not.
Mr. Gowdy. But you can see the awkwardness of telling a
denomination that has a long history of trying to help the
weak, the poor, the disenfranchised groups that nobody else has
been historically willing to help, to tell them that because of
your religious views on this issue, you need not apply. Because
the next thing that goes through my mind is what if the
Catholic Bishops wanted to apply for an after-school grant that
had nothing do with human trafficking? If it was just an after-
school program, but they might have female participants in it,
would they also be disqualified because of their religious
views with respect to abortion? I am trying to get you I guess
to answer what HHS would not answer last time, which is their
religious views have disqualified them. They need not apply for
any HHS grants until they change their religious views.
Ms. Burke. I think that it is not about male and female,
because I think that all victims of trafficking, sex
trafficking, labor trafficking are vulnerable to serious health
consequences, sexually transmitted disease, etc. So dividing
into genders would not solve this problem. What we need to do
is be inclusive that all health services are available to all
victims.
Mr. Gowdy. So would the Catholic Bishops be disqualified
for applying for any grants with any demographic that could be
even tangentially related to reproductive services?
Chairman Issa. The gentleman's time has expired.
You may answer, though.
Ms. Burke. I am not sure that I can answer, because I am
not in the position of making these grants. My overarching
responsibility is to see that all--that referrals for all
health services can be made for victims.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize, well, quite frankly, I think Mr. Quigley
was the only one here at the start, Mr. Quigley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Burke, Ms. Powell, again, thanks for the work that you
do and for those in your agencies for the work that they do.
There were news stories alluded to in the previous hearing
which argued the following point, that providing contraception
to trafficking victims is sustaining prostitution. The argument
being victims being trafficked right now cannot provide
informed consent to an abortion or a regime of contraception
because they are under control of a trafficker. If you do
provide these services, all you are doing is perpetuating
modern day sex slavery.
So the question for both of you is, is this correct? Does
providing contraceptives to survivors of trafficking sustain or
support prostitution? And based on your experiences in human
trafficking, are victims capable of giving informed consent to
family planning services? Fire away.
Ms. Powell. Okay. I will start. So as a social service
provider, we have never been in the position where we were
buying contraceptives for those who are currently being
trafficked. I think one thing to kind of frame this discussion
on is that when someone is a victim of human trafficking, they
are in fact enslaved. None of the money is theirs. They have no
agency. They eat when they are told to eat; they sleep when
they are told to sleep. They wear what they are told to wear.
They have absolutely no ability to make choices. And I am using
the word victim very confidently right now, because in that
state, in that situation in which they are enslaved, they are a
victim.
However, when they are referred to us through law
enforcement, when they escape, or when they are rescued, when
they come to us, they then go on this path of becoming a
survivor. And part of being a survivor is having the ability to
say what they need and when they need it, and how they want to
have that service provided to them. And it can be as simplistic
as wanting a pair of socks to sleep in, and it can be as
complex as legal services and medical services.
Our job as a social service provider, in particular in
those first 24 hours, is to really try to listen, as clearly
and without judgment as possible, to what this individual
needs. And that individual can be a 65-year-old man who is a
victim of labor trafficking, and it can be a 16-year-old girl
who is a victim of sex trafficking. Our job is to listen and to
help them get access to those services. And we do everything in
our power, given the resources and the size of our agency, to
do that.
Mr. Quigley. Ms. Burke.
Ms. Powell. I think you had a second part to your question
that I maybe didn't answer.
Mr. Quigley. At that point of being survivors, are they in
your mind capable of informed consent on such decisions?
Ms. Powell. Absolutely.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you.
Ms. Burke.
Ms. Burke. Yes, I would agree that with proper
understanding of the language, if there is a second language
issue, that information needs to be provided in the primary
language of the survivor, first of all. And with proper
education and information, certainly people can make informed
consent. They have to have informed consent to go through the
criminal justice process.
The key here is, as Ms. Powell said, that service providers
are not providing contraception or other family planning
services. We are making referrals for those things.
So your question about sustaining or supporting
prostitution, I don't see the connection between the provision
of contraception and that concept.
Mr. Quigley. And with the limited time I have, how much--
you talk about the health care that you provide. Can you touch
a little bit about the psychological capability--psychological
care you can provide at that point?
Ms. Burke. Currently, I don't provide direct services any
more. I am a consultant. So I am involved in training about the
need for psychological experts to provide care for survivors.
And this would, again, be based on the needs of the individual,
whether it need to be some sort of cross-cultural counseling or
a group mode of therapy. It depends on the individual.
Mr. Quigley. Mr. Chairman, if Ms. Powell could take, with
unanimous consent, about 60 seconds to answer the same
question, given the amount of time?
Chairman Issa. You may answer the same question, please.
Ms. Powell. Okay. So to answer your question, when a client
comes to us, we have to make a very comprehensive assessment.
And granted, we have very limited time in that first 24 hours
to think about a variety of situations going on. There might be
language competency issues at play. And certainly, we work
first and foremost to address that so that we make sure that
everything that is going on is understood by this new survivor
so that they are making the best decisions that they can make.
We then try to figure out what other basic needs that they
need to have met simultaneously so that they are feeling
comfortable enough to express what they need.
But we are not putting the words in their mouth. We are not
pushing them toward doing something if they don't want to do
it. We are doing everything in our power to hear what they
need. And that might mean that they want to immediately get
reproductive health services. It might just mean that they are
hungry, and they need some food. And they might just be tired
and need to sleep first.
And our counseling professional staff in all of our
locations are skilled professionals who can make sure that they
are helping that individual make the most important choices of
their life in the way that they believe that they would like to
make them.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
We now go to the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Gowdy.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to yield my time to my friend and
colleague from Idaho, Mr. Labrador.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you very much to the gentleman from
South Carolina.
Ms. Powell, I just--I want to thank both of you, actually,
for the work that you do. I was not a prosecutor, but I was
actually a criminal defense attorney, and I have dealt with
some of the issues that you are dealing with, and I know how
hard it is.
I do have some questions, though. According to your
testimony, Ms. Powell, your organization offers each of its
clients individualized care, including counseling, advocacy,
referrals for housing, legal and medical services. What
percentage of your clients request counseling?
Ms. Powell. Most of them request counseling. I don't have
an exact percentage.
Mr. Labrador. Approximate. You say close to a hundred
percent?
Ms. Powell. I would say 85 to 90 percent.
Mr. Labrador. What about advocacy?
Ms. Powell. It depends on whether or not they have been
arrested as a result of their trafficking. That might be
something that they need support for. Or if they need support
around immigration issues. But I am going to say more like 40
percent.
We actually also serve domestic minor victims of sex
trafficking. And sometimes advocacy for them looks pretty
different than someone who is a foreign national victim.
Mr. Labrador. What about housing?
Ms. Powell. Pretty much all of them need housing. And that
is a big challenge.
Mr. Labrador. And legal?
Ms. Powell. It really depends. I would say about half.
Mr. Labrador. And medical?
Ms. Powell. Almost all of them. I would say 98 percent need
some type of medical care referrals from us within the first 48
hours.
Mr. Labrador. Okay. You also state that their medical needs
include the treatment of STDs.
Ms. Powell. Right.
Mr. Labrador. Serious gynecological illnesses, including
cancer, kidney damage due to untreated STDs. These treatments
are all within what the U.S. Catholic Bishops do, and they
would be willing to provide, but they don't wish to refer for
abortions. How many of your clients actually ask for services
dealing with abortion?
Ms. Powell. When our clients ask for referrals for
reproductive health care, it is usually within the first 24
hours of us meeting them. And it is often that they would like
to discover. It is not that they know whether or not they are
pregnant or that they know whether or not that they have a STD.
So, by and large, they are asking for a referral so they can
figure out what the damage is to their body and what they are
going to have to do to recover moving forward.
Mr. Labrador. Do you pay for their medical services?
Ms. Powell. Luckily, we have a community health clinic here
in the D.C. area that offers the initial consultations pro
bono, while we figure out other remedies for payment. On
occasion, we have had to pay for medications, though.
Mr. Labrador. So if you look at all the services that you
provide, are you willing to say that providing abortion
services is the most important of all the services that you
provide?
Ms. Powell. It is very important that we are able to
provide the full range of reproductive and medical services
that our clients need.
Mr. Labrador. I understand. But we are talking about a lot
of different services. And if one organization provides all the
other services exceptionally well but does not provide one
service and is willing to send people out to provide those
services, don't you think they are doing a good service to the
community?
Ms. Powell. So my understanding is that for an organization
to be able to provide comprehensive services for victims of
trafficking would actually in fact mean just that; it would
have to be the full range and be comprehensive. So if they are
not providing referrals for this one particular service, then
they aren't in fact comprehensive.
Mr. Labrador. That is this administration's interpretation.
But the Catholic Bishops has been doing this for 5 years
without providing the comprehensive services. And in fact, when
they were rated, because you know there was a rating that--when
they were rated, they actually came in with the second highest
score when you looked at the overall responsibility that they
had, not just at this one particular thing. So when they are
the second best agency providing the services, all the other
services that we are talking about, don't you think it is a
disservice that we are not allowing--that we are not using an
organization like that that is actually doing everything else
pretty well?
Ms. Powell. To be honest, I really only have one interest,
and my interest is not the Catholic Bishops, and it is not the
grant process; it is to make sure our clients have
comprehensive services. As a very small agency that chose not
to subcontract with any government contracts with HHS, we did
this because we wanted the freedom to make sure that we could
provide comprehensive services for our clients.
I can tell you firsthand this is not easy cobbling together
the resources and making sure that while you are internally
panicking as to how you are going to pay for this, that you are
smiling at your client, saying it is okay, honey, we are going
to be fine, and thinking, how am I going to explain this to the
board that I just paid for this? So it is a very tricky
process. And I think that anyone who is providing comprehensive
services has to do just that. We can't pick and choose and part
and parcel. We have to do this holistically, just as we would
other victims of sex crimes and other forms of exploitation.
Mr. Labrador. And my understanding is that they do it
holistically as well, they just don't pay for the services. But
they will refer to medical providers to do any kind of service
that needs to be done.
But thank you very much for being here today.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now go to the gentleman from Brooklyn, New York.
I think Mr. Quigley and Mr. Cummings were the only ones
here at the start.
I apologize. You were here. You were so quiet; I missed
you.
Mr. Towns. I believe we have the yielding program here.
Chairman Issa. No, no, forget about that yielding thing. I
am not missing a chance to make amends. I now recognize, with
great pleasure, the gentlelady in the District of Columbia, in
which we are all thankful to be, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. At the moment.
Chairman Issa. At the moment.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate this
hearing.
My colleague on the other side indicated that if you are
second best at providing some of the services, that ought to be
enough, even if they are not all of the services that are
needed. I would say if you are first best in providing some of
the services, but those are not all of the services that the
clients need, that that is not good enough. If I go to a doctor
and he says I am real good at doing X, but you need X and Y, he
is not good for me.
Now, he also listed the services. He went down the
services. Did you notice that contraception was not on that
list? And I don't know why this discussion has gone off
entirely on abortion. I recognize how critical that is. But it
is important to get on the record that once the Bishops had the
contract, that these clients, who had been involved in
trafficking, for whom sex had become a way of life, were not
even able to be referred for contraception.
Let us understand what we are talking about. Even if you
are trafficking and you don't want an abortion, you don't
believe in abortion, after the Bishops got the contract, you
could not be referred even for contraception, even though you
had been involved in sex exchanges all your life.
Do you understand that going off on abortion hides what we
know every single person who has been involved in the life of
trafficking will need, and that is some way to protect him or
herself? Am I exaggerating the importance of contraception or
the need to provide contraception services, which were left
entirely off of that list that my colleague provided? I would
like to know something about contraceptive services and the
importance of providing them or not providing them to this set
of clients.
Ms. Burke. I don't think that you're exaggerating at all,
and I think that the referral for contraception and emergency
contraception is of vital importance for survivors of human
trafficking for all the reasons that we've listed. And when
USCCB got the contract in 2006, programs were no longer allowed
to refer for the full range of reproductive health.
Ms. Norton. You know, some of my colleagues accused those--
some of us on this side, who believe people should have the
full range of services, including contraception and abortion,
of anti-Catholic bias, even though I believe this was entirely
refuted by the record, which showed the Catholic Church had
received some $50 million in funding in the last 3 years, more
than they had received under the prior administration.
And I do want to say for the record, the Framers really did
have this thing right. It is as if you can get the public
dollar, the taxpayer money and continue to practice your
religion using taxpayer dollars as you please, regardless of
the needs of the client. There's no entitlement to a contract
in this country.
I want to ask about--I want to ask about, before the
Bishops had the contract. Before the Bishops had the contract,
Ms. Burke, were you able to provide the services, contraception
and abortion?
Ms. Burke. We were able to provide the referrals for the
services.
Ms. Norton. That's what I mean.
Ms. Burke. Yes.
Ms. Norton. So when the Bishops no longer had the contract,
all that was happening is that you were going back to the
status quo ante, how it had been before. When you were--when
the Bishops no longer had the contract, you were able to
provide the services. Once they got the contract, you were not?
Ms. Burke. Correct.
Ms. Norton. Now under the Bishops' restrictions, passing
out public money, how did the subcontractor or organization----
Chairman Issa. I would ask unanimous consent that the
gentlelady have another 30 seconds.
Ms. Norton. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman.
Under the Bishops' restrictions, if you needed, you believe
somebody needed contraception, I would say that would be
everybody, but forgive me if I think that, that needed
contraception or needed abortion, how would you assure that the
client received these services?
Ms. Burke. For some programs, there were other sources of
funding that were not tied to the contract, subcontract with
USCCB, and those programs could utilize that funding.
Ms. Norton. Well, suppose you were a subcontractor of the
Bishops?
Ms. Burke. For programs who were subcontractors with the
Bishops, and that was the only source of their funding?
Ms. Norton. Yes.
Ms. Burke. That meant that case managers, who work really
long hours at very low pay, had to spend extra time.
Ms. Norton. Uncompensated time?
Ms. Burke. Uncompensated time, trying to find a service
that would provide----
Ms. Norton. Contraception, for example.
Ms. Burke. Contraception, for example.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman,
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentlelady.
We now go to the gentleman from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Platts. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
I don't have any questions, but I appreciate both witnesses
for being here and especially written testimony, because I'm
running between meetings but glad to have your written
testimony that I may be able to take with me and appreciate
your work.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Platts. I would be glad to, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. I thank you. Let me go through a few
questions, because I have developed some questions while this
has been going on.
Ms. Burke, Ms. Powell, these questions will be sort of for
both of you.
Do both of you have places that you could refer an indigent
to get contraception at no cost to them? It's pretty
straightforward. Do you have a way outside of Federal funds to
get contraception for people in general, for women in general?
It's kind of an easy yes or no.
Ms. Powell. We have----
Chairman Issa. You have other resources you said you
scrapped together with very little money. I assume you have
that, is that right?
Ms. Powell. Right. So we're predominantly using pro bono
sources from the medical community.
Chairman Issa. Do you also have, if no other source is
available, the ability to get an abortion for somebody in need
if no funds are available.
Ms. Powell. If we can find a referral for the medical
services a client needs, then we can make that referral. But if
we don't have the----
Chairman Issa. No, I understand. And I'll get to the
referral in a second. I'm sort of building to that, and, you
know, in our earlier hearing--I don't think either of you were
necessarily in the audience--but there were three services,
which you are acutely aware of them, sterilization
contraception and abortion.
And abortion, under Federal law, we're only talking about
rape, incest and the life of the mother. We're not talking
about just because somebody's pregnant under the Federal law,
is that correct? Okay. So we are talking about a narrow
constraint, but it doesn't really matter. Those are the three
procedures out of 200 medical procedures.
Did the Catholic Bishops prevent you from referring
somebody to a doctor for gynecological examination, including
STDs and the other full range of things that can happen to
somebody who has been the victim of rape?
Ms. Burke. Yes.
Chairman Issa. They did?
Ms. Burke. Yes.
Chairman Issa. What, other than abortion, contraception and
sterilization, what procedures did they prohibit you from
referring to a doctor for, kidney disease, cancer, STDs, were
any of those prohibited?
Ms. Burke. No.
Chairman Issa. Okay, so you said there, yes, what's the
yes. What other than those three did they prohibit? In other
words, the same gynecological exam is going to go on for all of
these, so I just, I understand, you sent somebody for a health
care referral. You were not prohibited sending them to somebody
who could refer for an abortion because you didn't have to send
to a Catholic doctor. You sent to people, I assume, who could
come back and say the woman is pregnant or the woman needs
contraception for some reason, right?
You just couldn't physically get it paid for by the
Bishops; is that right? This is still the same doctor, isn't
it? I'm asking this for a question, and I'll get to the
question, rather than run you through questions you are
uncomfortable answering.
We are not concerned about abortion here today. We're
concerned about a contract. So let me go through the whole
point.
Had HHS said that, in fact, there was another program
outside of the Catholic Bishops and that under that site fund,
if a physician, who you referred for a full range of
examination, because, often you didn't send somebody in knowing
they were pregnant. The poor woman with a sponge, you thought
was pregnant, she wasn't pregnant, and ultimately, you still
referred here.
So if you sent somebody in and there was a site that said
if it comes back in these three categories by the doctor, that
referral goes to this site fund of Federal dollars, Ms. Powell,
something similar to when you had the State Department funding
directly that you had.
If you had another site fund, you would have been able to
refer them under that other site fund, is that correct, just as
you could have been referred them under pro bono work, is that
right?
Ms. Powell. We probably would be able to cobble together
different resources to do that.
Chairman Issa. Okay, but I am saying now if the Federal
Government had given you these resources and simply given it to
you on another site fund, provided it under the contract to
everybody, you would have had a site fund, you could have done
it. You weren't prohibited from having multiple contracts.
And the reason I'm asking this is, we asked HHS did they
try a work around? They said no, we went to the Catholic
Bishops and told them to offer us one. This committee is in no
small part concerned about differences on the--I'm sorry--on
the abortion issue, but we're also concerned on the
contracting.
So, in the future contract, if Catholic Bishops or any
group for any reason has any concern, if there is an effective
work around, and it appears as though there was an effective
work around, or at least it could have been explored, as people
dealing with people in need, you would have used the multiple
site funds or the free over here or that clinic over here that
you testified to earlier to, wouldn't you, to provide all those
services, because the Catholic Bishops were not providing the
services, they were doing referral and administration, right?
Ms. Powell. Sounds like a really complicated process, and
I'm not as familiar with the different types of contracting
that you're referring to.
Chairman Issa. Well, you're very, and my--his time has
expired, but you are very familiar with cobbling together money
to get what you want.
Ms. Powell. True.
Chairman Issa. Okay, you'd have cobbled it together. Our
problem here on the dais is we have a law that prohibits
religious beliefs from making somebody ineligible, and yet we
didn't have any attempt to work around. So that's why the
question--I apologize for going over.
And I guess I'm now going to the former chairman of the
full committee, who has been very patiently waiting, the
gentleman from Brooklyn, Mr. Towns.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me thank you and the ranking committee chair for having
this hearing. I would like to read into the record a statement
that was submitted by another survivor of human trafficking who
is on the verge of success with her life. Her story is one of
sadness, but also one of hope.
We can use hers and other examples as we continue to
examine what services are made available for victims of human
sex trafficking and who is capable of providing the services
that are necessary to transition back to a normal life as
possible.
And let me, this is from Asia Graves, who is 24 years old,
college student, is going to school for political science with
a legal studies concentration.
When I was 17 years old, she said, I was a victim of human
trafficking. I was living with my mother, who was addicted to
crack cocaine. For safety reasons, I moved in with my father,
who was an alcoholic.
I did not know my life would turn upside down. My dad
requested that I pay $900 a month in rent. I got a job working
as many hours as I could to try and pay my rent. I even missed
school. When I could not pay my rent, my father threw me out.
So, with no place to go, I moved in with a group of girls
who were staying in a one-bedroom apartment. They introduced me
to several of their male friends, who I didn't know were pimps.
I was told I was going to--on a date, but instead I was taken
to the track, a street corner in the middle of a snowstorm, and
left there. They told me that I had to have sex with these men
for money, or I would be homeless.
I didn't do it, and on my walk home, I met a guy who
appeared to be my age. He told me that I was beautiful, and I
could go home with him. He took care of me and gave me a place
to live.
After a week, he told me that he was a pimp, and I was his
property. He called an escort service, who took naked pictures
of me and put them on their Web site. Men came to the hotel and
had sex with me. I was told that if I did not have sex with
them, they would kill me.
Two weeks later, he took me to the track and made me work.
He said that if I did not, he would kill my family. He sold me
to several other pimps that had sex with me and forced me to
have sex with other men.
After being beaten, hit in the head with an iron and
sexually assaulted with a hair brush and figuring out that I
was pregnant, I had enough. I tried to run but was held hostage
at gun point.
When I finally escaped, I spoke to the first police officer
that I could find. That led to my trafficker's retaliation
against me. The next morning my trafficker sent four women with
steel-toed Timberland boots to assault me. They knew that I was
pregnant, so they focused their kicks on my face and stomach.
They left me on the sidewalk like a piece of garbage.
I walked to the nearest police station and spoke to a
police officer, who sent me to Sergeant Kelley O'Connell. She
knew who my trafficker was.
During our interview, I started to miscarry. She took me to
the emergency room. I was afraid to go to the hospital for the
fear that I wouldn't be seen due to lack of health insurance.
They made sure that even though I did not have health
insurance, I was taken care of.
After that, I did not know what to do or who to turn to.
Thankfully, I was blessed to have a group of investigators who
helped me physically and emotionally. I was also referred to
Carol Gomez, director, of course, and she who worked as my
victim advocate mentor and counselor. Without her, I would have
not have been able to receive mental health treatment or PTSD
physical, as well as dental help, to fix several teeth that
were broken by my traffickers.
I never went to a doctor during that period of my life,
during my life, while I was being held hostage by my pimps.
Thankful, since I got out of this situation and had access to
doctors, I have not tested positive for a sexually transmitted
disease. I was and am still scared of not knowing whether I am
really am disease-free.
Could I get another 30 seconds added?
Chairman Issa. Without objection.
Mr. Towns. I had a close friend who caught full-blown AIDS
from her pimp. She has died recently. Once I got help from
Carol, I was grateful to be able to have information about
access to contraception and condoms to make sure I stayed
healthy and to protect my partner.
Carol also took me to the doctor to make sure my sexual
health was in good standing. I am relatively healthy, but
doctors don't know yet if I will ever be able to have children
as a result of the beatings and assaults I suffered.
And had I not miscarried right after I escaped my
traffickers, Carol would have given me information about
options on pregnancy. She would have helped me access prenatal
care or abortion services, depending on what I decided was best
for me.
I owe Carol everything. Thanks to her and what she did for
me.
Once I escaped my trafficker, I am nearing college
graduation. I plan to attend law school so that 1 day I will be
able to advocate for women who are going through what I went
through. We need programs to help provide us with services, and
we need to make sure we get all of the services we need.
I thank both of you for coming to testify and for the work
that you are doing. I appreciate it. I want you to know, you
are making a difference in the lives of so many. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now go to the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank, particularly Mr. Cummings, the ranking
member, for requesting this hearing. I'm still--I can actually
hear from the providers of services to victims of human
trafficking as sort of a follow-up to the earlier hearing.
And assertions to the contrary, notwithstanding, in the
first hearing, we had on the subject from my point of view, the
witness we had, Mr. Sheldon in particular, made it very clear
that there was no politicization or anti-religious bias in the
decision not to award this particular contract of services to
victims of human trafficking to the U.S. Catholic Bishops.
In fact, the record made very clear that the U.S. Catholic
Bishops received several grants subsequent to the denial of
this one, and that the Catholic Church, Catholic entities,
including Catholic Charities, including Catholic Relief
Services, receive hundreds of millions of dollars of U.S.
taxpayer assistance because of the wonderful work they do,
whether it be internationally or domestically. Some of the
smear, the suggestion, that there is a bias against my church
is false.
The question came down to what the nature of the grant was,
what services were to be provided. Mr. Sheldon gave, I thought,
eloquent testimony before this committee that we know more now
about the victims of human trafficking, and that one of the
essential services, absolutely essential--and I'm going to ask
you whether you concur--but in terms of services for the
victims, most of whom are women, often young girls, who have
been multiply, you know, abused sexually, raped, physically
mistreated, are gynecological services, precisely the services
the U.S. Catholic Bishops, as a matter of conscience, chose not
to provide. That is their right. But if that's the nature of
the services needed, and that's the nature of the grant
designed, then you give it to somebody who can and will provide
those services.
It was a fairly straightforward proposition, not
politicized at all until it came to this committee.
Now I want to know, if I may, Ms. Burke and Ms. Powell,
from your point of view, is it essential that the full range of
gynecological services be provided to the victims who would be
served by such grants?
Ms. Burke. I can't stress enough how important I think it
is that the full range of services be available, that service
providers be able to refer for these services.
It's been borne out in years of experience on my behalf
that there--it's not just contraception, abortion or other
services, but it's the education that goes along with it, that
victims are often young, victims are often undereducated,
victims often come with a different primary language and don't
really understand their own sexual health. They don't
understand the functions of their body, and they are very
vulnerable to illness and disease. And we wouldn't consider not
referring clients who suffer from a diagnosis of cancer,
diabetes or heart disease, and yet it has been the practice of
the last 5 years to prohibit referrals for reproductive health
care that also helps to halt disease and prevent long-term
health issues.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Ms. Burke.
Ms. Powell, why, I mean, what's the harm, in skipping that
part?
Ms. Powell. It's absolutely critical that we have the
ability, and we must be able to provide comprehensive referrals
for all forms of reproductive health needs. And I'd like to
buildupon----
Mr. Connolly. Why? Why is it important? You just assert
it's important, but why is it important?
Ms. Powell. It's important for their lives. It's not just
about whether or not we think they might need it. These
individuals absolutely need the ability to have these
referrals, just like the example that I gave of a young woman
who had a kitchen sponge the size of a football in her stomach;
she would have died had we not been able to get her to care.
And this is not the only scenario that was like this.
This is a very common tactic of traffickers to put a
foreign object in a woman's body or a girl's body so that he
can maximize his profit by using her, even during menstruation.
Mr. Connolly. So if I understand you correctly, this isn't
just a matter of--well, as a matter of conscience I don't
really like that--so I'm going to make a little exception and
not provide that service. Absent that kind of service, we might
unintentionally, of course, actually be jeopardizing lives.
Ms. Powell. Right. And as a service provider, I can't be in
that position. I must be able to provide my clients to all of
the services that they need.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, my time is up.
Mr. Chairman, might I also ask that a letter from Catholics
for Choice, addressed to the ranking member, Mr. Cummings, be
entered into the record at this time?
Chairman Issa. They didn't send one to me?
Mr. Connolly. Pardon me? I don't know. You know, they sent
one to me. I don't know whether----
Chairman Issa. I'm shocked, I'm shocked. Yes, without
objection it will be included.
[The information referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.022

Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, knowing how hurt your feelings
are, I will make sure they send you one.
Mr. Towns. Mr. Chairman, I'll get you one.
Chairman Issa. I thank the former chairman.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
And I'll combine a close with my 5 minutes.
You've been helpful today. This hearing was one that I told
the ranking member I wanted to have anyway, although his
insistence made a huge difference in how fast we had it.
I want to go through a couple of things.
Ms. Powell, have you had any other contracts, Federal
contracts or subcontracts, other than the State Department? Did
you do any work under the Catholic Bishops?
Ms. Powell. We have not done any work with the Catholic
Bishops, no.
Chairman Issa. Okay. So you don't have any knowledge of
what they would or wouldn't do?
Ms. Powell. My case manager and program director worked for
another agency, and she has given me multiple examples, but I
personally don't have direct knowledge.
Chairman Issa. Okay. Well, we don't have her here today so
that's why I'm asking.
Ms. Burke, you haven't done any work with the Catholic
Bishops under a Federal contract, have you?
Ms. Burke. Not since 2007.
Chairman Issa. Okay. Let me ask just a couple of questions
to sort of clear up things that I didn't hear asked or
answered.
Catholic Bishops pay for well baby treatment? Did--would
they provide pregnant mothers with healthy exams to help with
making sure their baby was delivered in a healthy way? In other
words, did pregnant women under the Catholic Bishops get
referred to anybody? I assume they didn't just deny them health
care.
Ms. Burke. No.
Chairman Issa. So they would deny--they would allow them to
have the baby get an ultrasound, the mother get an ultrasound
of the baby.
Ms. Burke. I think so, yes.
Chairman Issa. So they would have found that sponge, right,
or found that it wasn't a baby? I just want to make the point
that maybe people would misunderstand in this hearing and think
that that woman with a sponge inside of her body would die
under Catholic Bishops care--and it doesn't appear as though
they would have--if someone thought she was pregnant, she still
would have gotten a referral. It would not have been a referral
to get an abortion, but it would have been a referral for
normal, healthy--normal questions, especially if the baby
didn't kick and she kept swelling, right?
Ms. Powell. We had about 2 hours with our client before we
made that referral because she was in so much pain.
Chairman Issa. Okay, let's follow up on that. Catholic
Bishops' administration, the people they paid to do it for
them, Ms. Burke, maybe, before 2007, if a woman was in pain,
you just, Ms. Burke, that woman in pain with a sponge in her
uterus or wherever it was trapped, she would have gone to the
hospital under the Catholic Bishops, wouldn't she? You wouldn't
have been prohibited from taking a woman in pain to the
hospital, even if she was distended and looked like she was
pregnant?
Ms. Burke. No, we wouldn't.
Chairman Issa. Okay, I just want to make the point because
I think it's important that there were differences, perhaps, in
what they administered, but I think there's no question--and I
sometimes object when Catholic Charities, Catholic priests,
Catholic everything, they willingly and knowingly house illegal
immigrants. They provide all kinds of around the government
because they're so caring and so liberal that will they don't
recognize U.S. borders.
So I'm not going to tell you that the Catholic Church is
perfect at all times, they have been part of sanctuaries for
people who they knew were not here legally, and they didn't
care. That's part of how compassionate they are.
So, certainly, no administrator on behalf of the Bishops
would have denied health care that they thought was life
threatening to somebody. They would have gotten them to the
doctor. You can all agree to that, can't we?
Okay. In closing, I understand, Ms. Powell, you thought it
was cumbersome if the contract had been let differently. But if
I told you what the first hearing told us, which was it is
illegal to deny them, based on their religious beliefs, and it
is, in fact, true that the contract never said you will be
denied this contract because you do not offer abortion,
sterilization or birth control pills and the like, that the
contract had a certain flaw.
You've testified today, both of you, that what you called
the full range of health care--and we called the last three of
200 that are listed--but suffice to say, they don't provide
those as a matter of conscience. The contract implied that they
could win, and they got an 89 and somebody with a 69 got the
contract instead.
So I think you would all agree, you both I hope would
agree, that the process of letting them go through the bidding
and then not receive it was inherently flawed because if, as I
understand correctly, you think that--and I'm not disagreeing
with you, I'm just asking, you think that, in fact, it should
have been, a, look, if you don't do it, you don't get the
contract, right? That's what you've testified to pretty much.
Okay.
That is one of the challenges, and I'll close now, for this
committee, is to figure out how the grant process can be honest
and legal up front so that nobody enters knowing that there is
a trapped door at the end and so that from the remaining
people, whoever are eligible, they receive contracts in a fair
and impartial fashion.
The term ``competitive grant'' always bothers me when I
find out that the competition at the end of it all is
somebody's individual decision.
So I want to thank you for your testimony. I think it was
illustrative, far beyond just the question of grant process. I
think you both have been excellent witnesses, and I thank you
for your being here.
I have no doubt that Congress will look to have you back on
this subject including, perhaps, this committee, and we stand
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:30 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[The prepared statement of Hon. Gerald E. Connolly
follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 73162.023


