- THE JOBS ACT IN ACTION: OVERSEEING EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION THAT CAN GROW AMERICAN JOBS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE JOBS ACT IN ACTION: OVERSEEING EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION THAT CAN
GROW AMERICAN JOBS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TARP, FINANCIAL SERVICES
AND BAILOUTS OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROGRAMS

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 26, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-168

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

75-589 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services and Bailouts of Public and
Private Programs

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire,      MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Minority Member
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               PETER WELCH, Vermont
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JACKIE SPEIER, California
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on June 26, 2012....................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Brian G. Cartwright, Ph.D., Scholar-in-Residence, Marshall
School of Business, University of Southern California, and
Senior Advisor, Patomak Global Partners, LLC
Oral Statement...............................................     4
Written Statement............................................     6
Mr. Alon Hillel-Tuch, Co-founder and CFO, RocketHub
Oral Statement...............................................    19
Written Statement............................................    21
Mr. C. Steven Bradford, J.D., Professor of Law, University of
Nebraska School of Law
Oral Statement...............................................    24
Written Statement............................................    26
Mr. John C. Coffee, Jr., Professor of Law, Columbia University
Law School
Oral Statement...............................................    44
Written Statement............................................    46

APPENDIX

The Honorable Patrick McHenry, a Member of Congress from the
State of North Carolina, Opening Statement.....................    84
Redrawing the Boundaries: JOBS Act's Impact on the Crowdfunding
Phenomenon and the Regulatory Framework of the Restricted
Securities Market, Aaron J. Horn...............................    86

THE JOBS ACT IN ACTION: OVERSEEING EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION THAT CAN
GROW AMERICAN JOBS

----------

Tuesday, June 26, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services, and
Bailouts of Public and Private Programs,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:00 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick T.
McHenry [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives McHenry, Guinta, and Quigley.
Staff Present: Ali Ahmad, Deputy Press Secretary; Will L.
Boyington, Staff Assistant; John Cuaderes, Deputy Staff
Director; Linda Good, Chief Clerk; Peter Haller, Senior
Counsel; Christopher Hixon, Deputy Chief Counsel, Oversight;
and Cheyenne Steel; Jaron Bourke, Minority Director of
Administration; Jennifer Hoffman, Minority Press Secretary;
Adam Koshkin, Minority Staff Assistant; Jason Powell, Minority
Senior Counsel; Brian Quinn, Minority Counsel; and Davida
Walsh, Minority Counsel.
Mr. McHenry. Good afternoon, and thank you all for being
here today. This is the Subcommittee on TARP, Financial
Services and Bailouts of Public and Private Programs, and our
hearing today is: The JOBS Act in Action: Overseeing Effective
Implementation that Can Grow American Jobs.
I will start today's hearing as we always do, as by reading
the Oversight and Government Reform Committee's mission
statement. The Oversight Committee mission statement: We exist
to secure two fundamental principles. First, Americans have a
right to know that the money Washington takes from them is well
spent; and second, Americans deserve an efficient, effective
government that works for them. Our duty on the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee is to protect these rights. Our
solemn responsibility is to hold government accountable to
taxpayers, because taxpayers have a right to know what they get
from their government. We will work tirelessly in partnership
with citizen watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American
people and bring genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy.
This is the mission of the Oversight and Government Reform
Committee.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for the purposes
of an opening statement.
Approximately 3 years into our economic recovery, America's
labor and capital markets continue to face unprecedented
challenges. The U.S. unemployment rate has now been above 8
percent for 40 consecutive months and nearly 24 million
Americans are either out of work or underemployed despite
various government-driven initiatives. To make matters worse,
outdated and even oftentimes new government regulations
continue to limit the ability of small businesses to access
capital, which is the lifeblood of our economy. Repairing and
strengthening our markets will not occur overnight, nor will it
be accomplished by more government regulation.
In an effort to address these challenges, the focus of
today's oversight hearing is on a bipartisan bill signed into
law this past April, meant to promote capital formation for
small businesses by relaxing various securities laws. Titled
the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act, it is commonly
referred to as the JOBS Act.
Let me first say that the JOBS Act is a significant victory
for capital formation and entrepreneurship here in the United
States. I am particularly proud that the efforts by this
committee, initiated by Chairman Darrell Issa back in March of
2011, his letter to the Securities and Exchange Commission
Chairwoman, Mary Schapiro, helped develop the JOBS Act and
modernize our securities laws.
For instance, elimination of the ban on general
solicitation, a rule that has been in place since the
Securities Act of 1933, will improve the ability of small
private businesses to communicate with investors and raise
capital. Increasing the private shareholder cap from 500 to
2,000 that a company may have before registering with the SEC
has been welcomed as a logical adjustment. It simply reduces
the number of instances a company is forced to endure a
complicated SEC filing process, merely because it attracted too
many accredited or institutional investors.
Now, Title III of the JOBS Act, based off legislation that
I authored, creates a new federal securities exemption to
permit equity-based crowdfunding. After introducing the first
crowdfunding bill in Congress, I reached out to my colleagues
on the other side of the aisle to build a bipartisan coalition
so that we can actually enact this bill to address these
concerns of the interested parties.
Specifically, I want to commend Congresswoman Carolyn
Maloney, who serves on this subcommittee, as well as Oversight
and Government Reform Committee at large, and also serves with
me on the Financial Services Committee. Now, Carolyn and I
don't often see eye to eye on matters of public policy, but in
this instance we collaborated and worked together to take the
legislation I introduced to improve it. Now, Carolyn had a
number of concerns about fraud and a number of investor
protection ideas, and we worked very diligently, very
diligently to craft a very balanced bill that we were able to
pass not just out of committee, but on the House floor.
And before it came to a vote on the House floor, President
Obama put forward a statement of administrative policy that he
endorsed and would sign the bill. Well, unfortunately, due to a
few Senators who I think misinterpreted the spirit and promise
of crowdfunding, the Senate inserted imperfect--we will just
call them imperfect provisions that jeopardize the vitality of
equity-based crowdfunding and complicated SEC rulemaking.
As the SEC considers comments regarding crowdfunding, the
crowdfunding title of the JOBS Act, it is clear that the
Senate's eleventh-hour changes have unnecessarily made sections
of the JOBS Act ambiguous and inconsistent.
Today's hearing serves as an opportunity for Congress to
hear from knowledgeable folks that either participate in the
arena of crowdfunding as it now exists. It is not equity-based.
It is not on the investorside, but crowdfunding as it now
exists market participants, and academic experts about these
provisions of the JOBS Act, and I want to get their thoughts,
and that is really what this is about.
Our intention is for Congress, interested parties, and the
SEC to work together to ensure that effective rules and
policies are promulgated that will allow crowdfunding to
flourish. And if crowdfunding flourishes, I think our small
businesses have another opportunity to flourish.
I thank the witnesses for making the trip here and I want
to thank the ranking member, Mr. Quigley, for his involvement
on this area of public policy, as well as many others. And with
that I recognize ranking member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
chairman for holding this hearing to examine the implementation
of the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act, as you know, was passed with
bipartisan support and signed into law by the President on
April 5th of this year. The act alters Federal securities laws
and regulations to make it easier for small businesses and
startups to raise capital. For example, the act will create a
unique status for emerging growth companies that will allow
these companies greater flexibility in testing the IPO waters.
The act will also lift restrictions on the ability of the
startup companies to raise capital. Startups, if they survive
their earliest years, make an outsized contribution to
sustainable job growth. Under Title III of the JOBS Act
startups will now be able to raise capital they need through
crowdfunding. This is a welcome step forward, and I commend the
President who endorsed the idea in his 2012 State of the Union
Address and the chairman of the subcommittee who sponsored the
original crowdfunding legislation for working together on this
issue.
At the same time, the regulatory restrictions that were
rolled back by the JOBS Act were originally put in place for a
reason. There are legitimate concerns that exempting this type
of activity from securities regulation would open or expand
opportunities for fraud. Just as clean water standards keep our
water safe to drink, financial regulations protect us against
unsafe financial products.
While Congress judged, correctly in my view, that there
were too many hurdles to raising capital, the SEC's mission is
still to protect investors and maintain fair, orderly, and
efficient markets. New rulemaking under the JOBS Act should
follow the same process and procedures as in the past. There is
no reason the JOBS Act should be prioritized in front of
pending Dodd-Frank rulemakings, which have been delayed as a
result of intense scrutiny from Congress and the courts. The
same standard should apply equally to all of the SEC's
rulemaking that are required by law.
I also believe that Dodd-Frank and the JOBS Act are two
sides of the same coin. Before and during the financial crisis
our financial regulations were deficient. As banks collapsed
and the housing market bottomed out, investors lost their
savings, homeowners lost their homes and millions of Americans
lost their jobs. By passing and implementing Dodd-Frank, we
will ensure that the next generation of Americans is not so
vulnerable to financial catastrophe.
At the same time we can also recognize that not all
regulations are necessary and that some may inhibit job growth
more than protect it. That's why I was proud to support the
JOBS Act.
Going forward, I am eager to work with the SEC and both
sides of the aisle to ensure that these two acts of Congress
are implemented in a timely and responsible fashion.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the ranking member. Members will have
7 days to submit opening statements for the record. We will now
recognize our panel.
Mr. Brian Cartwright is a scholar, is a Scholar-in-
Residence of Marshall School of Business, University of
Southern California, a Senior Advisor at Patomak Global
Partners, and former General Counsel of the Securities and
Exchange Commission. Thank you for being here.
Mr. Alon Hillel-Tuch--did I say that correctly?--is the Co-
Founder and Chief Financial Officer of RocketHub Incorporated,
and for those of you who are not familiar, it is a fantastic
crowdfunding site doing exciting things.
Mr. C. Steven Bradford is a Professor of Law at the
University of Nebraska College of Law, and has written numerous
works on crowdfunding.
Mr. John Coffee, Jr., is a Professor of Law at Columbia
University Law School.
It is the policy of this committee that all witnesses be
sworn in before they testify. So if you will please stand and
raise your right arm--right hand, actually. Do you solemnly
swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to give will
be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth?
All right, thanks. You may be seated. Let the record
reflect that the witnesses answered in the affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, we have the lights
set up for you. We are Members of Congress so they are very
simple, right? Red means stop. Yellow means hurry up and
finish. Green means go. So we will give you 5 minutes to
summarize your opening statements. Your opening statements--
your written statements will be in as a part of the record. And
so we will begin.
Mr. Cartwright, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF BRIAN G. CARTWRIGHT

Mr. Cartwright. Well, Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Quigley, members of the subcommittee, you have honored me with
your invitation to appear before you today and I thank you for
having me. You have my written testimony, and I won't try to
rehearse that testimony again here in these brief introductory
remarks. Instead, I want to frame the questions and discussions
to follow by offering my perspective on why the JOBS Act was
passed with the support of the administration by overwhelming
votes in both Houses of Congress and why I think we are here
today.
I believe the JOBS Act was passed because there is a
widespread, fully bipartisan understanding that something has
gone quite wrong in the world of American public companies,
particularly the newer up and coming companies. After all, the
number of public companies, exchange listed companies has
declined dramatically. In the roughest of numbers, we have gone
from having somewhere around 8,000 exchange-listed companies to
something in the vicinity of 5,000. That's a dramatic drop.
It's happened because not enough companies are signing up to go
public to replace those who drop out. The number of initial
public offerings has trended down far below previous levels.
But the most alarming development of all may be this, and I
know this from my days in practice. Back in the day, venture
capitalists would take a successful, innovative new company
public and many of those companies would then blossom and grow
and produce countless jobs, and we know that most of the jobs
actually come after a company goes public.
That's what used to happen upwards of 80 percent of the
time. But today that number has flipped. Today, over 80
percent, approaching 90 percent of successful venture-backed
companies are acquired rather than taken public. And that makes
all the difference in the world, because we know that
acquisitions rather than growing jobs often subtract jobs,
because the acquirer seeks to achieve efficiencies, as the
press release will euphemistically refer to it.
So I ask you to just imagine what the world would be like
today if Microsoft had been managed to make it as attractive as
possible to its most likely potential acquirer, IBM and IBM had
in fact then acquired it. And I submit to you that if that had
happened Seattle would be a very different city today. And
replicate that hundreds of times over, and the U.S. would be a
very different country today.
Public companies that were originally ventured back are
estimated by some to contribute something like 20 percent of
our current GDP. Imagine the problems we would be facing if we
didn't have that 20 percent today.
I think those are illustrative of the developments that I
believe led to the JOBS Act, which in my view makes only quite
modest, incremental tweaks to the existing system. Time will
tell, but those modest incremental tweaks may well prove
insufficient to get us where we need to be, and maybe some of
your questions you will be asking will be directed that way.
But the JOBS Act is a welcome, broadly bipartisan attempt to
move us in the right direction. And of course, even those
modest steps have been resisted by the defenders of the status
quo.
So the SEC needs to be encouraged to move with all
deliberate speed to implement the JOBS Act promptly and
faithfully. And I thank you very much, and I eagerly look
forward to your questions on this important topic.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Cartwright follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Mr. Hillel-Tuch.

STATEMENT OF ALON HILLEL-TUCH

Mr. Hillel-Tuch. So Mr. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Quigley, and members of the committee who are able to attend.
My name is Alon Hillel-Tuch. I am a Co-Founder and CFO of
RocketHub, and I thank you guys for the opportunity to provide
testimony on implementation of the JOBS Act and the proper
elimination of government barriers to small business capital
formation.
Background on RocketHub. RocketHub is an established
crowdfunding website, one of the largest in the world, and we
have provided a platform for the launch of over 8,000 campaigns
so far since 2010 and raised over $2 million to support
entrepreneurs and small businesses. These successful campaigns
have provided funding to businesses of all types from a local
bakery to a startup developer of medical devices to enabling
the financing of a film production.
Crowdfunding really is the application of new technology to
an old idea. People have always sought support in their
community to help raise money for new business. The advent of
web-based social networking allows people to expand their
community to their online friends and to benefit from the lower
costs of the web-based platform.
Thanks to Title III of the JOBS Act, crowdfunding in the
U.S. Will soon expand to permit the sale of stock by these
entrepreneurs to their supporters. And we at RocketHub look
forward to this development, and we intend to register as a
crowdfunding portal as provided in the JOBS Act.
While I believe that the JOBS Act will benefit small
businesses in the U.S., I also believe that its impact can be
improved for the proper use of the Securities and Exchange
Commission's discretion in rulemaking, and through certain
amendments to the act as well.
I see three areas for improvement. I want to try to fit it
into the time I have.
In the JOBS Act, Congress provided that issuers utilizing
crowdfunding platforms must provide investors with certain
information, including audited financial statements where the
issuer seeks to raise more than $500,000 or such other amount
as the Commission may establish. I believe that this $500,000
threshold is too low and that the audited financial statement
should not be required unless the issuer seeks to raise $1
million. Crowdfunding typically attracts startup companies and
small businesses, and audited historical financial statements
of these types of companies, which may have little or no
operations or relevance. They do not provide investors with
more meaningful information as compared to unaudited financial
statements, yet they impose a significant cost on the
entrepreneur which might really kill this. Making this change
could save small businesses tens of thousands of dollars for
opening up the opportunity for them to take full advantage of
the platform.
A second area where the Commission should exercise its
discretion in rulemaking is really by minimizing upfront
expenses to the entrepreneurs and small businesses that seek to
crowdfund. Crowdfunding platforms usually charge fees for
successful projects. This allows small businesses to access
crowdfunding at a minimal initial cost, which is critical. If
they attract support for their projects, then they have the
funds to pay fees. If their idea does not attract support,
their costs are minimal and no support is charged and the
entrepreneur can come back in the future with a new idea.
In implementing the JOBS Act, it is important that the
Commission considers and is careful around preserving the fee
structure. The platform should be able to charge fees on
successful projects while not imposing costs on projects that
do not attract funding. This structure allows more small
companies to use crowdfunding while reducing their risk if they
are unable to attract financing.
One area that Congress should address the JOBS Act is to
raise the crowdfunding exemption to $5 million from $1 million.
The higher amount will allow more small businesses who need
capital to utilize the cost-effective crowdfunding methods.
Currently, a company that seeks more than $1 million is unable
to use crowdfunding and must still rely on traditional venture
capital, angel investors, credit card debt, or small business
loans. These sources may not be available to all businesses,
especially startups, women and minority-led businesses, and
those additional small businesses that fall outside the high
tech model. Raising this limit will allow crowdfunding to more
effectively compete as a source of funds through venture
capital and banks and giving small businesses more options to
drive down financing costs.
Crowdfunding can be an important economic tool to help
small businesses grow and drive job creation. I believe that
raising the aggregate limit for crowdfunding to $5 million,
limiting the costs associated with audited financials to raises
above $1 million and aligning the interests of companies,
investors, and platforms with a success fee structure, we can
increase the economic benefit provided by crowdfunding.
These reforms will increase the number and type of
companies that choose to raise capital and expand the role of
crowdfunding in small business finance. We also expand the
opportunity and benefits to crowdfunding investors, allowing
these small investors the ability to participate in the growth
and success of a wider range of companies, including those in
their communities.
So I'm going to quickly close with a quick response to two
common questions. First is: Will crowdfunding lead to a lot of
fraud by issuers? No, it won't. In fact, crowdfunding
structures help minimize risk. Crowdfunding is highly
transparent and there is substantial feedback from community
participants. The crowd helps police players and keeps them
honest, and crowdfunding portals and regulators are able to
drive standardized understandable terms across offerings.
I thank you for your time and I'm looking forward to
questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Hillel-Tuch follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Thank you. Thank you so much. Professor
Bradford.

STATEMENT OF C. STEVEN BRADFORD

Mr. Bradford. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Quigley,
members of the subcommittee, good afternoon. My name is Steve
Bradford. I am a Professor of Law at the University of
Nebraska. Much of my work focuses on small business capital
formation under Federal securities law, and it is an honor to
be able to address you on that subject today.
I have recently written two articles on crowdfunding, and I
would like to focus my comments on the crowdfunding provisions
of the JOBS Act. I believe that crowdfunding could spark a
revolution in small business financing, opening up much needed
new sources of startup capital, but whether that happens
depends in good part on the regulatory burden. Those small
offerings will be possible only if the cost of complying with
securities regulation doesn't consume a large portion of the
offering proceeds.
The new Federal securities law crowdfunding exemption
created by the JOBS Act is an important first step, but that
exemption isn't complete until the SEC enacts implementing
regulations. The usefulness of the crowdfunding exemption will
depend in part on how the Commission exercises its rather
substantial regulatory authority.
My written statement includes a number of specific
recommendations concerning the crowdfunding rules, and I would
be happy to discuss any of those with the members of the
committee. But in the time available, I want to limit myself to
four important points:
First, cost is a critical consideration for the very small
offerings that crowdfunding facilitates. Because of that, I
believe the SEC crowdfunding regulations should be as light-
handed and unobtrusive as possible. In the name of investor
protection, the statute already imposes significant regulatory
requirements on both crowdfunding issuers, and on the brokers
and funding portals who will act as intermediaries in
crowdfunded offerings. Adding additional layers of regulation
on top of those requirements would increase the cost of using
the exemption without much additional benefit, and would also
be inconsistent with the thrust of the JOBS Act to reduce the
regulatory burden on small business capital formation.
Second, to the extent that any additional regulation is
required, it should be imposed on crowdfunding intermediaries,
brokers and funding portals, rather than on the entrepreneurs
raising funds. Crowdfunding intermediaries will be more
sophisticated and more heavily capitalized than the small
business issuers engaging in crowdfunding. Those brokers and
funding portals can afford securities counsel to guide them
through the regulations. There will also be repeat players so
they can spread any regulatory costs over a large number of
offerings. Because of that, I think it makes sense to center
the regulation on those intermediaries rather than on the
companies raising money.
Third, the SEC crowdfunding regulation should be clear,
concise, and written in plain English. The SEC requires
corporate disclosures to meet those requirements in order to
facilitate understanding by investors. In drafting the
crowdfunding rules, the Commission should follow its own plain
English standard in order to facilitate understanding and
compliance by crowdfunding issuers. Many of the small business
issuers using the crowdfunding exemption will be legally and
financially unsophisticated. If the regulations are dense and
legally complex, those businesses will need sophisticated
securities counsel to guide them through the regulations. That
would significantly increase the cost of the offering, and for
these small offerings cost is all important. That leaves
issuers with two alternatives, either they try to navigate the
complex rules on their own, in which case violations are
likely, or they would simply not use the exemption in which
case the promise of crowdfunding won't be realized. The best
way to deal with the issue is to write the rules so that small
business entrepreneurs can understand them without hiring
expensive attorneys.
Fourth and finally, the SEC should adopt a substantial
compliance rule to protect issuers and crowdfunding
intermediaries who inadvertently violate some of the
requirements of the exemption. The exemption contains a lot of
detail and, as I have said, the issuers using it will not be
particularly sophisticated. Because of that, the possibility of
an inadvertent violation is high, and the consequences of even
a minor, immaterial technical violation are drastic: Loss of
the exemption, violation of the Securities Act, and liability
to return all of the money to every single purchaser.
Other Securities Act exemptions protect issuers who
substantially comply with the requirements of the exemption, or
who reasonably believe the requirements of the exemption are
met even if it turns out they aren't, and the SEC should
include similar rules in the crowdfunding regulation.
My written statement includes a number of other specific
recommendations, but my time is just about up so let me just
thank you again for the opportunity to talk to you today.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Bradford follows:]

Mr. McHenry. I certainly appreciate it, and we will now
recognize Mr. Coffee.

STATEMENT OF JOHN C. COFFEE, JR.

Mr. Coffee. Thank you, Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Quigley, members of the subcommittee. My name is Jack Coffee
and I have been working in the field of securities regulation
and initial public offerings for over 40 years. Let me make
three basic points all briefly.
First, I believe the greatest enemy of job creation today
is not overregulation, but the loss of investor confidence.
Today, American investors have lost confidence in the IPO
marketplace. This is evidenced by the Facebook fiasco, the
drying up of the IPO pipeline, and the low trading price of
most of the recent social media initial public offerings, all
of which are trading below their offering price. This erosion
in confidence probably goes all the way back to the burst of
the Internet bubble in 2001, and confidence has not been
restored.
But more recently, there has been a new focus. Investors
are again and again complaining about the prevalence of
selective disclosure in IPOs, as issuers, underwriters and
analysts seem to be tipping, as seems to have occurred in
Facebook, projections and forecasts to preferred institutional
investors. I think there are a number of problems with the IPO
marketplace today, and I agree with many of the comments made
by Oversight Committee Chairman Issa in his recent letter to
the SEC, particularly his views that there should be greater
attention given to the role of auctions in this process.
But in the oversight and overviewing the IPO process, I
would point you particularly to the problem of selective
disclosure. There is no efficiency in selective disclosure.
This is an issue of fairness, and I think there are ways in
which is JOBS Act actually compounds this problem, as I set
forth in my written testimony.
Let me move now to my second point. The JOBS Act on
virtually every page requires the SEC to adopt new rules to
implement the JOBS Act, and it imposes fairly tight timetables.
And the first of those deadlines expires on July 4th with
respect to crowdfunding.
Under recent decisions of the D.C. Circuit Court of
Appeals, these proposed rules that the SEC must adopt shortly
are vulnerable to judicial second guessing. Either the D.C.
Circuit might find some costs to be overstated, or it might
find some benefit to be understated, or it might even say that
the empirical studies done by others that the agency is relying
upon are just not reliable. All this has happened repeatedly in
recent decisions. As a result, the SEC stands at risk that its
rules could be found to be arbitrary, capricious, as has
happened on three or four recent occasions. As a result,
virtually everyone affected by SEC rules today under the JOBS
Act has an incentive to sue. If they are not happy, they are
going to find an attorney and many are going to go to court.
This will result in continuing uncertainty, confusion, and
delay in the implementation process. Even if the SEC makes a
superhuman effort, litigation is still predictable because
someone who is not happy with the rule now has a fair option of
going to court and suing.
Third point, which relates to the second, I reviewed the
Commission's most recent policy statements, including the
statement dated March 16, 2012, setting forth its ``current
guidelines on economic analysis and SEC rulemaking.'' I believe
these new guidelines properly integrate economic analysis with
the rulemaking process. They do require the Commission to
consider economically reasonable alternatives to the rule being
proposed, and they do require the careful matching of costs and
benefits. Of course, I cannot tell you that the Commission will
always follow these principles and rules that have not yet been
proposed or formulated, but I can tell you that whatever the
Commission does, whatever heroic effort it may make, there is
still a real prospect that the D.C. Circuit could disagree and
substitute its judgment for the Commission's judgment. If that
happens, I cannot tell you that a Federal Court has a better
judgment or greater expertise than the Securities and Exchange
Commission. It is not more expert. It is not more sensitive to
the market. Thus, I do not think we will come out with better
rules through that process.
My bottom line here is that the SEC is today caught between
the rock and the hard place. It has been asked to expedite
rules and it is trying to do so, but it faces a somewhat
unsympathetic bench that is quite skeptical of rulemaking in
general. I could give you some specific examples and might like
to do so if we have questions. For example, the SEC has to
adopt rules both on the use of audited financial statements, on
the use of follow-up periodic disclosure after an offering.
This is true both under Section 3(b) and under the new
crowdfunding exemption.
I think in all of those areas the Commission is doing what
Congress has told them to do, but I think we are going to see a
long battle because I predict that those unhappy with these
rules are going to try to exercise the judicial option.
Ultimately, the danger here is that we can be led back to the
Lochner era of the 1930s, when courts could substitute their
analysis and their preferences for those of the agency by
saying that it interfered with freedom of contract. Today
instead they will be saying it interferes with proper cost-
benefit analysis. There is a danger that looms here, and I will
stop at that point.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Coffee follows:]

Mr. McHenry. Well, I thank the panel for their testimony,
and your written testimony will be in the record. I will now
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Now, securities regulation, you know, we have a foundation
of 1933 and 1934 for the essence of our securities regulations.
That is still the foundation of what we deal with today. And at
the time, we were, Congress was acting to deal with a
challenge, which was the folks standing on the street corners
hawking securities. Right? Times have changed. We now have the
Internet. What we have found and what I have said multiple
times before is that under the mentality of the SEC, the
website eBay would not be able to exist. Because the SEC would
not be there to root out folks that have lower net worth from
purchasing products. Instead, we know that eBay sells, you
know, billions of dollars on a yearly basis between people that
don't know each other, two individuals of average means that
don't know each other. But under the SEC mentality, that simply
would not be able to take place without massive fraud. But then
we have the SEC, and we have known the very large failures of
the SEC to root out fraud among regulated entities that they
oversee, and that is unfortunate. We don't want that. We don't
want any fraud in this, in the crowdfunding space or in
securities at all.
So there is a question of how we root this out. Mr. Hillel-
Tuch, you mentioned that you believe that fraud could be, in
essence, rooted out through the power of the crowd. Can you
explain why you believe that?
Mr. Hillel-Tuch. Yeah, absolutely, not a problem.
Crowdfunding is very transparent. As I mentioned earlier, there
is a lot of feedback from community participants. In essence,
the crowd basically polices players. It keeps them honest. The
beauty about crowdfunding is you have a centralized location,
which is the portal, and it allows for communication by
potential investors to analyze and share their views on
offerings, and web-based structure also allows portals and
regulations to provide risk disclosure and investor education.
We definitely expect portals and their operators to
undertake a gatekeeping role in authenticating issue identity
and require minimum standards. But what we have noticed,
historically, both on our platform and others, is the crowd is
extremely wise in assessing potential risk. On top of that,
looking at 1930, for example, you didn't have the access to
information you have now. I am able to go on to Google, for
example, and research a company to see their track history, see
their online presence as well as off-line. I am able to pull of
a credit score. I am able to research individuals all from the
comfort of my home. This is something that every investor is
able to do now that simply did not exist before the computers
and before the Internet. The access to information to an
individual now is at a level that is unheard of. We are just
not utilizing it for fraud prevention, which is very
unfortunate.
Mr. McHenry. So fraud prevention. Professor Bradford, you
mention in your writings, you mention also in your testimony
today that imposing additional layers of mandatory disclosure
on the issuer rather than the portal is not the best way to
root out fraud. Can you flesh that out for us?
Mr. Bradford. Well, it is mostly because the entrepreneurs
that are going to be using this, and these are relatively small
offerings, relatively inexperienced entrepreneurs, simply can't
bear the cost of that burden. If I'm making a $200,000
offering, it doesn't take much cost before I simply can't do
it. Every dollar that is paid for regulatory cost, every dollar
that is paid to the intermediaries is a dollar that I don't get
to use for my business.
And therefore, it makes more sense to try and do it
structurally through the entrepreneurs and protect fraud that
way than imposing a whole bunch of complicated disclosure
requirements that these people probably aren't going to fully
understand in any event without having to hire securities
counsel, which is another expense.
Mr. McHenry. So do the 50 States as it stands now have the
ability to root out fraud?
Mr. Bradford. Well, the 50 States and the SEC. I mean,
nobody was talking about taking away the antifraud rules. The
States under the JOBS Act still have the ability to enforce
their fraud restrictions. That's not preempted. The SEC has the
existing antifraud rules plus an additional antifraud rule in
the crowdfunding provisions. And that is the best way to attack
fraud because that only imposes costs on the fraudsters. The
problem with expensive mandatory disclosure requirements is you
are imposing costing on everyone that wants to raise money,
most of whom, at least I believe, are honest entrepreneurs and
acting in good faith to raise money for their business, and
everything that we impose on them in the name of fraud
protection is going to be borne mostly by honest people.
Mr. McHenry. Well, thank you for your testimony. We expect
a second round of questions. So I will now recognize Mr.
Quigley for 5 minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Well, the same two gentlemen, just for the
sake of argument, you recognize a little bit of the difference
of most of the transactions that take place on eBay. Most
people know when they are buying a bike on eBay what a bike
should be, right? But some of these investments, Mr. Hillel-
Tuch, you acknowledged that there is a little more
sophistication involved here, and I supported this act, but
just for the sake of argument let's talk about how we implement
it.
At least some sense of protecting those, because of the
level of sophistication that is involved with this, and the
concerns that are--that can take place with people who aren't
as practiced. You acknowledge that. They are not as practiced
at investing in the first place.
Mr. Hillel-Tuch. That's actually a great position we can
discuss. What is very critical what a portal provides over any
other kind of real structure is standardization of a lot of the
requirements and the education that absolutely is necessary to
the different levels of sophistication. Granted, assuming an
accredited investor is sophisticated is ludicrous in itself.
That said, through a portal, what you are able to provide is,
and we completely agree with Professor Bradford, it is critical
to make it as seamless and low friction as possible, and cost
is the decisive factor. The SEC can very easily make this cost
prohibitive when that is completely unnecessary.
Fraud and investor education go very much hand in hand. One
of the things we have noticed with crowdfunding right now is a
lot of the net worth comes from individuals who are in your
neighborhood. I mean, we have an example right now of a tea
shop in Shelbyville, Kentucky, trying to raise funds. It did so
last year. And they raised it from within their community.
Their community knows that shop. The community raises funds
together to help that shop succeed. And those are the kinds of
businesses that are not venture backable right now, but they do
have members in their community who believe in that business,
want to support that business, and are right now not permitted
to do so.
And the education level is different. They don't have the
interest of getting a short-term return on their investment.
They are looking at the long-term strategy.
Mr. Quigley. Professor Bradford?
Mr. Bradford. I'm perfectly willing to concede that what is
sold on eBay is different from securities, and that securities
are without a doubt more sophisticated than most of the
products that are sold on eBay. But I do think that what eBay
has learned through their platform about preventing fraud, is
useful to crowdfunding. For a fraudster, if I get money it's
money. It doesn't matter whether I am pretending to sell people
securities or whether I am pretending to sell them goods that I
don't eventually deliver. And I think the experience with eBay
shows a couple of things.
Number one, it shows that we can use an Internet platform
to sell things. We can have fraud protection techniques in
place to help prevent fraud. But having said that, I wouldn't,
I'm not going so far as to say that securities crowdfunding
ought to be unregulated. I think some of the things we have in
the exemption, a limit on how much people can invest that you
don't see when people are buying goods on eBay; some disclosure
about what is going on, what the entrepreneur is going to do.
Clearly, there ought to be more regulation of crowdfunding than
there is of eBay. No dispute about that.
Mr. Quigley. Mr. Cartwright, if you want to weigh in.
Mr. Cartwright. Yes, thank you. We are talking about fraud
in small offerings. And I would like to start with the baseline
of where we stand today because--and I feel very passionate
about this. If you spend most of your career in a large law
firm where you are too expensive to work with small offerings,
you don't really see much of this. But when you go to work at
the SEC, you discover that there is an alarming, shocking
amount of low-level fraud. I call it security street fraud. It
is guys who make up completely fraudulent press releases in
pump and dump schemes that claim that the company has achieved
a major contract with some Chinese company or a big
technological breakthrough that has commercial advantage.
Totally made up. I mean, this is hard core securities fraud,
hard core wire fraud. This is hard core criminal behavior, or
they exploit an affinity group, the members of their house of
worship, or if they are of an ethnic background, recent
immigrants who are trying to make their way in America and
struggling. And there is way too much of it and it is
disgusting. And they are doing that under the existing law. And
they are using--sometimes most of them don't even care about
the exemption from Section 5. I mean, if you are willing to
blow through the most fundamental fraud provisions in the
criminal law, you are not worried about whether you have an
exemption from the otherwise applicable provisions of Section 5
of the Securities Act.
But if they are, they are claiming 504, typically, Rule
504, typically erroneously. The way to address this, and it is
a problem, because it is left to the SEC to address, and the
SEC doesn't have the tools. And we talk about the SEC being the
cop on Wall Street, but it is not a cop. That's hype. It has a
civil jurisdiction. It can't do search warrants. It can't do
wiretaps. It can't do stings, and most importantly, it can't go
into Federal Court and bring a case that ends up with a
conviction that puts people in jail. That's under the
Department of Justice. But the U.S. Attorneys offices around
the company who are responsible, they have got a lot on their
plate, and this stuff is pretty small time.
At the SEC, the enforcement attorneys used to refer it to
dismissively as little cases. They don't get much press. But
small people who are innocent are harmed. I think the way to
boot out fraud as it exists under existing law and under
crowdfunding or any other change in the law is to direct
resources in an efficient fashion to bring criminal cases
against these people. Very frustrating for SEC enforcement
lawyers. They know these guys shrug off a civil case from the
SEC. It is a cost of doing business. It is a risk. They don't
mind when they are taking the proceeds from an offering and
spending it on sports cars and speed boats instead of what they
claimed.
We need something like, and maybe there is other ways to do
this, but something like a National Task Force in Justice.
National, so it has the scope and scale to develop the
expertise and the efficiency to root these people out. And the
U.S. Attorneys offices around the country can refer those small
cases for criminal prosecution. The SEC can refer those small
cases. If we started putting these people in jail the way we
should, they would pretty soon, there would be a lot less of
them. I think that's what we ought to do.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you for your comments and to that point,
we have retained State fraud prevention and prosecution within
the law that currently exists for crowdfunding. That way you
have, you know, your county prosecutors and State prosecutors
that can actually go after these quote ``small fraudsters,''
and I appreciate your explanation.
Mr. Cartwright. And State law, as you say, Mr. Chairman,
State law enforcement is critical here, because they do, at
least in some jurisdictions, they are prepared to handle
matters that are somewhat smaller than the Federal authorities
will. But I frankly, I think we still need more.
Mr. McHenry. Absolutely, thank you.
With that, we will now recognize the vice chairman of the
committee, Mr. Guinta of New Hampshire, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
testifying today. I wanted to address my first remarks to
Professor Coffee. Thank you for being here.
You had mentioned in your testimony the arbitrary and
capricious findings by the courts. I'm assuming you are aware
of the fact that the SEC recently instituted new and stronger
cost-benefit analysis policy.
Mr. Coffee. That is in the March 19th statement from the
SEC.
Mr. McHenry. If you will put on your mic. Turn your mic on.
Thank you.
Mr. Coffee. Sure, I understand that and I was referring to
their new guidelines as of March 19, 2012.
Mr. Guinta. Well, I guess my--okay, I appreciate that. My
question would be, just by the fact that there is going to be a
greater effort now put into cost-benefit analysis, wouldn't
that necessarily reduce the amount of risk of any arbitrary and
capricious finding?
Mr. Coffee. Well, I hope that we have a better
understanding and we have a workable accommodation between the
SEC, one of our best Federal agencies, and the D.C. Circuit
Court of Appeals. Only time will tell. Because right now, the
ease with which these prior findings were overturned creates a
strong litigation incentive. Someone will always feel injured
by a new SEC rule, and there is a strong incentive to sue. I
hope there is an understanding that is quickly reached, though.
Mr. Guinta. Would you say that the SEC in the past has put
a lot of effort and energy into performing legitimate and
serious economic analysis?
Mr. Coffee. I think that I would agree with maybe your
subtext and say sometimes it has been pro forma. I think,
however, the burden cannot be overstated. If you look just at
the crowdfunding provision in the JOBS Act, I count eight
different sets of rules that Congress has directed the SEC to
promulgate just under Section 4(a). So they have a burden and
they have very short time limits. It is hard to do everything
overnight.
Mr. Guinta. Mr. Cartwright, can you comment on that? I
happen to think that cost-benefit analysis should be performed.
I think that the SEC can perform a valuable commodity here for
just about everybody, but I wanted to hear your comment on it.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, the law requires it. The SEC is
required to consider efficiency, competition, and capital
formation in most of its rulemaking activities, and it's been
required to do that for quite some time. I think too often in
the past, and I hope this is changing, too often in the past it
was an afterthought. Someone decided that there ought to be a
rule, the Chairman, the Division Director or whatever. They get
a rule writing team going writing it. They write the rule, and
then at the end of the process, in the past at least, someone
would say oh, my goodness. You know, there is that cost-benefit
analysis, the efficiency competition and capital formation we
have got to do that was kind of a compliance exercise. And it
was done at the end. The SEC is a lawyer-dominated agency and
the expertise that is really required here is more in the
economics and the economist regime, and those people were
typically often not consulted at all or, if they were,
peremptorily.
So I frankly think that it is wonderful here in America
that if you believe that an agency has exceeded its authority
or acted arbitrarily or capriciously, you do have a chance to
get into court and question the agency's exercise of its
jurisdiction. That historically didn't happen at the SEC very
often, but other agencies have had this experience. The EPA,
almost every matter they do is litigated by one side or
another, and you get better at it I think as an agency if you
have to respond to these legal requirements.
I applaud the March statement. I think it's a very good
statement. And I think that it's a huge step forward. The real
question is whether this is going to be implemented in a way
that gets the economists and people who are asking these
questions in up front at the very beginning, so the design of
the rule is shaped in part by these considerations that the law
requires rather than creating a rule and then trying to justify
it, basically a lawyer, do a brief at the end to try to justify
what you have done in any event.
Mr. Guinta. And quickly, on a different subject matter, can
you quickly describe the changes to the 500 shareholder cap in
the JOBS Act, and what benefits you would foresee?
Mr. Cartwright. Are you asking me?
Mr. Guinta. Yes.
Mr. Cartwright. Yeah, sure. As the law exists today, prior
to the JOBS Act, let's say, rather, prior to the JOBS Act, if a
company had $10 million in assets, which is a very small amount
for a company of any size, so almost always that test is
satisfied, and 500 record holders, then it is required to
basically become a company, a public company. It has to
register with the SEC. And it is an unfortunate development
that today many of the most successful entrepreneurs no longer
want to have their companies go public.
When I started practice every entrepreneur, that was the
holy grail. Let's see if we can go public and do it fast, and
the sooner the better. Now, some of the most successful
companies, the most successful business leaders try to keep
their companies private as long as possible because the
disadvantages and burdens of being public are too great. So the
JOBS Act and the title in question increases the threshold to
2,000 holders, provided that no more than 500 are accredited--
unaccredited.
Mr. Guinta. So did you just say that you think people are
keeping their companies private for a longer period of time
because of the challenges of bringing it public, correct?
Mr. Cartwright. Well, it's the challenges of, in part, the
challenges--there's two things. First----
Mr. Guinta. I guess my question is, is it investor
confidence or is it overregulation?
Mr. Cartwright. No, I think it is not a question of
investor confidence. This is coming from the company side. It
has two aspects to it. The first is, companies that, let's say
15 or 20 years ago were of a scale where a public offering was
feasible and the burdens of being public were not so costly,
those companies would go public. Today, there is a band of
companies in size and scale that no longer can swallow the
overhead costs of operating as a public company and maybe of
becoming a public company. So they have to wait longer until
they grow bigger in order to become public. But what's really
surprising is that even when they have gotten big enough so
they could meet the requirements, the most successful
entrepreneurs today, and if you hang out in Silicon Valley lots
and lots of people will tell you this, they want to keep their
companies private as long as they can because they believe even
once they are big enough to go public the burdens are greater
than the benefits, and you can see that. Google, for example,
some years ago, 2004, I think if I have got that right, they
held on longer than they could have. They picked up an SEC
enforcement action against themselves and their General Counsel
for going too long. I think some of the recent IPOs, if you
just look what happened you can see that they held out until
the last possible moment, and that's one of the reasons why we
have this--there is in the Economist, I don't know if you saw
it. The Economist magazine, thought by many to be the
preeminent financial weekly, had on its cover story a few weeks
ago the vanishing public company. And it showed on the cover,
the cover art was sort of a scruffy paleolithic band rushing
the mastodons over the cliff. And they are--the mastodons were
all Inc's. They are the public companies. So we got a problem
here and it has completely reversed since the early years of my
career.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the additional
time.
Mr. McHenry. Well, thank you so much. The questions have
been very good, and we will start with a second round of
questions. And I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
For the whole panel, from your review of the crowdfunding
provisions of the JOBS Act, do you all agree that SEC holds a
great deal of discretion over the implementation of this
section?
Mr. Cartwright. Start with me?
Mr. McHenry. Just say briefly.
Mr. Cartwright. Yeah. I will be brief. I understand I can
sometimes not be so brief.
Mr. McHenry. No, thank you. Mr. Hillel-Tuch. We will come
back. I promise.
Mr. Cartwright. Clearly true.
Mr. McHenry. Okay.
Mr. Hillel-Tuch. Yes.
Mr. McHenry. Thanks.
Mr. Hillel-Tuch. It's that simple. I mention in my
testimony one example is audited financials. It is at their
discretion to change it.
Mr. McHenry. Okay, Professor Bradford.
Mr. Bradford. Yes, although I believe that discretion goes
more in the direction of adding additional regulation than it
does in the direction of cutting some of the existing
requirements.
Mr. Coffee. You want an answer, and the answer would be
yes. But it is largely because Congress has delegated in every
provision of the JOBS Act rulemaking discretion to the SEC. The
SEC can't duck this. They were told to consider rules.
Mr. McHenry. Right. So the legislation we passed, there
were 400 votes that I authored here the House with the help of
Carolyn Maloney, was a different construct. So does this
discretion, Professor Bradford, place at risk the viability of
crowdfunding to actually take place in the real world? Does
that--you know, even if the SEC acts counter to the bipartisan
support of this provision and the idea and even the President
and the same party as the majority of the SEC Commissioners.
Mr. Bradford. Well, as I said, for these small offerings,
cost is an extremely important consideration. The more
regulation the SEC adds, the stronger that regulation, the
greater the cost of, number one, understanding what the
requirements are and, number two, complying with that
regulation. And at some point if the statute itself hasn't
already reached that point, we reach a point where the
regulatory cost makes use of the crowdfunding exemption
infeasible.
Mr. McHenry. So what are the areas of greatest concern for
you, Professor Bradford, in how the law is actually written
dealing with crowdfunding? What are the number one through--
what are your top-level concerns, you know, number them and
tell me the level of importance.
Mr. Bradford. Are you talking about in the way the law is
written or the regulations the SEC has to add to it?
Mr. McHenry. Yes.
Mr. Bradford. Oh.
Mr. McHenry. And I'm giving you a rare opportunity.
Oftentimes before these panels you don't get a chance to
answer, but I'm giving you the rare opportunity to school
Congress, so----
Mr. Bradford. My greatest concern is in the disclosure
requirements imposed on issuers, particularly some of the
accounting disclosure, audited financial statements for
companies raising a relatively small amount of money, and even
for really small offerings, financial statements required of
all issuers, even, for say, a $10,000 offering.
That, and then there are some disclosure provisions in the
statute that are relatively difficult to understand. For
example, issuers have to describe the risk to investors
associated with possible future deals that the company might
do. I'm not using the exact language, and so that requires
these relatively unsophisticated entrepreneurs to think about
future buyouts, mergers, IPOs, whatever, to predict what the
effect of that could be on these crowdfunding investors, and
try to disclose it subject to a liability provision that makes
them liable if they are negligent in doing so, in failing to
disclose properly.
And so that portion of the crowdfunding act is probably my
primary concern. I guess my secondary concern is a general one
that I sort of mentioned in my opening statement, and that is
just the lack of clarity, the complexity, the need for
entrepreneurs and intermediaries to understand various
provisions in the act. For example, I mentioned in my written
statement, the prohibition on solicitation. Solicitation as
interpreted by the SEC is a very broad concept, and people like
Mr. Hillel-Tuch--did I get that right?
Mr. Hillel-Tuch. Yes.
Mr. Bradford. --need to know exactly what they may or may
not do in terms of advertising their site.
Mr. McHenry. So the concern I had with the Senate provision
from the get-go was as simple as the origin of Congress'
action--and I can say the origin of Congress' action because I
filed the first bill. And the reason why I filed the first bill
was because of PBR. Right? And many of you have heard this
story, but you had an advertising guy who put up, he tweeted,
said, ``Let's buy a beer company.'' Pabst Blue Ribbon was
putting themselves up for sale or they were going to close. And
it was this sort of idea on a whim until he had Federal agents
visit him. Right? And he realized he was--he was then told that
he was breaking Federal securities law because he tweeted that
he wanted to buy a beer company--well, later he put up a Web
site.
So, you know, the idea of crowds buying their favorite beer
company. I don't think these individuals were pledging money
because they thought they were going to make a million off of
it. They wanted to support the brand that they liked.
So this is what I see on crowdfunding sites as they exist
now, is you have an idea that you like. Could be your local
coffee shop, could be your favorite cupcake. And you invest in
it because you believe in the product, not because you are
going to make a million. It is the same reason why a lady I
know, her father was a fan of the Boston Celtics. He invested
in the Boston Celtics so he could say he owned a piece of the
team. He is an Irish immigrant, of course. He loved that.
Right?
So it is not--it is a slightly different idea and
motivation to this point. And so the disclosure piece is
important whether or not the expense of that is too great to
bear for small issuances.
Mr. Hillel-Tuch, you talk about your current platform that
you have, and that is, on the charitable side, you can preorder
a product, you can get a T-shirt, you can do a number of
things. What are your offerings? What is the smallest offering
you have had on your site, roughly?
Mr. Hillel-Tuch. We have had offerings as small as $500,
but----
Mr. McHenry. And how large? What was your biggest?
Mr. Hillel-Tuch. They go over $100,000. It really depends
on your community.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. So in that range from $500, which--
getting financials on that would make it a little unworthwhile,
right?
Mr. Hillel-Tuch. ``Ludicrous'' is a mild way of putting it.
You know, you are asking, for example, in an offering for a new
company to put up historicals on a timeline of zero. It just
doesn't make sense.
I mean, it is an education issue. I think what happened
is--and I read your original bill, and I have seen all the
changes. A lot of the changes that happened were due to
educational issues, where we are trying to approach this from
an old-world perspective while--you are spot-on in your
statement, is not everybody's looking for the million-dollar
return. It is just not what this is about.
We are really democratizing access to capital in a way that
didn't exist before. And that is allowing your cupcake store,
your T-shirt shop to get financing that is not debt. They don't
have to run a credit card debt. They don't have to run a
mortgage, which we saw--we saw what happened with that a few
years ago. And this is completely different. You are getting
support from a whole other side of your community that wants to
invest in you and is simply not allowed to do so right now.
Mr. McHenry. Well, Mr. Cartwright, to that end, this cost
of going public, at what point under current regulations does
it just--under what point of money that you have to raise going
public does it simply make it not possible to go public, is it
not economical to go public? Is that----
Mr. Cartwright. That is an investment banking question, and
I am not sure----
Mr. McHenry. I know, but, you know, you are a good lawyer,
you are willing to venture off into areas you don't know--no, I
am kidding, kidding.
Mr. Cartwright. I would say almost a hundred million, and
these days it is probably larger than that. And what is sad is,
so often, companies that might meet that threshold cannot--
don't want to go public even then.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. So you are talking about a much higher
threshold?
Mr. Cartwright. A vastly higher threshold.
Mr. McHenry. Different world.
Mr. Cartwright. A different world. A different world.
Mr. McHenry. So the idea of having light-touch regulation
on the intermediary and regulate this security in a very
different way, is that something that could be done, that we
could do in a--speaking from your former hat as an SEC----
Mr. Cartwright. Yeah, I think the original idea behind
crowdfunding was to have a quite different mode available, now
that the Internet, among other things, makes communication so
easy, to raise quite modest sums for entrepreneurial purposes.
And what has happened is we have overlain on that original idea
the model of a big offer. So you need lawyers and accountants
and financial intermediaries, and they all need compliance
infrastructures, and you need financials that are in accordance
with--I mean, all these additional requirements, which are the
model of a big-dollar offering, but it doesn't work if you are
raising $40,000 for a company that is going to make cases for
iPads.
Mr. McHenry. Uh-huh. Well, thank you for your testimony.
I will now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, as to your earlier point about Pabst Blue
Ribbon, I want you to know we are in total agreement about
purchasing beer. I have served here 3 years now. The longer I
serve, the more I support purchasing beer.
In a letter to the SEC on May 24th of this year, Professor
Coffee, the Consumer Federation of America, Consumer Action,
and several others wrote the following, and I quote, ``We are
concerned that the SEC's slow pace on Dodd-Frank, while
investing resources in other lower-priority initiatives and
testifying to its prompt efforts to implement the JOBS Act,
creates at least the appearance of bowing to political
expediency. We believe that leapfrogging rulemakings whose
deadlines are months away ahead of rulemakings whose deadlines
are months passed and, in some cases, cherry-picking which
congressional mandates the Commission will even choose to
follow violates both the spirit and the letter of the law and
is inconsistent with the SEC's duty to protect investors and
facilitate capital formation.''
Obviously, the question gets to how important it is for
Dodd-Frank to be implemented. But in your view, as well, is
there any reason that the implementation of JOBS should be
prioritized over the implementation of Dodd-Frank?
Mr. Coffee. I am not sure I would call it a priority
because Dodd-Frank was passed in 2010, and it was 2 years ahead
of the line.
What I would tell you in the simplest terms is that the
biggest problems in our financial economy are the problems
associated with systemic risk. We have not yet solved those
problems--issues like the Volcker Rule and how you can keep
banks that are too big to fail from taking on risk that could
cause them to fail; or the problems with the money market
funds, where there could be a bank run on money market funds.
Those are huge, difficult problems. They affect not only
investors, they affect everyone in the United States, because a
major failure will push us back into a depression.
Therefore, I would say the problems associated with
systemic risk deserve a priority. I do agree, however, the
problems with small issue offerings, access to capital for
smaller companies, are quite important and they should be
pursued.
Mr. Quigley. You see no reason to leapfrog one set of
priorities over the other, in terms of time?
Mr. Coffee. I think one is enormously important: systemic
risk. All of the future of our economy depends upon being able
to solve in a credible fashion the problems of major bank
failure. And we all are under the shadow of what could happen
in Europe within a matter of weeks.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. I certainly appreciate it. I have a few final
clean-up questions if the panel doesn't mind and if the ranking
member doesn't mind.
Professor Coffee, to your comment, I am grateful for you
saying this, that the SEC prioritized their rulemaking. For
instance, they spent enormous resources trying to write a rule
on conflict minerals that was in Dodd-Frank. That certainly
isn't systemically important, especially in light of the whole
world we are going through. Your point is exactly right, and I
do appreciate that.
Now, we also have the general solicitation--the change and
relief of the ban on general solicitation contained in the JOBS
Act. And they had to write very, you know, very basic rules, I
would foresee, seeing as it is a lifting of something. It is
supposed to be done by July 4th.
Now, what do you foresee as the consequences of them not
doing this by the timeline?
Mr. Coffee? Mr. Cartwright? This is your stock in trade. We
will start with you, Mr. Coffee.
Mr. Coffee. The simplest rules are those associated with
private placements.
What I would tell you, which I think I have to tell you to
add a little reality to this discussion, is that if any
entrepreneur advised by any of the great majority of securities
lawyers were to consider what is the most feasible option today
to raise capital for a small business, they would basically
choose between the new liberalized private placement and the
new expanded 3(b) small-issue exemption. They are much more
attractive and more feasible than a still novel and still very
esoteric crowdfunding exemption. And you usually issue----
Mr. McHenry. Well, crowdfunding is still not allowed
because we are still waiting for the SEC to write regs by the
end of the year, so----
Mr. Coffee. Even if they write those regs, they have to
address so many different things, that it is simpler using the
very time-honored, established clear path through private
placements with a general solicitation. I think that will be
very feasible. I testified in favor of it in December. I still
think it will work. And I think those are easy to write.
Mr. McHenry. To take that to the next step, is it because
you think that crowdfunding, as was written into law, is too
cumbersome, too complicated, too complex?
Mr. Coffee. Remember that the ceiling is low. The amount
you can sell any investor is $10,000, if they are fairly
wealthy. They are restricted securities, and they come with a
negligence-based liability regime. An issuer hears that and
says, the alternative is a private placement to accredited
investors who are numerous, and to sue me you have to prove
intent to defraud. I would think most issuers would say,
regardless of the SEC rules, I want that way which I can't get
sued and I can sell unlimited amounts.
Mr. McHenry. Well, you have made Professor Bradford's point
on the liability provision within crowdfunding.
Mr. Coffee. --Congress is not the SEC.
Mr. McHenry. Oh, no. I know. I know. And it is my
colleagues, my good friends on the other side of this
institution that put in imperfect language that, if you read
it, you realize that they did not reconcile their differences
between paragraphs. Ah, the wisdom of the great debating
society of the Senate. No offense. This is not a partisan
matter, because we can agree the Senate is the true enemy. No
division between parties there.
Mr. Quigley. A cul-de-sac, not an enemy.
Mr. McHenry. Ah, that is a better point. Absolutely.
So, to your point, that provision, that liability
provision, is higher than what you would have in private
placement?
Mr. Coffee. Yes.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Yes.
Mr. Coffee. It just affects the choice that an issuer will
make.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Well, this is fantastic. You know, we
have a bipartisan--you know, a whole variety of views on this
panel, but there is consensus here.
Mr. Coffee. I would add, too, I agree with my colleague on
one other thing stated slightly differently. There is a rule
known as Rule 508 in Regulation D, the Private Placement Rule.
It is known to most lawyers as the innocent and immaterial
exemption. And it says, even if you screw up under private
placement, if your mistake is innocent, immaterial, and it is
not intentional, the offering, at least to those people, or at
least to most people, will still be good.
I think that rule could be generalized for both 3(b) and
crowdfunding, as well. And right now it is totally ambiguous
what these standards will be.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Wow. Thank you. That is amazing.
Mr. Cartwright, the ban on general solicitation, this
removal--the SEC is supposed to write regs by July 4th. If they
fail to do that, what are the consequences to the marketplace?
Mr. Cartwright. And I will just, you know, second much of
what was just said.
And with respect to general solicitation, as has been said,
those rules should be relatively easy to write, so we shouldn't
have to wait too long for them, I don't think. And if they are
not written, then the existing regime will continue, which is
an impediment, makes it harder to raise sufficient funds to
reach enough investors. Lots of offerings are completed
nonetheless, but presumably at the margins. It is slowing down
capital formation, and at this time in our economic history, we
could use more.
So I think the SEC ought to be urged to promulgate those
forthwith.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Hillel-Tuch, you mentioned that you desire
to become a crowdfunding portal for equities. So this provision
that the JOBS Act opens up, you desire and your firm desires to
do that, to become a portal.
So, as the law is currently written, how can you compete
against broker-dealers, given the disadvantages the law imposes
on portals? Is that a distinct challenge?
Mr. Hillel-Tuch. The way the JOBS Act is written right now,
we are still at a place where, if the SEC is given the
education, awareness, and the proper nudging, it could fall out
in a way that we can actually become an equity-based platform.
That said, there is a risk that if they make it too tight,
they add additional requirements, we will not do it. And the
reason is we don't think it will serve the issuer or the
investor properly.
When it comes to, you know, making this actually happen and
what is their motivation to do so, we believe that you need to
be able to offer both perks and equity and makes sense for
different individuals.
One of the things that we haven't really addressed here and
I was hoping to bring up is the concept surrounding job
creation. And what we are actually trying to accomplish here is
allowing small businesses, who are one of the largest job
creators out there, to actually access capital in a way that is
easier than what a broker-dealer can do.
By making it basically transparent and providing clear
communication, which is our intent--and we hope the SEC is
going to let us do so--is very empowering to individuals right
now who are dependent on very costly access forms of capital.
Broker-dealers are not the world's cheapest people out there.
And if they are licensed, they can charge up-front fees, they
can charge back-end fees. And for a small business, the ones
who actually create some of the largest job-growth numbers out
there, they are looking for $30,000, $50,000 sometimes, maybe
$100,000, maybe $200,000.
A broker-dealer is an extremely expensive way to access
capital. And you are putting your faith in another person's
hands to guide you throughout that process, and you are not
able to get support from your community.
Mr. McHenry. So, under section 304, that undermines a
portal's ability to truly act as an intermediary between the
issuers and investors. And, specifically, the Commission
prevents portals from offering investment advice and
recommendations, soliciting sales and offers, and holding,
managing, or possessing investor's funds or securities.
And, additionally, the Commission--or, well, National
Securities Association, presumably--we presume FINRA, may
exercise very broad discretion over portals. That seems to me
to be disproportionately affecting portals to the benefit of,
well, the existing regime or broker-dealers. Is that how you
see it?
Mr. Hillel-Tuch. In part, we do. And what we did in order
to try to combat that--and a lot of that is education. We
produced a white paper, ourselves, back in May. And the SEC and
FINRA both have a copy of it, and we met with both groups, as
well, to discuss it to some extent.
This--the requirements out there and, you know, offer
investment advice and recommendations and things of that
nature--is way more strict than some of the Reg D things out
there. The level of oversight that they are providing here is
sometimes excessive, sometimes right; you do have to find a
right balance. We are probably leaning more toward the stricter
end than the end that might allow looseness.
Mr. McHenry. Stricter or more costly?
Mr. Hillel-Tuch. They go hand-in-hand. And it is an issue
where--going back to what is the easiest way to access capital,
I don't want it to be private placement, because while that is
the traditional form of access, it is expensive, and we have to
recognize that fact. That should not be your cheapest option
when there are other means to do so.
Mr. McHenry. Okay.
So, Mr. Coffee, how would you fix the provisions within the
crowdfunding title of the JOBS Act so that it could work, it
could function, and do so in a costly manner with as minimal
amount of fraud as possible?
Mr. Coffee. I do not think the Senate bill is nearly as bad
as everyone else seems to think. I have to say the Senate has--
--
Mr. McHenry. Well, we are starting with you.
Mr. Coffee. Okay. But I would say what I was trying to say
earlier. Right now, if you were to make one sale to an
unqualified person because they didn't get the right
disclosure, they didn't get the right investor education
materials that Congress has mandated, or they didn't answer
questions that proved they understood them, there would be an
issue of whether the whole offering was bad.
I think what you need is this ``innocent and immaterial''
exemption, which is what we have under private placements. And
I think it might as well be applied to 3(b), as well, so that
mistakes that do not have any suggestion that they were
intentional and were not widespread should not cost the
offering.
Mr. McHenry. Must that be done--must that be done
legislatively?
Mr. Coffee. No.
Mr. McHenry. Or can the Commission act----
Mr. Coffee. 508 is not based on legislation of Regulation
D. The SEC can do in one context what it has done in others.
Mr. McHenry. Well, we are hopeful that the SEC is either
watching this--and if so, hello----
Mr. Coffee. I will get angry emails if they are.
Mr. McHenry. --and if not, we would hope they would read
the transcripts. And if not, we have Chairman Schapiro in on
Thursday morning, and I will read her the transcript. It should
be for a very entertaining and maybe lengthy hearing.
Mr. Cartwright, same question. How would you improve this
crowdfunding section of the JOBS Act so that this offering,
these low-dollar offerings, can actually occur in an affordable
fashion.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, I think the simplest way to say that
in very general terms is to move it back in the direction of
the bill that came out of the House.
What we have done is overlaid the model for big offerings
with lots of intermediaries and gatekeepers, who are very
expensive, on an original idea that was not designed for small-
dollar offerings by entrepreneurs for small-scale businesses
with a very different model. And they really are incompatible.
So there are probably lots of places where you could move
things back in the direction of the original idea that would be
helpful. And you probably need to do a number of those before
you get to the point where there has been enough change to make
this approach viable.
I think that, as it is currently written, it may well have
been strangled in its crib, just because there has been so much
added to it, that it will be, at least for the lower end of the
range, the $100,000, $200,000 end of the range, the costs will
be prohibitive.
And I suggested in my written testimony that when the SEC
does do rulemaking, it ought to carefully evaluate what those
costs will be. And if in the SEC's judgment after rigorous cost
analysis it turns out that all of that layering is going to
consume the proceeds and more, then the SEC ought to say that
in their release so that Congress can then be aware and take
whatever action Congress feels is appropriate under that
circumstance.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Hillel-Tuch, the same question.
Mr. Hillel-Tuch. I saw the original bill, and, personally,
naturally, I favored that one a lot. Of course, I understand
that intervention was necessary in order to get it passed, and
it did so with bipartisan support. It is a tough one for us,
because we come from experience, having done this for several
years already, and we understand how people behave and what the
cost structures are.
Going back to the example mentioned to you before, that
$500 raise came at a cost to that individual of only $20. That
is not expensive. It just simply isn't. We do a lot now already
on the back end that you don't even get with Carnes' Reg D
exemption work. I am able to check an individual with OFAC, for
example. That is simply not done otherwise. I am able to track
funds and how they are moved, how they are handled, how they
are spent, whether there is fulfillment, what is the
performance. The oversight I am able to perform with a Web-
based platform is so much more significant than the paper-based
trail from the 1930s which we are still using. It is mind-
boggling to me that we are not adopting the modern
perspectives.
And, naturally, if the SEC is listening, I would love to
explain to them how crowdfunding works. We have tried it in the
past, and we have had some opportunities. But one of the issues
right now is there is a big difference in education. When
people don't grasp something, they tend to move back to the
older roots of understanding. And laying the investment banking
fold over this thing is not going to work. We are in a
different era right now, and we need to be able to strive for
it and drive innovation.
When other countries are already effectively implementing
equity crowdfunding, we are one of the last developed nations
out there not doing so. And, you know, that, for me, is
personally very troubling, considering we have a huge
opportunity here and entrepreneurship really was born in this
country.
Mr. McHenry. Professor Bradford, same question, final word.
Mr. Bradford. It is hard to answer that question quickly
because I have written a 60-page article basically talking
about the problems with the act and what I would change.
Mr. McHenry. Yeah. I have it right here.
Mr. Bradford. I assumed you did.
Mr. McHenry. And for those of you who are watching or
listening to this, Professor Bradford has, in essence, written
the bible on crowdfunding, something that my whole staff has
read and I have read as well.
But, for the record, if you could outline those items.
Mr. Bradford. Absolutely.
If I could boil it down to two things, number one,
something we really haven't talked about a lot here today, the
first thing I would do is clear up the ambiguities and the
drafting errors in the bill. There are a lot of problems. There
are a lot of things that are unclear in exactly what the
meanings of the language is. There are inconsistencies that
need to be cleaned up even if we don't change any of the
regulation.
And then, second, to echo what many people have said today,
I would just generally reduce the regulatory burden,
particularly for the--if I had to limit it, I would say
particularly for the smaller offerings. The burden is--the
exemption is simply too expensive.
Mr. McHenry. So the ambiguity you are mentioning, one of
which, as I recall, is the distinction between how much you
make and how much you are worth, your net worth versus your
income. In the drafting, it doesn't distinguish between either,
nor does it give any indication which one should be the one you
look to if somebody's net worth is under the amount that they
make or their net worth is over the amount that they make.
Mr. Bradford. Yeah, the exemption creates three categories
of individual investment limits. And the middle category, where
somebody's annual income or net worth is over $100,000 and the
other of those two figures is below $100,000, both limits apply
to that middle category. I mean, obviously you can't have two
limits applying to one investor.
And then there is also, for higher-end investors, it is
unclear whether it is the greater of 10 percent of their annual
income and net worth or the lesser of those two numbers.
Mr. McHenry. Interesting. Well, you know, the ambiguities
need to be resolved, obviously. There is some consensus in
terms of what is material as opposed to incidental errors or
omissions in this offering. And I think we have had a very
informative panel today.
Mr. Quigley, do you have any final----
Mr. Quigley. No. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Thank you.
And I want to thank the panel. I thank you for the
opportunity to ask questions of you. You have been very
generous with your time and very instructive in terms of your
words and your explanation. I thank you. We hope that this
furthers the cause of helping small businesses, especially, get
the capital they need to grow or to survive. And we certainly
appreciate your willingness to engage in this exchange. Thank
you for your time.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:30 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


