- CAN A USPS-RUN HEALTH PLAN HELP SOLVE ITS FINANCIAL CRISIS?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CAN A USPS-RUN HEALTH PLAN HELP SOLVE ITS FINANCIAL CRISIS?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL WORKFORCE, U.S. POSTAL SEVICE AND LABOR POLICY

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, MARCH 27, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-147

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-456 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Federal Workforce, U.S. Postal Service and Labor Policy

DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida, Chairman
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan, Vice         STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Minority Member
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                     Columbia
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 27, 2012...................................     1

WITNESSES

Patrick R. Donahoe, Postmaster General/CEO
Oral Statement...........................................     4
Written Statement........................................     6
Walton Francis, Author and Federal Health Care Expert
Oral Statement...........................................    45
Written Statement........................................    49

APPENDIX

The Honorable Elijah E. Cummings, A Member of Congress from the
State of Maryland: Written Statement...........................    70
United States Postal Service Retiree Health Benefits.............    71

CAN A USPS-RUN HEALTH PLAN HELP SOLVE ITS FINANCIAL CRISIS?

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 27, 2012

House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Federal Workforce, U.S. Postal
Service and Labor Policy,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:35 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Dennis Ross
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Ross, Amash, Issa (ex officio)
Jordan, Gowdy, Lynch, Norton, Connolly, Davis and Cummings (ex
officio).
Staff Present: Ali Ahmad, Majority Deputy Press Secretary;
Michael R. Bebeau, Majority Assistant Clerk; Robert Borden,
Majority General Counsel; John Cuaderes, Majority Deputy Staff
Director; Adam P. Fromm, Majority Director of Member Liaison
and Floor Operations; Linda Good, Majority Chief Clerk; Seamus
Kraft, Majority Director of Digital Strategy and Press
Secretary; Justin LoFranco, Majority Press Assistant; Jeffrey
Post, Majority Professional Staff Member; Peter Warren,
Majority Policy Director; Kenneth John, Majority Detailee;
Jaron Bourke, Minority Director of Administration; Kevin
Corbin, Minority Staff Assistant; Ashley Etienne, Minority
Director of Communications; Angela Hanks, Minority Counsel;
Jennifer Hoffman, Minority Press Secretary; Adam Koshkin,
Minority Staff Assistant; and Adam Miles, Minority Professional
Staff Member.
Mr. Ross. Good morning. I would like to welcome everyone to
the Subcommittee on Federal Workforce, U.S. Postal Service and
Labor Policy. Our hearing today is, Can a USPS-Run Health Care
Plan Survive its Financial Crisis?
I will call the Committee to order and begin with the
tradition of Oversight Committee and its subcommittees with the
mission statement of the Oversight Committee.
We exist to secure two fundamental principles: first,
Americans have a right to know that the money Washington takes
from them is well spent and, second, Americans deserve an
efficient, effective government that works for them. Our duty
on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee is to protect
these rights.
Our solemn responsibility is to hold government accountable
to taxpayers, because taxpayers have a right to know what they
get from their government. We will work tirelessly in
partnership with citizen watchdogs to deliver the facts to the
American people and bring genuine reform to the Federal
bureaucracy.
This is the mission of the Oversight and Government Reform
Committee.
I will begin with my opening statement. After we do some
opening statements, I may have to either suspend or turn the
gavel over to run and do a vote over in Judiciary, but it would
just be three to five minutes. I respect everybody's time and I
am grateful that you are here.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.
A vibrant, healthy Postal Service is critical to our
economy. Virtually everyone in the mailing industry, paper
manufacturers, printers, catalog companies, and advertisers,
rely on the Postal Service. These jobs, and many others, are
directly tied to a healthy Postal Service. The mailing industry
as a whole accounts for nearly 8.7 million employees and
generates $1 trillion in economic activity each year.
Unfortunately, the United States Postal Service continues
to inadequately respond to Americans' transition to digital
communication and the related decline in first class mail
volume, in large part due to an oversized workforce whose labor
costs account for approximately 80 percent of the Postal
Service's operating expenses.
As a result, today the Postal Service is facing the most
significant financial challenge in its history and is on the
brink of default, threatening the existence of hundreds of
thousands of jobs all across America. Under the leadership of
Postmaster General Donahoe, the Postal Service has made recent
strides in improving the fiscal standing of the USPS. While I
commend Mr. Donahoe for his commitment to implementing cost-
cutting measures, the financial situation of the Postal Service
remains untenable.
In response to this fiscal crisis, the Postal Service
recently presented its five-year business plan to
profitability. The USPS plan details a need to cut $22.5
billion in annual expenses by 2016 in order to keep pace with
diminishing consumer demand for mail. The plan contains
elements USPS can implement on its own and those that would
require congressional approval.
The centerpiece of this plan involves shifting USPS
employees and their retirees from the Federal Employee Health
Benefits Plan, FEHBP, to a new USPS-run health plan. Today's
hearing will examine many of the aspects of the Postal
Service's business plan, and I thank the witnesses here today
for testifying.
On a personal note, I do want to thank Mr. Donahoe, who I
have come to deal with over the last 18 months and appreciate
your efforts in trying to do all that you can to save the Post
Office. When we met a couple of weeks ago, you indicated that
you came from Pennsylvania and saw the occurrence of the rust
belt, and that action there was not taken quick enough to save
an industry. You are committed to saving this industry and I,
along with you, am committed to saving this industry and making
sure that the Post Office is around for well over another 200
years, that it is running efficiently, effectively at the
service level the American public deserve and expect. So I
thank you for being here.
With that, I will now recognize the Ranking Member of the
full Committee, Mr. Cummings, for an opening statement.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you for calling this hearing.
The Postal Service recently issued its five-year plan of
profitability in which it proposes achieving $20 billion in
savings by 2015. The Postal Service estimates that it can
achieve $10 billion in cost savings without legislation, but it
will require congressional action to realize the remaining $10
billion in savings.
According to the Postal Service's plan, the bulk of those
savings, $7 billion, would be realized if Congress authorized
the Postal Service to take its employees and retirees out of
the Federal Employees Health Benefit Plan and put them into its
own health care plan.
Currently, the FEHBP covers more than 9 million Federal
employees and their families nationwide. Employees enrolled in
FEHBP can choose from among 200 different health care plans.
The Postal Service contends that it could manage employee
health insurance better than the Federal Government as a whole.
I want the Postal Service to succeed in the long run. I
believe the Postal Service serves a unique and irreplaceable
function in our society; that it is a necessary part of our
Nation's economic and social future. But I am quite skeptical
that the Postal Service can or should manage its own health
insurance system. I suspect that the achievable cost savings
will come not from shrinking health care costs, but from
shifting them onto employees. Postal employees would likely
receive less coverage under the Postal Service plan and they
would pay a greater share of their health bills. Postal
annuitants would also pay more, as they would be faced with
paying an increasing share of their health care from their
fixed retirement incomes.
I look forward to hearing from the Postmaster today about
his proposal and about these concerns.
I am also concerned with regard to the issue of possibly
raising rates. One of the things that we have seen is a
decrease in first class usage of the Postal Service. When we
raise rates, which we may very well have to do, the question
becomes will we continue to lose business. I think that is a
very important thing that I know Mr. Donahoe will address.
I also want to hear from him as to how he is going to grow
the Postal Service business and what new authority he needs
from Congress in order to make the Postal Service as relevant
to America's future as it was to our past.
So, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for your courtesy,
and I yield back.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Cummings.
When Mr. Lynch, the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee,
arrives, I will also allow him an opportunity to have an
opening statement.
With that, members may have seven days to submit opening
statements and extraneous material for the record.
We will now welcome our first panel. Mr. Patrick Donahoe is
Postmaster General and CEO of the United States Postal Service.
Mr. Donahoe, as you are aware, pursuant to Committee rules,
all witnesses will be sworn in before they testify. If you
don't mind, please stand and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give this Committee will be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth?
[Witness responds in the affirmative.]
Mr. Ross. Let the record reflect the witness answered in
the affirmative.
Thank you. As you know, your written testimony is before
the Committee. We like to limit it to five minutes. This is a
crucial issue. I am grateful for you being here. With that, Mr.
Donahoe, you are recognized for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PATRICK DONAHOE, POSTMASTER GENERAL AND CEO,
UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE

Mr. Donahoe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman and
members of the Subcommittee, good morning. Thank you for
scheduling this important hearing. I appreciate the opportunity
to testify about the financial state of the Postal Service,
about our five year plan to restore the Postal Service to
profitability and long-term financial stability, and about our
proposal to manage health care insurance for Postal employees
and retirees.
America depends on a financially strong Postal Service. The
Postal Service provides a vital national delivery platform that
is part of the bedrock infrastructure of the American economy.
It supports a $900 billion mailing industry that employs 7.5
million people. Every American residence and business depends
on a regular, secure, and affordable delivery of mail and
packages.
Nevertheless, due to a rise in electronic bill payment and
the economic recession that began in 2008, the Postal Service
has been in a financial crisis. In response to a 25 percent
decline in the use of first class mail, the largest and most
profitable part of our business, the Postal Service has
aggressively cut costs and taken the responsible steps to
return to profitability.
We have generated cost savings of $10.5 billion since 2008
and have reduced the size of the workforce by 106,000
employees, and done so without layoffs or disruption in
service. Indeed, our service levels have never been higher.
Unfortunately, we cannot emerge from our financial crisis
within the current legal framework. Absent a legislative
remedy, the Postal Service will default this fiscal year on
mandated prepayments to the Postal Service Retiree Health
Benefit Fund. And as troubling as our current cash crisis is,
these near-term shortfalls pale in comparison to our long-term
financial challenges.
Mr. Chairman, the Postal Service has put forth a
comprehensive five-year plan that provides a clear path towards
financial stability. Our plan would enable the repayment of all
existing debt and fully fund future health care obligations.
Our plan will also position the Postal Service to better meet
the changing mailing and shipping needs of the American public.
The plan we have developed is the result of an exhaustive
process of evaluating every appropriate option to reduce costs
and retain or grow revenue. We have worked with Evercore
Partners, one of the Nation's leading restructuring firms, to
validate our approach. At the core of the plan is a reduction
in annual costs of $22.5 billion by the year 2016. Our plan
calls for, and we are aggressively pursuing, the realignment of
our mail processing, retail, and delivery operations. This
realignment of the operational network is expected to yield
more than $9 billion in annual cost reductions.
Among the major legislative reforms we are recommending,
the most significant includes enabling the Postal Service to
provide employee and retiree health benefits independent of the
Federal programs. This has the potential to produce
approximately $7 billion in annual cost reductions and
eliminate the need for any further scheduled prefunding of
retiree health benefits. If provided the authority to do so, we
believe that we can provide our employees and retirees with the
same or better health cover for significantly less cost. Both
our employees and retirees and the Postal Service would end up
paying lower premiums.
Mr. Chairman, without legislative reform that quickly
enables meaningful operational changes in cost reductions, the
Postal Service could incur annual losses as great as $21
billion by the year 2016. As a result, it is not inconceivable
that the Postal Service may soon require appropriations greater
than $20 billion a year. Fortunately, such an outcome is
entirely avoidable. The Postal Service does not want to become
a burden to the American taxpayer.
The Postal Service is currently recording a loss of $25
million a day. If our plan is fully implemented, we could
record a profit of $6 million per day by 2016 and be debt free.
We believe the plan we have proposed for the consideration of
Congress is a strong one. Our plan would restore the Postal
Service to profitability and financial stability; it would
enable the Postal Service to meet its universal service
obligations and continue to provide secure, reliable, and
affordable service to the American public.
We believe it is a responsible approach that is fair to our
customers and fair to our employees, as well as fair to the
American public to which we serve.
I look forward to discussing this with you today and would
be more than pleased to take any of your questions. Thank you
very much.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Donahoe follows:]

Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Postmaster.
With that, I will recognize myself for five minutes for
questioning.
Mr. Donahoe, 150 million homes and businesses each day rely
on the effectiveness and efficiency of the Postal Service to
deliver their mail; 8.7 million employees are somehow or
another, indirectly or directly, dependent upon the Postal
Service for success. So today I think there are many that are
hanging on your words as you give your testimony and answer the
questions today.
To go straight to one of the points that I think is most
glaring at us is the cost of doing business for the Postal
Service, and we know that over 80 percent of that cost is
labor. With your plan for profitability that includes
sustaining your own health care benefits, what have been your
efforts and your results in dealing with the APWU, the Letter
Carriers, and others in trying to sell this particular package?
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, let me
just say that I agree wholeheartedly with your concerns about
the entire postal industry. This is a major issue for us.
Sending the right message to this industry in terms of people
who use us to present bills and manage their cash flow, as well
as advertising and shipping their packages, is extremely
important, so the quicker we act and get ourselves back on firm
financial footing, the better for the entire industry.
In regard to the unions, we have had a lot of, I think,
very productive discussions, and we are still in the discussion
phase with these proposals. The goal in the short-term has been
to get to the point where everybody understands what the
proposals are, to listen and make sure that, going forward,
everybody is on the same page. We are not at the point where we
are in agreement yet, but we are at the point where we are
discussing and getting a good knowledge base on these issues.
Mr. Ross. Let me ask you this. In getting to that point, is
it a catalyst that your financial situation is such that you
may run out of money soon?
Mr. Donahoe. I think that the unions realize the financial
situation that we are in.
Mr. Ross. And when do you think is there a risk of the
Postal Service running out of money this year?
Mr. Donahoe. Here is where we are from a cash perspective.
Our finances this year have been a little bit better than
projected; we are about $600 million ahead of our finance plan
right now. In October of this year we will be required to make
a payment of $1.3 billion to the Department of Labor. At that
point we will be at about $100 million in cash on hand. That is
razor thin. Our operating cash for a day is $200 million a day.
We will be able to go as long as the finances hold up this
year, but in October 2013 we would be in a cash crisis.
Now, that also precludes us not making the prefunding
payments this year.
Mr. Ross. Okay, so right now it doesn't look likely that
you are going to be able to make the prefunding payments for
2012.
Mr. Donahoe. No. No, we are not.
Mr. Ross. Which come due in November.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Ross. And you are thinking, then, that if we stay on
this course with inactivity of this Congress, then you are
going to be out of cash to operate the United States Postal
Service by October of 2013?
Mr. Donahoe. We would be out of cash as it stands now.
There are some options that we could take, that we have taken
before, to conserve cash, like suspension of payment into the
FERS fund that we are overfunded by $11 billion, but I would
strongly encourage Congress to move now. This is much more of
an issue of a crisis of confidence about the postal industry
than it is just our cash flow. The faster we can resolve this
and get focused moving forward on growing this industry----
Mr. Ross. Quick question about the reduction in workforce.
I laud you and the Postal Service over the last few years in
trying to respond to the decline in revenues because of first
class mail not being utilized as much. There has been a
decrease in the number of employees in the United States Postal
Service. I recognize that; I think that is tremendous. I also
understand that we have probably close to 150,000 employees
that, by way of attrition, will be necessary in order to right-
size the expenditure side of the Postal Service.
Do you have any plans or suggestions for those that are
currently eligible for retirement to incentivize retirement?
Mr. Donahoe. We think that by the year 2015 we need to be
at about 400,000 current employees. Presently there are about
155,000 people that can retire, with another 100,000 eligible
over the course of the next five years. We do plan on issuing
some incentives based on the fact that we make some changes in
our operations. As we shrink the network, as we move to six to
five day delivery, we would put some incentive money to move
people along.
It is critical for us to move the headcount down, but at
the same time we have a lot of non-career people on the rolls
that are less expensive to work with, but they are also younger
people, and if we had to take them off the workforce, they
would end up unemployed, and I don't want to do that.
Mr. Ross. One real quick question; I am running out of
time. The impact on Medicare under your health care plan, could
you expound on that?
Mr. Donahoe. The way that we are looking at the entire
plan, what we would like to be able to do is take full
advantage of Medicare, just like any other organization. Right
now the Postal Service is the second largest contributor into
the Medicare system. We think it is only fair that our
employees and our retirees get to take advantage of Medicare
and enjoy the savings of a wraparound plan that is more
affordable for them, just like any other private corporation.
Mr. Ross. I appreciate that. My time is up.
I now recognize the Ranking Member from Massachusetts, Mr.
Lynch, for an opening statement and then we will move right
into questions for you.
Mr. Lynch. Why don't we go right into the questions?
Thank you, Postmaster General. Good morning.
Mr. Donahoe. Morning.
Mr. Lynch. You are making me nervous. I am just trying to
figure out and we have been dealing with FEHBP for a while now.
There are some colossal inefficiencies in that whole system.
So I can see where the opportunities for savings within
that plan exists, and I have fought for some of those plans,
especially with the pharmaceutical side. I think we are losing
about $1 billion a year, honestly, on the drug plans offered by
the pharmacy benefit managers. We are not getting the value
that we should be getting for the taxpayer or for the employee.
We are being ripped off, I think. So I am pretty frustrated
because we haven't been able to move. I have legislation to try
to save that.
So, on one hand I do see some opportunities for savings,
but how many members, we have 8 million in the wider system for
Federal employees?
Mr. Donahoe. I think it is around 9 million total.
Mr. Lynch. Okay.
Mr. Donahoe. Total employees, retirees, and their families.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. So you have, admittedly, or at least in
theory there is a certain amount of leverage that we have
having 9 million participants in the Federal Employee Health
Benefit Plan. Now you are suggesting we are going to extract
about 600,000, if you add survivors and what-not, by extracting
the Postal employees from that wider plan, and I am just
concerned about the lack of leverage, the lack of our ability
to capitalize on savings opportunities as a separate group.
I also know that the mail handlers' plan, which is very
popular among Postal employees, I think my mom and dad are in
that, two of my sisters, all 55 of my cousins. I am kidding. I
am kidding. I am kidding. There are only about 17 of them.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Lynch. But there is a lot of popularity in that plan
and I am just nervous that you are going to make it
unaffordable. People hate change.
Mr. Donahoe. Sure.
Mr. Lynch. Especially when they have something that works
for them; it is stable, it is reliable, it is fairly efficient.
So what happens to my folks that are in the mail handlers'
plan? Now, if you were suggesting that we are going to give
people another opportunity here and we are going to give them
another plan, and there was an opt-in opportunity where, if you
ran a good plan, you ran a low-cost plan, you ran an effective
plan, people would opt into that by their own volition, because
I think there are a lot of people that you could convince that
you could do a better job. I think there are some people that
are unhappy out there.
If that were the case, I would have less problem with it.
However, what you are suggesting here, I think, is we are going
to pull our people out and that there is not a whole lot of
choice there for the employees who would like to stay with the
plan they have now. Could you address some of that?
Mr. Donahoe. Absolutely. I would be more than happy to.
The key thing from our perspective is to find the best plan
for all of our employees and retirees, and what we have been
doing over the course of the last year is working on that with
consultant Ayon Corporation and Hay Corporation to put together
an excellent plan. So the first thing I would assure you is
whatever we would present to employees and retirees would be
something they would be interested in.
The idea is not to run it ourselves, per se. What we would
do is go out on the market and actually bid competitively for
one of the large health providers like a Blue Cross or United
Healthcare, one of those companies out there, to run the plan.
What we would offer in the plan would be a number of different
options.
Number one, you would have a couple of different tiers, a
high value, a medium value, and a low value plan A young
person, 25 years old, they may pick the low value. We would
also give people options: single, single plus one, plus family,
family. So that gives people some options there too.
What has happened with your mom and dad, if they are
Medicare age, and I don't know if they are, they have actually
already done what we are proposing to do. They have measured
the value of the mail handler plan and said I will sign up for
Medicare A and B, and I can save money taking this mail handler
plan.
That is exactly what we propose. We would like to have a
plan for the current employees and then a wraparound plan for
the Medicare-eligible employees that gives them excellent value
at a low cost, so they would use Medicare as their primary
provider and have this backup plan from a wraparound. That
saves a lot of money, because today what happens is a person
like me or other people who would be retiring may never change
their health care, and the Postal Service and the retirees end
up paying full health care plan for the rest of their lives,
when in fact they could get much better value at that lower
cost.
So we have looked at this from a total top to bottom
perspective and making sure that the good value is there for
the employees and the retirees.
Mr. Lynch. Well, I have enormous respect for you and I also
understand how difficult the environment is right now. But as a
lawmaker we need to drill down. I need to know every last
detail about this if this is something that you are serious
about, and I think you are. And we need to talk to the
employees and let them know that this is what is being
suggested, and we need to be poking at this thing and testing
it, and whether or not this is really going to help the
taxpayer and is going to help the Postal customer. Obviously
this is really primarily going to impact Postal employees and
their families. So we will keep talking.
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. I am not convinced. I am not convinced.
Mr. Donahoe. That is fine.
Mr. Lynch. But we will keep talking. Part of it is I need
to know more. But thank you, I appreciate your testimony today.
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Lynch.
I now recognize the Chairman of the full Committee, the
gentleman from California, Mr. Issa, for a round of
questioning.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
I want to thank you, Mr. Postmaster. The work you do I
won't say it is thankless, but it is pretty close. And I know
that your program is not being well received in some quarters,
particularly, well, the real austerity is not being well
received, but even the shift to using Medicare in a primary
position is not being well received, and one of the not well
received people could perhaps be me.
I am probably going to support your doing this, but let's
have no illusions: you are just cost-shifting. There is no real
cost savings to the American people. The money in fact will be
paid out of one hand in order to save out of another hand. Now,
if you didn't have a projected $22.5 billion loss in just three
years from now if no change is made, we probably would say no
thank you, but suck it up and keep it in the rate base.
I think the questions today that I have is even if we do
this, where with inaction is the rest of the savings going to
come from? If we do this, how much more do we have to do? You
have given us a program that makes an assumption that you will
be $60 billion in revenue in 2015, is that correct?
Mr. Donahoe. That is correct.
Mr. Issa. Do you really believe you will be at $60 billion
without some change in the trajectory in 2015?
Mr. Donahoe. And I think the exact number is about 61 and
change by 2016. I think that based on the fact that a lot of
our research has shown that is the direction that mail is
going, predominantly driven by first class, as well as a CPI-
based rate change, we think that we will be right in that
vicinity. We have been talking to customers, as I had mentioned
here before.
My biggest fear is not so much diversion, electronic
diversion that is happening with bill payment; my biggest fear
is the electronic diversion of bill presentment if we don't
stabilize the finance of the Postal Service. We have to get our
finances stabilized. I think then that will keep bill
presenters, first class mail in the mail. That is the best way
for them to still communicate with their customers.
Mr. Issa. Well, because I am a member of Congress and have
extensive reporting, I want you to know that I am doing my
share. I do get electronic presention, is that the word.
Mr. Donahoe. Presentation.
Mr. Issa. Presentation. But I also get the paper copy so
that I can absolutely be sure that I can do my reports
properly. So I am doing my share to make sure that is
happening.
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. But let's be honest, it will be a cold day in
hell before I would voluntarily write a check and put it in the
envelope again. My regular bills are all paid electronically,
as probably, if not everyone on the dais now, in the near
future will be. So again, it is a rosy scenario to be at $61
billion in revenue. If the continued decline in other forms,
magazines and the like, if they continue to have more robust
online services and less current, you are going to have
challenges, aren't you?
Mr. Donahoe. Well, here is what we are looking at towards
the future. We think that the Postal Service has three major
products that will grow, either stay steady or grow going into
the future: first class commercial mail bill presentment;
advertising we know can grow. Advertising through the mail is
the most effective way you can do it. And the package business.
We are growing package business right now at a very brisk rate.
Our final model delivery is running 15 percent over last year,
and that is over the year before.
Mr. Issa. Let me follow up on that, because it is true that
that is one of the areas, and when I speak to many of your
partners, most notably FedEx and UPS, you are critical to them,
you are teamed. You are teamed on the back end, you are teamed
on the final mile.
Isn't the future of the Post Office an efficient, effective
delivery system that often carries, in greater amounts, all of
the above, meaning that you are the last mile in many, many,
many cases, and that allows you to continue to be more
efficient while it allows them to save money? Isn't that, to a
great extent, where you are going to be?
Mr. Donahoe. That is where we are going to be and that is
where the Country is going with the growth in e-commerce.
Mr. Issa. Now, today, in rural areas, you are the last mile
for newspapers in many cases, aren't you?
Mr. Donahoe. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Issa. And those newspapers choose to deliver on
Saturdays, and you are planning, for major cost savings, to no
longer deliver on Saturdays, is that correct?
Mr. Donahoe. That is correct.
Mr. Issa. Do you find it odd that the vast majority of
these newspapers do not want a rate increase, say they cannot
tolerate a rate increase, but they want you to continue
delivering on Saturday?
Mr. Donahoe. Well, right now we are still working through
trying to get all stakeholders on the same page, but I think we
can work with the newspaper industry too, if they are
interested on Saturday delivery. But to your point, we feel we
have to reduce it at this point.
Mr. Issa. You have a very bold proposal that you offer
Saturday delivery, but that it be self-paying, in other words,
to the extent that people still want a Saturday delivery, for
example, pharmaceuticals, where, for a smaller premium than
FedEx or UPS, you can in fact still roll out that delivery.
Does that system in some way translate to other areas? For
example, is it possible to maintain, if you are given the
flexibility to make it pay its own way, maintain, for example,
those newspapers on Saturday in rural areas? You have rural
letter carriers. Is there any way that is going to pencil out
if you are given complete flexibility, as long as it pays for
itself?
Mr. Donahoe. What our proposal is for Saturday is to keep
post offices open, post office boxes, run the network, and
deliver packages with an extra fee. To your point, with the
technology today, with intelligent mail bar codes, we could
actually deliver mail if a customer asks, again, making sure
that we would charge the amount that would cover. So if a
person absolutely needed delivery on Saturday of their letter
mail and newspapers, I am sure the flexibility is there for us
to work that out.
Mr. Issa. So as Senator Lieberman and others in the Senate
are reaching cloture on their bill and we are preparing for a
date on the floor, should we have a sensible manager's
amendment that would include greater flexibility, or does the
current bill give you the flexibility you need for a modernized
Saturday delivery, in addition to what we all understand to be
historic Saturday delivery ceasing?
Mr. Donahoe. I think any language that gives the Postal
Service more flexibility is good, because with all the
financial issues that we are facing, we could certainly use
that flexibility for the customers, and I think working with
our unions we can get more flexibility in the workforce to make
sure that we can deliver that mail.
Mr. Issa. Well, thank you. I note an esteemed former chief
staff member here behind you. He knows how that should be
written. I also see Mr. Clay, Sr. He certainly knows how the
Committee works. I won't name everybody, but we would look
forward to that. Obviously, it is probably on our side of the
Capitol that we are going to have to put additional language
in. We would like to work on making sure that language is
flexible enough for your proactive proposals, which I think are
every bit as important as the cost-cutting.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Issa. I thank the Chairman and yield back.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the full Committee,
the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Cummings, for five minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to go back a moment to some things Mr. Lynch was
saying. When you are talking about, and I agree with everything
he said and I agree with his skeptical comments, about this
health care plan, when you think about something like health
care, it is so very, very important and vital to people,
particularly in today's world. Have you had a discussion with
the unions about the proposed health care plan?
Mr. Donahoe. Yes. We have been talking with the unions and
the management associations for the better part of about three
or four months. What we have been trying to do is go through a
process so everyone understands what is being proposed. So we
talked about the original how we would set it up, the Medicare
requirements. We have actually mocked up some proposals based
on taking a set of private industry plans, averaging them
together and comparing some costs with what we have today, and
we have discussed those.
Mr. Cummings. So you are saying that they have had some
input into your thinking and your planning there with regard to
the program?
Mr. Donahoe. We have had discussions, but we have not come
to an agreement. To your point, this is probably the most
critical issue that people worry about, their health care, so
we don't want to push them. We want to try to work through so
that we understand. We listen at the same time.
Mr. Lynch mentioned the question about the mail handlers.
One of the things that we have said to the unions is if you
want to still maintain your plan, because some of them have a
number of people and the rest of the Federal Government, we are
fine with that.
Mr. Cummings. One of the reasons why I mentioned unions is
because they have, in my estimation, bent over backwards and
have been very understanding, trying to work things out. It is
just incredible the lengths that they have gone to try to work
things through and understanding that sacrifices have to be
made, and I would hate to see you coming up with these kinds of
plans without having some type of input, because you are going
to have to come back to them at some point anyway, and I think
it is better to have people onboard as you go along and they
feel as if they have been a part of the process, as opposed to
going and trying to shove something down their throats.
Mr. Donahoe. I agree 100 percent. We want to make sure we
work with the unions on this and also the communication of the
employees, and just as much so the communication with retirees,
because there is a lot of concern, there is a lot of fear of
the unknown out there, and it is just as important for us to
listen to what the recommendations are and build that into the
plan.
Mr. Cummings. Now, let me go back to revenue. Packages rose
some 8 percent?
Mr. Donahoe. Priority mail, yes.
Mr. Cummings. Priority mail. And why is that? Why do you
think that is? Because I think whenever we find a sweet spot we
need to kind of zero in on that to try to figure out how we
increase it. Go ahead.
Mr. Donahoe. I agree 100 percent. Couple things on priority
mail. Number one, priority mail is an excellent value. That is
the flat rate box, if it fits, it ships.
Mr. Cummings. Oh, yes, that commercial. I like that
commercial.
Mr. Donahoe. There you go. And returns the same thing. We
have really priced these well so that you have small users,
small business, home business, it is very easy for them and
large businesses to use priority mail.
The other thing we have concentrated on this year is
visibility, so good scanning the whole way through. Our people
have done a tremendous job improving that, so I think that is
where you are seeing a lot of value and that is where you are
seeing growth.
The other area that we have seen tremendous growth is that
last mile, parcel select, that our letter carriers and rural
carriers deliver. That is growing at almost 15 percent a year.
So we are very excited about packages and that is why we would
like to get a resolution around some of these issues, so we can
get back and focus on growing advertising and marketing mail,
packages, stabilizing first class mail.
Mr. Cummings. Now, you are familiar with the Senate bill,
are you not?
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. And what are your feelings about it? Any
concerns that you have? Because I think it is quite possible
that may very well be the vehicle that we may end up sort of
using to try to figure this out. That is my opinion, though.
Mr. Donahoe. Sure.
Mr. Cummings. Mine only.
Mr. Donahoe. We think there are some very good points in
the Senate bill. We have had a number of discussions with
Senators Lieberman, Carper, Brown, and Collins. We think there
are some very good points in there. There are some suggestions
we have made. We have said to them the biggest concern is the
length of time. If we can move up some of the proposals to
match up more with our plan, we will get back to a profitable
nature quickly and then be able to focus on growth.
Mr. Cummings. One last question. There have been
discussions and you have said that maybe you would not have to
close as many as 250, 200 and some processing centers. Can you
talk about that for a moment, please?
Mr. Donahoe. Sure. One of the questions that has come back
from the Senate has been, rather than moving to the full phase
of the network consolidation, is there a halfway point to keep
more overnight service for local businesses and customers, and
we think that there is an opportunity. We have done some
studies around there, and it would require us closing about
half as many facilities as we propose.
In order to stay true to the finances, we have pitched the
idea that we would like to raise the price of single piece
first class eventually up to 50 cents. That is about a billion
dollar tradeoff each way; provide service, keep more of the
network up, but we would need the finances on the revenue side
of the house to stay true to the numbers.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Cummings.
I now recognize the Vice Chairman of the Subcommittee, the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Amash, for five minutes.
Mr. Amash. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Donahoe. It is good to see you again.
Mr. Donahoe. Good to see you.
Mr. Amash. I have a few questions. When was the last year
the Postal Service had a profit?
Mr. Donahoe. I think we had a profit in 2006, maybe 2007. I
can't be 100 percent sure, one of those two years.
Mr. Amash. How much money did the Postal Service lose in
the first quarter of 2012?
Mr. Donahoe. With our requirement to prefund, about $3.3
billion.
Mr. Amash. And how much do you expect to lose for the
entire fiscal year?
Mr. Donahoe. Depending on how we finish the year, probably
in the vicinity of about $14 billion. We are a little ahead of
our revenues right now and people have done a great job holding
costs. The prefunding for this year accounts for both this year
and last, so that is 11 billion of those dollars.
Mr. Amash. Now, last year Congress acted at the last second
to give you some temporary relief from the prefunding. What
does the lack of certainty of whether or not you will have to
make your payment each year do for your plan for profitability
in your overall business model?
Mr. Donahoe. We have to get that resolved. That is what we
are proposing right now in terms of the health care proposals
in the overall plan. But I will tell you it is much larger than
us. This is an industry issue. To give you an example, if you
are worried about the Postal Service being able to deliver your
bills and statements, and you are worried about your cash flow
as a large company, you are going to start thinking about
alternatives. The faster we get this resolved, the faster
people don't have to worry about alternatives to the mail.
Mr. Amash. That goes nicely with my next question. In
November 2011, you addressed the National Press Club and,
according to the transcript, you said, ``You know that phrase
speed kills? Well, the lack of speed will kill the Postal
Service. There is a stark choice: a more flexible business
model that allows us to control costs quickly or very large
losses that will ultimately burden the taxpayer.''
If immediate action is needed to return the Postal Service
to solvency, why did it decide to self-impose a five-month
moratorium on closures and consolidations of its facilities?
Mr. Donahoe. We were approached by members of the Senate
and they asked us, in order to keep some stability with the
employees and the customers, if we would agree to wait to give
them an opportunity to get legislation out and over to the
House, and get the legislation through the House and up to the
President for signature. I didn't think that was an
unreasonable ask.
As we work through these processes to consolidate
facilities, it is not going to happen all at once. The way we
consolidate will be done in a very thoughtful and careful
method so we don't disrupt service. We are looking for the
bottom line cost reductions, and we will get those, but these
consolidations will happen over the course of the next year.
Mr. Amash. So you were supportive of the Senate's request,
then?
Mr. Donahoe. They asked me for that consolidation; I had no
issue with that.
Mr. Amash. Chairman Ross and Chairman Issa wrote a
comprehensive Postal reform bill last year that was passed by
this Subcommittee and the full Oversight Committee. It is full
of cost-saving measures that will revitalize the Postal
Service. What parts of H.R. 2309 does the Postal Service
support?
Mr. Donahoe. We support the FERS refund; we support the
ability to move and consolidate the network; we support the
ability to move to consolidate from six day to five day
delivery. Practically everything in the bill we are in support.
Mr. Amash. In your written testimony you mentioned
establishing a Postal Service-sponsored health care program
represents the largest part of the plan for profitability
savings, accounting for over $7 billion of annual savings. Does
the Postal Service have the resources to maintain its own
health care plan?
Mr. Donahoe. What we would do for a health care plan is
what any other company does; you go out into the free market,
you bid that, you find the best health care provider to act as
pretty much an overall health administration firm, say a Blue
Cross or United Healthcare.
We would also expect to use HMOs or other health care to
fill the gaps, because there are gaps out there, and that is
the way that we would manage it. We would go out through a
regular competitive request for proposal, and once we are able
to secure the health care, the provider would manage the plan
for us.
Mr. Amash. And how long do you think it would take to
implement such a plan?
Mr. Donahoe. We have had some discussions with health care
companies to understand that, to actually test out our ideas
and see if they are sound. We would have to go through a
request for information, an RFI, to get more and then go out
with an actual bid. We think that we would be able to have a
health care plan ready by 2014.
Mr. Amash. All right. Thank you, Mr. Donahoe.
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Amash.
I now recognize the gentlelady from the District of
Columbia, Ms. Norton, for five minutes. Good morning.
Ms. Norton. Good morning, and thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. This is an important hearing we are having.
First, Mr. Donahoe, I just want to congratulate you and
your union for what you have done so far. Never in the history
of the Federal Government has a Federal agency downsized, saved
billions of dollars without a single layoff.
And I must say that that could never have been done if
there were not a union at a table. All hell would have broken
loose if any private corporation or if the Federal Government
had tried to make these billions of dollars in savings
singlehandedly as a management matter. I also note that the
fact that the Postal Service is doing better seems to me to be
a sign of recovery. You are a virtual barometer about the
economy itself.
Now, if you look at the top line of what you are proposing,
there is a part of it that is counterintuitive because of the
notion adopted by every country in the world, that the larger
the pool, the less the cost of health care. That is what is
before the Supreme Court now. That is what every country in the
world does, it creates the largest pool it can. Every country
in the world creates a pool of the nation itself. That is what
we are trying to do with the Affordable Health Care Act.
Moreover, I am sympathetic to the Postal Service in this
respect: we ask you to do what we ask no Federal agency to do.
It is mind-boggling that what we do, including providing
services, and yet we want to treat you as a private
corporation. We haven't made up our minds how to treat you.
So I look at what might motivate this new idea of yours and
I want to ask you, candidly, if you would have felt compelled
to put forward this proposal if the post retiree fund
contribution the Postal Service must make today was eliminated
or substantially reduced. If that were not the case, would you
feel compelled to come forward here today?
Mr. Donahoe. One of the things, to your point, that we have
looked at over a number of years is to actually own our own
insurance plan, and your point of the size of the pool is
critical. The size of the pool for the Postal Service would be
about one million participants, retirees plus the----
Ms. Norton. Compared with how many in the FEHBP?
Mr. Donahoe. Well, compared within the FEHBP it is a
smaller pool, but if you took that and you went out into the
private market and bid that, that would be the largest single
health care group or pool out there. And that is the exact
thought behind what we have been looking at.
My feeling is that, not that we have any arguments with the
FEHBP, I am sure that everybody tries to do their best there,
they run a pool of 200-plus different plans, and there is no
real way to get out and compete to get the best price. And we
have had companies come in to talk to us about how they are
saving in health care costs and providing better benefits
through making the health care companies go out and compete and
provide better pharmaceutical plans, et cetera, and we look at
that and say, jeez, with a million people we should be able to
get some of those same benefits.
Ms. Norton. So the post retiree contribution issue is not
what motivates the proposal?
Mr. Donahoe. That is one of them. We have looked at this
beforehand. However, with the retiree health benefit
requirement, having our own health insurance does give us the
opportunity to reduce those costs and manage Medicare at the
same time. So what we are doing is looking at a number of
things.
There is a potential that, as we work through these
changes, we won't be at the point where we are fully resolved
with the health care, and we will have to continue to work with
the unionson that which will be__
Ms. Norton. Mr. Donahoe, the first thing that any member of
Congress will think about when a new proposal of this kind
comes forward, and you have mentioned stakeholders, is what the
OMB, and you say this plan has been vetted, what the OMB, what
the OPM, what your own inspector general have said precisely
about this plan.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes. We have asked them, to your point, please
look at that, shoot holes. Are we missing anything? So we have
asked the IG to audit it and they have, and they have told us
it looks good. We have been to the OPM; I have been there with
Mr. Barry on a couple of occasions and actually have sent a
number of our people back to look at it to make sure that any
issues that were not covered we thoroughly vetted.
I think to Mr. Lynch's point and Mr. Cummings' point, we
need to continue with that. We need to continue to examine----
Ms. Norton. And what about the OMB?
Mr. Donahoe. We have talked to the OMB, but in terms of
really digging in, probably not to the same level. We have had
discussions----
Ms. Norton. Do you have anything in writing from those
three----
Mr. Donahoe. I have from my IG, and I have asked Mr. Barry
at the OPM to please provide back in writing what his thoughts
are.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Chairman, could I ask that what Mr. Donahoe
has in writing from the OMB, the inspector general, and who
else did you say?
Mr. Donahoe. We have to get something back from the OMB. We
have asked----
Ms. Norton. The other two you have something in writing?
Could you submit that to the Chairman so it can be----
Mr. Ross. Without objection.
Mr. Donahoe. Absolutely.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
We now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis,
for five minutes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Donahoe. I want to go back a little bit to
the number of mail processing plants that we might be arriving
at in terms of closure. I think some rethinking has been done
from what was initially indicated.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Davis. Where are we now in terms of that?
Mr. Donahoe. The original proposal was to move from
approximately 487 down to around 200. We came back after we did
our studies and proposed that we would go from 487 down to
about 232.
Mr. Davis. Could I ask that, in light of the potential job
impact and the uncertainties in the minds of individuals who
would be affected greatly in terms of where they might end up
working or having the opportunity to work, do we expect to have
that maybe close to finalization by the 15th of May? That is a
date that we have been talking about some things happening.
Mr. Donahoe. We have been working through that with our
employees. One of the things that we have continued to do, even
though we have held the date for closings until after May 15th,
was to continue to work with customers and employees. So we
would know by then which employees would be affected.
What we are trying to do is go person by person, that is
how important this is, so we can sit down with an employee and
have a discussion if they want to retire, if they want to take
a different job, if they want to do something different in
their career, because as we have reduced headcount in the
organization, we have always been very conscious to try to do
the right thing as a responsible employer.
Mr. Davis. Do we have any round numbers in terms of how
much we are likely or would like to be able to save as a result
of this process?
Mr. Donahoe. We think that the network reductions as
proposed right now would save us about $2.5 billion. We also
have actually taken about $400 million in revenue off of there
based on feedback we have gotten from our customers. So the net
would be about $2.1 billion.
Mr. Davis. Then let me shift over a little bit back to the
line of questioning from Representative Norton. Did I glean
that we are very comfortable from the responses that we have
gotten from the stakeholders who vetted the proposed system
that the Postal Service would run itself, in terms of health
benefits and----
Mr. Donahoe. I think comfort would probably not be the
right word. I think that our feeling is, with our work with our
IG, we have asked them, as we have gone along, make sure we are
doing this the right way. We don't want to put something out
that is incorrect. So we have kept them abreast.
The OPM, we are waiting back for answers in writing from
them. We have been working with them and asking them again, as
we make these proposals, does it make sense? What we are
saying, is this legal? Does this make sense from a health care
perspective.
I think any time you get into a big change like this, there
is no real comfort level, it is just trying to reassure and ask
the questions to make sure we are doing this the right way.
Mr. Davis. Let me ask what are we getting back from the
unions as we interact with them around this proposed change?
Mr. Donahoe. I think that the unions, as we have worked to
communicate and explain what we are thinking, there have been a
number of questions come back. From some of the unions they
have said, jeez, you know, we have our own health care plan;
what would happen with that? And that is something that has to
be resolved. Of course, some of the other concerns have been
what happens in the long-run if there is any problem with the
Postal Service from a financial perspective.
Our proposal also includes putting together a trustee group
like representatives of the unions, as well as management, and
a third party like the Treasury or the OPM, somebody else in
there that could oversee and make sure that all decisions were
proper decisions going forward. And this has come about through
all the discussions and looking at how other people have gone
through those processes. But to your point, we have to be very
careful and make sure everybody knows exactly what is on the
table and what is being proposed.
Mr. Davis. Have you looked at or explored or thought about
a Postal only plan within the Federal Employees Health Benefits
Program?
Mr. Donahoe. We have talked to the OPM about that and that
is something we have said to them if you could come back to us
and say how, managed within there, we could get the same
benefits, the same savings and flexibility, we would certainly
be open to something like that.
Mr. Davis. So we still have a number of options open
relative to how we close the loop on providing these benefits.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Davis.
For those who want to hang around, I would like to do
another round with you.
Specifically, I want to recognize myself for five minutes,
but also ask you about rates. You have talked about increasing
postal rates from 44 cents to 50 cents. My concern is even
though I was a lawyer by trade, I had an undergraduate degree
in business, and some of the business models we would deal with
when I was in school would be that if nobody is buying your
product, one of the last things you do is raise your rates. And
my concern here is that the assumptions upon which you are
basing your increase in revenues with an increase in rates,
does that take into the cause and effect a declining user base
of first class postage?
Mr. Donahoe. This would be the way we would approach this:
our prices are broken out right now competitive and market
dominant.
Mr. Ross. Right.
Mr. Donahoe. For the most part, we would follow the pricing
scheme that we have now with the CPI cap on all of our market-
dominant products. The only portion of mail that we would look
at to increase the price would be specifically the single
piece, the blue mailbox mail that you or I might use to send a
card or mail a bill in. That is a volume that has continued to
shrink.
Mr. Ross. Right.
Mr. Donahoe. And as that has shrunk, that has generated the
recommendations of shrinking our network down. Now, there have
been some suggestions that have been made to slow the shrinking
down to some extent over the course of the next couple years,
not be as drastic, and our approach to that has been if that is
an option, if that is the will of the Congress, if that is
where people want to go, that we would propose to increase just
that single piece stamp rate to make up the difference of the
savings that we would lose.
Mr. Ross. But wouldn't logic and reason and, quite frankly,
laws of economics dictate, then, that you might actually have
an even further decline in revenues because of a lack of
buyers, if you will?
Mr. Donahoe. That revenue is going, whether we like it or
not, because of electronic diversion. It is kind of an
interesting situation because the revenue of single piece is
going away and we project it to continue to drop based on bill
payment online and electronic diversion. But there are other
portions of that mail that are very inelastic. So we have
looked at----
Mr. Ross. Inelastic. Even if you went from six to five days
it would still be inelastic?
Mr. Donahoe. Yes, because it is convenient. Even today with
Forever stamps, you can buy a book of Forever stamps and pay 45
cents apiece and use those five years from now when the postage
rate might be 50 cents. So it is a good deal for people.
Mr. Ross. Real quickly on your charts there, because I want
to go to the second part there, operational initiatives. It
looks as though you have formulated a $9 billion savings with
those three particular areas. Could you identify those? You are
talking about the reduction there, I guess, in the network and
sortation and transportation?
Mr. Donahoe. Right.
Mr. Ross. If you could go over each one of those three in
the middle part there.
Mr. Donahoe. Sure. Here?
Mr. Ross. Right there, yes, sir.
Mr. Donahoe. Okay. What we have laid out here are three
basic approaches. We have legislative initiatives, that is the
prefunding result in five day. That is worth about $8.5
billion. The network itself, that is the facilities, retail,
post offices, and then our delivery routes. We think there is
about $9 billion worth of savings there. And then the final is
compensation and benefits. That is health care savings plus
more flexibility with the union contracts.
Mr. Ross. And specifically on the middle part there, when
you say the savings in network, that is through consolidation,
correct?
Mr. Donahoe. That is consolidation of----
Mr. Ross. How would that affect the geographic delivery of
mail, if any, when those changes are made?
Mr. Donahoe. What we are proposing is changing service
standards today from one, two, and three days, to two and three
days. What that would allow us to do is to consolidate
substantially into the smaller number of plants, going from 487
down to the 232 we proposed. What that allows you to do is to
use those buildings for 20 hours a day, versus the 8 to 9 hours
a day that we use now and save substantial amount of money; a
lot of overhead, a lot of maintenance costs. That is the area
that we would be able to get this----
Mr. Ross. And the retail would be the consolidation or
closure?
Mr. Donahoe. The retail would be the consolidation and/or
change in the cost of post offices.
Mr. Ross. So you are talking about village post offices,
that concept?
Mr. Donahoe. We have four proposals right now that we think
are very viable for post offices. One is to consolidate small
ones into larger ones. And, again, we want to be very careful
with the customers. That is only a mile or two. We are not
proposing for people to have to drive 25 miles. Second is some
type of a contract unit available at a local store that is open
7 days a week.
Another is to serve people off of the rural routes, and we
have had people actually ask us, as we have had these 3700
community meetings, to move to rural delivery. But another
solution is to match up the cost of the office with the revenue
we bring in.
Mr. Ross. Right.
Mr. Donahoe. What we face right now is we have thousands of
offices that cost us, on average, $70,000 to operate and bring
in somewhere between $15,000 and $20,000. We think that there
is a happy medium there. We are working with our postmaster
associations. We will also go back to the community to work on
this, too. Keep the flag flying, but we will be able to do it--
--
Mr. Ross. And one last one--I am out of time--on the
delivery. Are you going, then, from door to curb, is that----
Mr. Donahoe. No, that does not include door to curb, that
is improvements in what we call flat sequencing and also in the
way that we have the route structured. That is something that
we are working with the----
Mr. Ross. So this doesn't include door to curb.
Mr. Donahoe. No.
Mr. Ross. And what is that estimated as annual savings?
Mr. Donahoe. Door to curb varies. There are savings and
there is also investment, and I would be more than happy to
give you a paper on that. We have done a lot of research on
that. That is also something, I will tell you, of all the
research that we have done from a customer satisfaction
standpoint, that is the one thing that customers don't want
changed; they don't want their mailbox changed. So we did not
include that in there.
Mr. Ross. But isn't it true that only about 25 percent of
Postal customers really get door-to-door anymore?
Mr. Donahoe. It is about 30 million people.
Mr. Ross. Okay.
Mr. Donahoe. So we want to be sure we don't have 30 million
people really mad at us.
Mr. Ross. And I will follow up with you on that. Thank you
very much. My time has expired.
Mr. Donahoe. All right.
Mr. Ross. I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Lynch
from Massachusetts, for five minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Postmaster General, in your proposal here, as Chairman Issa
identified, there is a cost shift over to Medicare. How do you
propose to do that in terms of just mechanically? Are you going
to tell your Postal employees, okay, now it is mandatory? Are
you going to ask Congress for the power to say to you that you
can tell your Postal employees the first dollar has got to be
from Medicare, you have to go to that first? Or are you going
to have some type of option to have people go, or how is that
going to work?
Mr. Donahoe. We would prefer the mandatory requirement for
Medicare. We are the second largest payer into Medicare, the
Postal Service is, and we feel it balances the playing field
with everybody else that uses Medicare. So we would ask to
require Medicare A, B, and D, and that we would provide, as
part of the health care proposal, a very good value, low-cost
option to provide Medicare wraparound for B when our retirees
sign up for that.
Mr. Lynch. Okay, here is my problem. Right now on the
Medicare side I am seeing a lot of docs refusing Medicare. So
let's just say I have a Postal employee wants to go to that
doc, now you it is mandatory that they go Medicare.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Lynch. Their doc doesn't accept Medicare because
reimbursement rates are pathetically low. So under your plan my
person couldn't go to their doctor, right, they would have to
go to some other doctor that accepts Medicare?
Mr. Donahoe. I don't know the answer. That is something I
would have to get back to you on. I am not sure how that works.
With the wraparound, I don't know the answer to that on
Medicare A and B, that if a person could actually choose to use
that wraparound to cover some of that. I will have to get back
to you on that.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Well, that is an important question
because, ideally, I would like the opportunity, if you are
going to require a person, in the first instance, to go
Medicare, if their doctor, their existing doctor, current
doctor does not accept Medicare, I would like there to be some
other option. They have gone first, if it is rejected, then
they can still go to the same doctor. There is this promise out
there with the Affordable Care Act that everyone would still be
able to go to their own doctor.
Mr. Donahoe. Right.
Mr. Lynch. That is not necessarily what is going on right
now. And as this folds out over the coming years, I am
concerned about even people being able to go to their own
hospital.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Lynch. Because I am seeing some hospitals are getting
very shaky, so they may not be in existence. So I am concerned
about that.
The number you have up there for five day delivery shows a
savings of $2.7 billion.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Lynch. We have had some analysis on this that shows it
to be half of that.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Lynch. Does this properly account for the fact, if you
are not delivering on Saturday, and most people talk about the
five day, eliminating Saturday, do you factor in the drop-off
in volume? Because if I am mailing an important package on
Thursday and I know it is not going to get there Friday because
we have lower delivery standards, and it is not going to get
there Saturday because the post office is closed, and it is not
going to get there on Sunday because the post office is closed,
and God forbid Monday is a holiday, there is going to be a
drop-off in volume there. Have you factored that in fully
because of the fact that you are not working Saturday?
Mr. Donahoe. We did market research on that and I will tell
you, off the top of my head, I can't remember the exact number,
but I can give you that number. We have done some market
research and that is why we picked Saturday, because it was by
far the lowest volume day.
One of the proposals that we also have working through the
Saturday delivery, to your point, is on non-widely observed
holidays that fall now on Monday, we would deliver on Saturday.
That is part of our proposal. So that closes that loop.
Mr. Lynch. Okay, I only have about 30 seconds here, so let
me just squeeze in this last one. I had an opportunity to meet
with the folks from Pitney Bowes, and they are running a
program in Denmark where they have a virtual mailbox now. So on
your iPad or on your computer at home or on your laptop you can
pull up a virtual mailbox, and what they do there is, as the
mail comes into the processing center, it takes a picture of
your mail. What you can do is you can click on the mail you
want delivered and you can click off on the mail you don't want
delivered. So it eliminates what some people call junk mail. We
call it direct mail. I understand it. We call it jobs, right.
Now, that technology, are you looking at anything like
that, where folks could use this virtual mailbox to click off
on mail? Look, I have two girls at home; I get a ton of this
stuff. They probably like to get it, but I sure don't. I am
just thinking about looking down the road. Have we factored
that in here? If they are doing it in Denmark now, number one,
are we looking at that and have we factored that in? What is
our plan?
Mr. Donahoe. Well, I want to make sure your daughters get
their mail, because then they will buy something and we will
deliver it.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Lynch. I bet you do. You are saving me money.
Mr. Donahoe. We are. Right now we are looking at digital.
In fact, we are in the process of establishing a group to take
the lead on that, and we think there are big opportunities in
the digital world from a digital transmission because we
provide the safety and security of first class mail. We think
that there are some opportunities to transition that into the
digital world. But we also think that there are plenty of
opportunities to grow revenue within the current products that
we have now, employing some of those same technologies. So
plenty to report out on that and we would like the opportunity
to cover more of these digital areas.
The one thing that we will need from a legislative
standpoint is just some clarity around the fact that we can get
into those areas. That is part of the non-Postal we are looking
for.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Just one yes or no question. I am abusing
my time, I understand that, and I appreciate your patience with
me. Have you been talking with Kevin Tally from the Rural
Carriers and Jennifer Walburton from the National Association
of Letter Carriers on this five day thing and where the numbers
might be on this?
Mr. Donahoe. I talked to Fred Rolando and to Jeanette. I
don't know the other people.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. All right, thank you.
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Lynch.
We now recognize the Ranking Member from the full
Committee, Mr. Cummings from Maryland, for five minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Donahoe, what went into the development
of this plan? How did you come about it? You are dealing with
some pretty exact numbers and projections, and I am just
wondering, trying to get to the integrity of the plan.
Mr. Donahoe. Sure. Here is how we approached this. To Mr.
Darton's point earlier, facing the problems that we face with
the retiree health benefit payment, rather than throwing our
hands up and saying we can't do anything about it, we started
to look at what actually made up the requirements of that
retiree health benefit, and there were a number of things that
came up. Number one was the requirements for health care for
employees who weren't in the Medicare plan. There were some
accounting issues and, of course, the cost of FEHBP plans that
don't give you the value of the wraparound. So we have
historically looked at having our own health care plan.
This goes back, I think we made some original studies right
after the 2000-2001 time frame. So we went back and sat down
with a couple of groups, Ayon Corporation and the Hay Group,
two outside firms who are expert in this area, and we actually
assembled a health care plan based on what we thought one would
look like in the size and scope of an organization the size of
the Postal Service. We designed it based on what other
companies are doing today, looking for a number of value levels
plus a number of different groups, the single payer, single
plus one, family. The other thing we did was made sure that we
had pharmaceutical coverage in that too.
So we sat down and pretty much built a health care proposal
based off of all this information, and that is where we are
right now. Taking that, then, and then comparing that to what
we spend currently in FEHBP and the same way what we are doing
in terms of Medicare today, and that is where we have arrived
at the point where we are today. So we have done a lot of
studies on this.
To the point we made before, we have talked to the OPM, the
OMB, we have had our IG, we have had people come in from the
outside, all the big health care providers, not on RFIs, but
for discussion to understand how we can manage health care, how
you can manage pharmaceuticals. A lot of work has been done.
Mr. Cummings. And would the employee have to give up
anything if going into your program?
Mr. Donahoe. I can provide you all the detail. We have gone
through and stratified every plan that every employee is in. I
would say, for the most part, probably 95 percent of our
employees would benefit from a better plan at a better cost.
There are people who choose some very, very low value plans.
They would probably have to pay a little bit more. But I can
provide you all that data.
Mr. Cummings. And I take it that when you have a plan where
you have the four categories, I think it is four?
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. As opposed to two?
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. That allows for more precise measurement as
to what it would cost the insurance company, is that right?
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. And therefore, hopefully, tailoring of the
premium too.
Mr. Donahoe. It gives you a better choice in terms of what
you actually offer, and I will get you this information too,
but I think that it actually ends up costing us a little bit
more to give that actual flexibility. But I can provide you
with that information. We think it is fair that a person
shouldn't have to buy family if there is only two of them.
Mr. Cummings. Sure.
Mr. Donahoe. But I think that, as you shake all the numbers
out, that is something that would fall back as more expensive
for the Postal Service, but it is fair for the employees.
Mr. Cummings. Now, someone asked you, I think it may have
been the Chairman of the Subcommittee, asked you whether you
were comfortable with the House bill, the one that we have
developed so far, and you said just about everything.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. Are you comfortable with the control board
type system that is in there?
Mr. Donahoe. That is the one area that I will tell you that
I am not very comfortable with, and it is kind of a
philosophical thing. I felt very strongly about the fact that,
as a group of stakeholders, being the unions and the mailers,
we should be able to figure out how to get these issues
resolved working with Congress, working with the
Administration, getting the right laws passed so that we don't
have to go to a control board type of environment. What we have
proposed in this plan, if we can get that through and everybody
have a little bit of skin in the game, we can get the Postal
Service back on good firm financial footing, clear that issue
up with the mailers that were ``going out of business,'' and
really be strong for the next decades to come.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Cummings.
We now recognize the Vice Chairman of the Subcommittee, the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Amash, for five minutes.
Mr. Amash. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks again, Mr.
Donahoe.
In a March 2010 USPS action plan, USPS stated
diversification to non-Postal activities, such as logistics,
banking, and consumer goods, would not be viable due to high
operating costs and relatively light customer traffic in post
offices. Is this still your opinion?
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Mr. Amash. And could you elaborate on that?
Mr. Donahoe. Here is the thing. The way we look at it is
this. The Postal Service has a tremendously strong core
business and we think that, looking out to the future,
commercial first class mail, advertising mail, and packages
provides us big opportunities to grow the business itself, as
well make some additional money on new services. So our focus
should be on being the best at what we do the best right now.
When you look at things like banking, there are banks on
every corner. When you look at cell phones, AT&T is trying to
merge with T Mobile because they can't make any money
independently. Even if you study what the foreign posts do, if
you look at what Germany does today, Germany makes their
profits off of the mail. Of course, they charge 85 cents for a
stamp to deliver the size of a territory like Ohio and
Pennsylvania, but they don't make money on logistics. And it
would be foolish for us, especially in a situation we are, to
take our eye off the ball and get into something we are not
good at.
Mr. Amash. I have a slide up here which I think really
emphasizes this point. This is from 2009. It shows a $7.8
billion shortfall. In order to make up that sort of shortfall,
you need to run revenues of almost $150 billion. And to show
you how big a deal that is, that would equate to creating 13
Fortune 500 companies, it would be more than twice the combined
revenue of FedEx and UPS, it would be equal to capturing 5
percent market share of the total U.S. savings market, and it
would be equivalent to building an e-commerce business eight
times the size of Amazon.com. Do you have any comments on this?
Mr. Donahoe. Well, I agree with that. It is better for the
Postal Service to focus on the core mission. We have people
that do an excellent job every day out there. We have the best
network in the world, the house-to-house, business-to-business
network. And with the growth in e-commerce that we can see
coming up, we think there are definitely opportunities for us
to grow that business.
Mr. Amash. Thank you. I have a few questions about the
health care plan.
Mr. Donahoe. Sure.
Mr. Amash. Currently, the taxpayer provides a backstop for
Postal employees retiree health care benefits. Would you expect
the backstop to continue if USPS leaves FEHBP?
Mr. Donahoe. Backstop meaning that if we left FEHBP and the
Postal Service was out of business, that there would be no----
Mr. Amash. If you were running the plan yourself.
Mr. Donahoe. Right. Here is the way we look at it. First of
all, by implementing a plan like we are projecting now, we do
not plan on going out of business. We plan on getting stronger
and being strong out into the future. That is the goal right
there.
Secondly, by working through how we actually set up the
health care plan and how we manage the retirees and how we
manage the prefunding money that is already in there, $45
billion, we think that will be enough to cover retiree health
care benefits going out to the future. The key critical thing
for us, though, is, again, a good, viable, financially strong
Postal Service going out into the future.
Mr. Amash. And would the premiums and benefits of a USPS-
run health care plan be subject to collective bargaining?
Mr. Donahoe. They could be. We have not really spent a lot
of time on that, but it would be an area that would be open for
collective bargaining. That is pretty much the way that the
rest of American business does it today. Currently, the
legislative issues cover retiree benefits and the retirement
portion of the FEHBP. I think many years ago there was actually
some collective bargaining done around benefits and, of course,
we consider that going out to the future.
Mr. Amash. And how would USPS prefer to have its separate
health plan funded?
Mr. Donahoe. We would fund it just like we do now. It is
part of the business of running the organization. There is no
government money coming our way. We want to be self-sufficient,
like I said in my opening statement, and that is exactly how we
would fund this.
Mr. Amash. And would you immediately want to draw on the
current Retiree Health Benefits Fund managed by OPM?
Mr. Donahoe. There are a couple different options on that.
We would have to sit down and walk through those with you. I
think that as you go out there will be a need to start to use
those funds, probably three or four years from now, but I don't
know that we would be doing anything in the next couple years.
But I would like to sit down with you. We have some people that
know that stuff a lot better than me. I would be more than
happy to cover that.
Mr. Amash. Thanks for your time. I yield back.
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Amash.
We now recognize the gentlelady from the District of
Columbia, Ms. Norton, for five minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have two questions I want to get in in my five minutes.
Mr. Donahoe, are you aware of the experience of agencies
that have done exactly what you propose to do, like the FDIC
have tried to do their own health care plan, only to come right
back a couple years later?
Mr. Donahoe. I am familiar with it. I understand that some
of those changes were due to accounting changes the FDIC
decided they----
Ms. Norton. What do you mean by that?
Mr. Donahoe. The prefunding requirements. From what I
understand, when the FDIC moved off to have their own health
care plan, once they were faced with law changes that required
prefunding, they chose to move back with the FEHBP.
Ms. Norton. Because the Federal Government required
prefunding in their plan.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes. And it was smarter for them to move back
in.
Ms. Norton. They didn't have prefunding before.
Mr. Donahoe. I know.
Ms. Norton. Because they were a Federal agency and these
Federal agencies don't have to prefund, which, of course, goes
back to my original question to you, would you be here if you
did not have that requirement. And, Mr. Donahoe, I am not quite
sure you would. There is every private employer who moves first
to insurance because we are the only country where employers
pay for insurance and that, of course, is the biggest part of
what they have to take care of, even with the tax issue for
them, which you don't even have.
Mr. Donahoe. Yes.
Ms. Norton. Let me ask you a question. I think the record
would benefit from knowing how you are proceeding on the
closings. We had a number of closings here, then some of them
were taken off apparently by the Postal Service. How do you
decide what post offices will be closed? I recognize they have
been suspended after the Senate intervened, but I assume they
are going to resume.
Mr. Donahoe. Here is the way we would approach that. Post
offices and stations and branches in, say, a city like
Washington, we think there are a number of options. Number one,
consolidation, which we are doing in some cases. Where we just
don't have the foot traffic in a place, we would consolidate
one into the other, maintain the zip code so customers would
have no ill effects of changing an address.
In the rural areas we are looking to do some contracting
with local stores that are open 24/7. In many cases our
contract with them keeps the lights on in a place like that,
and it is also convenient for customers. One of the other
considerations in rural areas is what is called extension of
rural delivery so that we deliver to a person's house, rather
than having them to come to the post office.
But I think the key thing going forward, and this is
something we have been working with our Postmaster Associations
on, and that is being able to provide a better match up of
costs and revenues for small post offices going forward. Maybe
instead of opening for eight hours a day, we would be open for
six hours a day. That matches the revenues up with the costs
and it allows us to keep the lights on, the flag up there for
customers to have access to the Postal Service.
Ms. Norton. Shorter hours?
Mr. Donahoe. In some cases, yes.
Ms. Norton. Well, actually, your notion of partnering with
a commercial establishment was part of an amendment I
introduced. I couldn't imagine why this wouldn't have passed;
it would help the private sector, it would help the Postal
Service. But, believe it or not, that amendment did not pass,
and it shows we are not looking always for win-wins.
But I have to tell you, in my own district, I got some
information back that intrigued me that said that at a post
office that was due to be shut, perhaps because of your other
troubles, there was only one Postal clerk there. This was a
neighborhood which people regard as very busy, very much in
need of postal service. People would walk in and they would see
these humongous lines with only one little person there, and
they would just walk out again. So that is why I need to know
what are your criteria when your own downsizing may have been
inadvertently chasing people away from the Postal Service.
Mr. Donahoe. That is a concern. One of the things that we
pride ourselves on is customer service, and long lines is
something we want to avoid. Years ago, when I worked in
Washington, D.C., that was one of my major impetus, was to work
better with customers, make sure that we provide a great
service. Offline you can tell me what office that was, and I
will make sure that we take care of that. But one of the things
we are looking at is making sure that not only we have access
to post offices, we are looking at putting more self-service in
so the people have the opportunity to either go to the line
or----
Ms. Norton. How much are you going to save if you were to
close every post office that is on your list? And I recognize
that there is an appeal process. So if you are going to have
savings, that appeal process is going to continue operative,
isn't it? And if so, what would be the savings in the end,
assuming that you prevailed in every appeal?
Mr. Donahoe. We think that as we balance up the hours and
the revenues, we will probably save about half a billion
dollars, and that is keeping the majority of places open, it is
just trying to make sure that we have the right number of
resources there with the revenue that comes in the door.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
We now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis,
for five minutes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Donahoe, as we experience this era of declining mail
volume, do you think that the current cap is reflective of your
actual cost, or should maybe the PRC look at possibly
reconfiguring the cap?
Mr. Donahoe. Well, the cap, there is a good side and a bad
side for the cap. The cap, from a Postal Service perspective,
puts some discipline into the costs of the system and makes us
work hard to stay efficient, which is a good thing. From a
customer perspective, it provides a lot of predictability,
which is a very good thing and helps us keep people in the
mail.
To the discussion that we had earlier, we think that there
is some ability for the Postal Service to raise single piece
mail prices over the course of the next couple of years. Right
now, by law, single piece and commercial mail is linked. We
would like, by law, that to be changed and have some
flexibility. The fact that we have Forever stamps out there,
customers can buy them and use them forever, that gives them a
little bit of a discount that way. But it would certainly help
us generate a little bit of money with what we think even 45
cents is a pretty good bargain.
Mr. Davis. In his last round of questioning, Chairman Ross
raised the issue of rates. Let me ask what do you see or what
do you think might be in store for nonprofit or not-for-profit
mailers under the proposals that we are looking at?
Mr. Donahoe. The nonprofit revenues continue, from a
standpoint of volume, continue to be strong in the
organization. We have not come out, from a Postal Service
perspective, and asked to change that. I know there has been
some discussion about increasing the not-for-profit rates.
Those people depend on the mail. They will tell you that even
though they advertise a lot online, I don't think they get many
donations online. The majority of the donations that come in to
the not-for-profit come through the mail, and the good thing
about those, a lot of those donations are mailed back with a 45
cent stamp, which is good for us.
Mr. Davis. I have no further questions. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Donahoe, I appreciate your being here today. I am
looking forward to continuing to work with my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle and with you in making sure we do what
is necessary to preserve this age-old institution, and make
sure it is run efficiently and effectively. Thank you for time.
That will conclude this first panel.
Mr. Donahoe. Thank you.
Mr. Ross. We will now take a few minutes and get ready for
our second panel, Mr. Francis.
[Pause.]
Mr. Ross. I will now reconvene the Subcommittee on Federal
Workforce, U.S. Postal Service and Labor Policy, and welcome
our next panel, our witness, Mr. Walton Francis, who is an
author and a health care expert.
Mr. Francis, it is customary for those who testify before
the Oversight Committee and its subcommittees that they be
sworn in under oath, so if you wouldn't mind stand and raise
your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give this Committee will be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth?
[Witness responds in the affirmative.]
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
Let the record reflect that the witness answered in the
affirmative.
Please be seated. We do have your opening statement by way
of a written testimony before us, but please, I would like now
to recognize you for five minutes for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF WALTON FRANCIS, AUTHOR AND FEDERAL HEALTH CARE
EXPERT

Mr. Francis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
Committee. I am going to just try to summarize very briefly.
First, the proposal before you is essentially a proposal to
dismantle the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program. That
program covers 8 million people. Probably half the plans in
that program will be forced out effectively. All the people in
all those plans will be forced to move to new plans. A lot of
these people are elderly, don't want any change. They are going
to be faced with massive change. And all that proposal is
unnecessary, which I will explain in a second. So that is the
issue before you.
Let me just say, first, I happen to agree strongly with
virtually the entire Postal plan that I heard described by the
Postmaster General, and I cannot urge on you too strongly that
it is incumbent on the Congress to fix the flawed legislation
which the Postal Service now works and give it a chance to
solve its problems. This part of it, however, isn't part of the
solution, it is part of the problem.
Second general point, the FEHBP model, multiple plans
competing for consumer business, is a widely adopted and copied
model, and has been the winning model in the Congress of the
United States and with the last two or three administrations
for very good reasons, and I won't go through the whole list.
The Breaux-Thomas proposal was to copy the FEHBP for Medicare.
The Medicare Advantage program and the Part D programs, when
enacted, were explicitly modeled after the FEHBP, with
improvements, Okay? But that was the model. And both have been
hugely successful.
The original Paul Ryan proposal, Ryan-Rivlin, Rivlin-
Domeneci, Ryan-Wyden, which I think is maybe the best of that
group. Just the budget resolution that the House passed a few
days ago, the Medicare part of that is modeled on the FEHBP.
The Obama Administration's health reform, whichever side of
that issue you are on, the State exchanges where multiple plans
compete for people is modeled on the FEHBP.
Now let's talk about the prefunding issue. There is a
reality here. The prefunding is not going to be paid, ever. The
$5.4 billion is toast. It may be carried on the books as a debt
owed the U.S. Government; it may be written away by legislation
you pass. I don't know how it is going to be solved. The only
thing I am sure of is it is not going to be paid.
So now the question is why are we going to destroy the
FEHBP to create what amounts to a fig leaf for not paying the
$5.4 billion? I just find that Kafkaesque. It is driven in part
by the budget rules that control you to some degree in how you
account for things, but that is the reality. And a part of that
reality is the money in the trust fund, okay, actually, every
trust fund, Social Security trust fund, but the prefunding
retirement thing, that trust fund is a paper fiction, it is an
accounting exercise. Any money spent out of that fund will
actually be spent by taxing the American public or borrowing
money to be paid by our children some years hence through
taxes. The money is taxed, it is not there. Remember the
Clinton Administration, all the lockbox talk about Social
Security? That was essentially a debate over this same issue.
I will stop there, but merits of the proposal. I have to
tell you I have read one of the consultant reports that the
Postal Service got and I have read several of their own
reports. They are full of errors, false assumptions,
misstatements, and so on. I won't go through all the examples,
but I have one simple one. They are talking about saving money
on prescription drugs because they are going to operate a
single plan that is going to enroll 2 million people. Well, the
FEHBP has a single plan that enrolls 5 million people, it is
called Blue Cross. Funny thing. How are they going to save more
money covering 2 million people than we can save covering 5
million people? It is unreal, okay? It is made up.
They have never recognized, but I have given you in my
testimony details, on it is going to cost at least half a
billion dollars because the Postal employees are subsidized by
the GS and other non-Postal employees who are much younger, on
average, and healthier, and it is all one pool. So there is a
half billion dollar-plus subsidy every year going into the
Postal Service. Okay, they pull out, they are going to have to
spend an extra half billion just to maintain existing benefits
and premiums. They start a half billion a year behind.
The other point I want to emphasize is a lot of what is
going on here is shifting costs from FEHBP to Medicare. That is
not real savings, that is moving it from one pot to another.
And when you get some real analysis from CBO or others, and I
don't count the Postal Service Inspector General in this group,
you are going to hear what I am telling you.
The Postal Service, unlike most Federal agencies, has a lot
of flexibility right now under current law. One of the
suggestions I made in my testimony, kind of buried near the
end, is they could offer to pay its employees a bonus for
signing up for Part B. Just say we will pay you $100 if you
sign up. Or they could say we will pay you $100 if you switch
from higher cost plans to lower cost plans. They have the
ability to create employee incentives right now. They are not
bound by the general pay schedule and all the rest.
Their record, I won't go through their record in the past.
They have bargained with the unions quite improperly. The
unions have sought the best possible benefits for their
members. That is their job. But one of the prices paid by that
has been overpaying premiums relative to the non-Postal side
and relative to the private sector.
The good news in all this is they are focused like a laser
on the biggest single defect in the FEHBP, the interface with
Medicare. And I cannot commend to you too much how important it
is to address that issue, but not for the Postal Service alone,
for the entire program. It is crazy the way it is done now. And
it is going to get worse. People are going to bail out more and
more from Medicare.
I might add, this Committee, I don't think, has the
jurisdiction to solve this problem alone. For one reason, they
are proposing mandatory enrollment in Medicare Parts A and B.
Well, I am going to tell you something. There are tens of
thousands of 80-year-old widows, Postal Service widows who do
not have coverage for Medicare Part A due to their work or
their husband's work, and who opted out of Part B. The premium
cost for one of those widows to join Parts A and B, right now
under current law in the Social Security Act, is over $8,000 a
year. That is what it would cause to mandate that that widow
leave the Postal plan she is now in and sign up for A and B.
There are several ways to reform this. Part of the question
will be who is how the saving is going to be shared between the
Medicare program, the employing agencies, and the FEHBP system,
and the retirees themselves. A lot of options here, but the
basic idea, I think, is to provide positive incentives to
retirees to join, first place, Medicare Part A is automatic. It
is illegal to collect Social Security in this Country if you
are not in Medicare Part A at age 65.
So this stuff about people aren't signing up for Part A or
all these taxes that have been paid, all the taxes paid are
Part A taxes. Anyone who is not in the 80s or 90s of Postal
Service retirees already is in Part A once they hit 65. So that
is a false issue and it has been misdescribed. Again, I am sure
it not the Postmaster General's fault, but the people who write
his speeches, the people who prepare these consulting documents
aren't getting it right.
Part B, where the premium for most is $1200 a year, the
right model is the employer or the plan, directly or through
the employer, subsidize people, incentivize them to join Part
B, and you don't have to give them 100 percent, complete
wraparound benefits, which is what they now get if they have
Part B, because that induces massive waste. And there are real
savings to be made by reducing overutilization of medical care.
Thank you very much.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Francis follows:]

Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Francis. I appreciate your energy,
especially your expertise in this area, and I will now
recognize myself for five minutes.
I want to talk about prefunding for a quick second because
you touched on that. Are you suggesting then because it is
simply not true that everything is being set aside that it is
really an obligation to pay an IOU, if you will, in a trust
fund, that we all just call it what it is and eliminate it
entirely and tell the American taxpayers that they are going to
be on the hook for the unfunded liabilities of health care and
retirement benefits?
Mr. Francis. I don't know the best answer to that, Mr.
Chairman. A couple of points. First, if we reform the Medicare
interface, that alone will substantially reduce. The part of
what you heard from the Postmaster General is correct. So the
unfunded liability can be greatly reduced if you can get more
Federal retirees to enroll in Medicare Part B. That is sort of
Point A.
Point B, a lot of this may hinge on scoring rules and so
on. I think the Congress enacted this prefunding requirement
about four or five years ago, as I understand it, in the
expectation that the Postal Service might go insolvent, so we
better get these funds before it is too late. And then it has
turned out that the prefunding itself has been the single
biggest cause of the Postal Service's budget hemorrhaging----
Mr. Ross. Which, of course, it isn't. There are systemic--
--
Mr. Francis. Well, you are right.
Mr. Ross. Given the $5 billion or the $5.8 billion, they
are still showing over a $5 billion annual loss. It has nothing
to do with prefunding.
Mr. Francis. Right.
Mr. Ross. But be that as it may, also on the Medicare
issue, Mr. Donahoe mentioned that he is the second largest
employer that contributes to Medicare and, therefore, there
should be some benefit for that contribution. How do you
reconcile that?
Mr. Francis. Well, it just sounds like strange writers to
me. First, he is not the second largest. How about the civilian
side of the Federal Government? I mean, don't they count for
something. View from a business perspective I am not going to
argue with his point, but what he is doing and the employees
are doing--and, by the way, economists all believe that the
entire burden of the Medicare Part A tax is paid by employees.
It effectively comes out of wages, okay?
The Postal employees are paying into a Medicare Part A
trust fund and they are going to get free Medicare Part A when
they retire. That is the deal. There are problems with that
deal, but they are not Postal Service problems. There is
nothing special about what the Postal Service is doing; that is
the system for every employer in America.
Mr. Ross. Obviously, we are here because we want to talk
about the proposal on the health care benefits, but that is
more of a symptom of the major problem. The major problem is
that there is a problem within the Postal Service that requires
reorganization and reformation. One of the issues that we have
to address, of course, is their labor costs. Over 80 percent of
their cost is labor. How do you recommend that we handle that?
Mr. Francis. This is a similar problem, no, actually, it is
a common problem.
Mr. Ross. It is the $60 million question.
Mr. Francis. This is what Rhode Island faced and had to
take really drastic action to reduce public employee pensions
and health benefits. I don't know the right answer. Is the
Postal Service----
Mr. Ross. But you would agree we have to address the labor
cost, right?
Mr. Francis. Oh, absolutely. No question about it.
Mr. Ross. Because if the revenue side of the equation
continues to decline, even if it stays static on the expense
side, we are going to have further and further shortfalls.
Mr. Francis. Yes. And I have no sense of whether Postal
employees are overpaid or underpaid by any metric, but clearly
reducing labor costs is a vital thing for them to do. But I
want to be clear. For employees they are going to increase
labor costs. Their proposal is not going to save money, it is
going to cost money.
Mr. Ross. Let me throw out something. In your written
testimony you talk about a health savings account and a
contribution. So you believe that maybe there is even a more
innovative way to stay within FEHBP and just change the way we
do it, and have the Postal Service contribute less but more by
ways of an HSA?
Mr. Francis. Absolutely. They could go ahead and give
health savings accounts to employees who sign up for Part B.
That is another area we might have to change the law----
Mr. Ross. So, in other words, we could reduce the cost
because the premium would be reduced, and yet increase the
amount we put into an HSA and have a net decrease of what we
are investing in health care?
Mr. Francis. Yes. That could be done tomorrow, assuming
there is no legal impediment on the Ways and Means side. I
don't know of any other legal impediment.
Mr. Ross. One last thing. You indicate that the USPS finds
itself in a predicament that is primarily the result of one
flawed statute that enables the Congress of the United States
to micromanage what should be a business decision. Any
suggestions in the next 30 seconds that you would offer how we
make that a more flexible statute so that there would be more
flexibility to the Postal Service?
Mr. Francis. I think the proposals that were discussed,
that are in the bill that you discussed with the Postmaster
General, all sound to me perfectly reasonable. I think the
flexibility to close processing centers and post offices is
very important, but it is not probably as important as some of
the other things discussed. I think he has a great plan, and I
hope the Congress enacts all of it but this piece.
Mr. Ross. One last quick question. Have you had a chance to
consult with the Postmaster General on any of his proposals?
Mr. Francis. Only a few seconds before and after his
testimony, sir.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Francis.
Mr. Connolly. There are a lot of us in Congress in the same
position.
Mr. Ross. Okay, I recognize the gentleman from Virginia,
Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Lynch, for your courtesy. I have to run to the steps of the
Capitol, so I really appreciate it. I have a middle school
group of 200 kids.
I want to welcome Mr. Francis, who deservedly has the
reputation for being the walking expert on these matters, and I
thank you, Walt, so much for being here today. If I understood
your testimony, let me get this straight, now. If we were to
adopt, whole and entire, the Postmaster General's proposal with
respect to health care here, it would actually cost the Postal
Service a half a billion dollars, that transition, because they
are now beneficiaries of being in a larger pool and, therefore,
they are subsidized?
Mr. Francis. Correct.
Mr. Connolly. Would it be a half a billion every year or
just a one-time hit?
Mr. Francis. It would grow over time, because----
Mr. Connolly. Grow over time?
Mr. Francis. Yes, sir. Because they already have an aging
workforce that is much more aged. The crucial point is a 50-
year-old, on average, in this Country costs something like
$8,000 a year in health care, and a 20-year-old costs something
like $2,000 a year in health care. They aren't going to be
hiring any more 20-year-olds for at least a decade to come.
Leave aside those retiring. The existing workforce will keep
aging, will be more expensive every year. The best thing they
could do is stay in that FEHBP pool. It affects the cross-
subsidy from the younger and healthier ones being hired.
Mr. Connolly. So, golly, gosh darn, a proposal allegedly
designed to save money will cost money. And, by the way, as we
discovered in the study the Postmaster General and his senior
management team commissioned and then deep-sixed because they
didn't like the results, it is a similar situation where some
of the other so-called reforms that apparently would cost $5
billion in lost revenue, more than offsetting the savings. So
here we have another example.
Let's assume, let's stipulate good intention, but the
analysis does not hold up. We are going to lose money, and I am
shocked. That loss of a half a billion grows over time because
of the aging workforce and the fact that newer, younger folks
aren't come in because of the shrinking of that workforce.
Mr. Francis. That is the case.
Mr. Connolly. Now, you also said a second problem with
this, I am sure also unintended, is that we are going to have
one heck of a penalty on widows and other survivors who
currently aren't signed up for Medicare A and B. And the reason
there is an $8,000 per person penalty or cost is because they
actually have to pay a certain penalty, don't they, under
Social Security?
Mr. Francis. Yes, sir. Let me just be clear. Under current
law, if you do not have Part A through the normal post-
employment way that you get it, and there is a large number of
people in this Country, several hundred thousand, who don't
have it you get to pay the princely premium for signing up for
Part A of around $5,000 a year. Now, I have never heard of
anyone paying that, actually, I have, but there aren't many who
would pay that. But the proposal, as written, says they are
going to force, now, actually hidden in----
Mr. Connolly. So it will be an individual mandate.
Mr. Francis. Oh----
Mr. Connolly. My goodness, Mr. Chairman. I can't imagine
the Subcommittee----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Francis. Part B has a penalty of 10 percent a year for
every year you could have signed up after age 65. So say you
are an 80-year-old widow. You have 15 years of 10 percent a
year penalty if you sign up for Part B. And, again, you could
change the Social Security Act to get rid of those penalties--
--
Mr. Connolly. So, given my brief time, Walt, it is going to
cost a half a billion dollars a year to the Postal Service,
hardly saving money, and that grows over time. We are going to
penalize widow ladies to the tune of about $8,000 per widow,
and there are tens of thousands of them because, again, of the
nature of the workforce and the retiree demographics.
Now, a third consequence from this proposal, of course, is
an FEHBP itself, is it not? It reduces the risk poll rather
considerably, given the size of the Postal Service.
Mr. Francis. It will be a cosmic change.
Mr. Connolly. Cosmic?
Mr. Francis. Well, to give you a simple example, two
examples. A lot of the HMOs that participate in the FEHBP are
in cities where the main part of the Federal workforce is
Postal, okay? Guess what happens in those cities? Insurance is
going to say it is not worth doing business. We used to have
1,000 enrollees, now we are going to have maybe zero or maybe a
few hundred. So they are going to pull out.
So a lot of people who are not Postal employees are going
to lose that access. I think it is unlikely that any of the
Postal plans would survive this. It is possible, but almost all
the Postal plans predominantly enroll either current Postal
employees or retired Postal employees, and they are not going
to be allowed to enroll either group.
Mr. Connolly. So other than that it is a great idea.
My time is up, Mr. Chairman, but I just want to cite H.L.
Mencken, who once said that for every human problem there is a
solution that is simple, neat and wrong. The Postmaster
General's proposal on health care fits that description.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee, the
gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, for five minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Francis, for your willingness to come and
help this Committee with its work. The idea of insurance
usually or generally is that you spread the risk of harm or
illness over a wide population so that what happens is the
healthy folks, which is the majority of people, subsidize the
cost to those of us who get sick. That is how insurance
generally works.
The way the Postmaster General was describing it today was
that we were going to concentrate the risk. In other words, if
an individual participant was just by themself, they would pay
less. They would pay less. A husband and wife would not have to
pay a family plan, they would pay less. And it would, by its
nature, concentrate more of the risk on the very individuals
who might be the sickest.
Have you looked at that aspect of the proposal?
Mr. Francis. Yes, I have, sir. The key factor here is that
people pose very different risks at different ages. By the way,
the OPM actuaries have actually looked at this question because
it has many times been proposed that, for example, there be a
rate for couples. I counsel thousands of people very year and
they will raise their hand and say we are a married couple, we
are 50 years old, we don't have all those kids; why can't we
get a rate just for us? And the answer is because that young
couple with kids is cheaper than you, and if you were in a
separate pool you would pay more, a lot more. And I give an
example in my testimony of how it could be double.
The FEHBP pool of 8 million people, the 20-year-olds are
paying a lot more than they would if they were in a separate
category, okay, to be sure. And it is very interesting how this
all plays out. And, by the way, back to the Medicare point, 65-
year-olds with Medicare Parts A and B, they often complain why
can't we get a lower rate because we are cheaper? And they are
right, because Medicare is primary and they cost less than
those 64-year-olds.
So the FEHBP says we are going to spread it across
everybody and we are not going to try to chop it up in pieces,
and the Postal proposal would not only reduce the pool from 8
million to 2 million people, it would, by creating four premium
paying categories, may make a lot of people pay more than they
pay today; others would pay less.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Thank you. Thank you for that. The other
question I had is regarding the Affordable Care Act. Under the
Affordable Care Act, one of the key funding provisions for the
Affordable Care Act is that in 2018, if you have an expensive
health care plan, then in 2018 you are going to be hit with a
20 percent tax on the value of your health care plan. Not how
much you use, but the value of your health care plan. Now, just
for the record, I voted against the Affordable Care Act, and
that was one of the key reasons why, because we never used to
tax health care because we wanted people to have it. It is kind
of like taxing food. We would never taxed food in this Country
because you would starve without it.
Well, the way it looks right now, what the framework of
FEHBP and, most likely, this Postal plan that the Postmaster
General has suggested, it would a Cadillac plan based on the
costs now and the estimated increases until we reach 2018. And
there is a reason it comes into effect in 2018, because the
folks that pushed it will all be gone and they won't have to
answer for this. So have you thought at all about this 20
percent tax on expensive high-end health care plans and what it
might mean for this Postal plan if it is separated from FEHBP?
Mr. Francis. I hadn't, Congressman, but you are absolutely
right, it is a potential problem of significant proportions.
That provision of the law, by the way, in the Affordable Care
Act ties that number to the cost of the Blue Cross plan in the
FEHBP. What will happen, I think, and I am just thinking on my
feet on this, actually, the high value Postal plan, the one
they say is equal to, it isn't, it is actually inferior. For
example, it has lower benefits than Blue Cross standard option.
Nonetheless it is pretty close in benefits to that. It is
going to disproportionately attract the older and sicker Postal
employees. They are all going to be in that group by then,
pretty much, and, yes, that plan will cost more than Blue Cross
standard option in that year, I think, that would be a
reasonable projection, and that tax will hit Postal employees.
Mr. Lynch. Okay.
Mr. Francis. Or the Postal Service.
Mr. Lynch. All right. I see I have exceeded my time. I
appreciate you coming before the Committee and helping us with
our work. Thank you, Mr. Francis.
I yield back.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis, for
five minutes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Francis, do you see any redeeming value in the
Postmaster General's self-run plan or do you see anything about
it that you like?
Mr. Francis. Well, I hope I am clear. There is one huge
redeeming value, sir, and that is the focus on the need to
reform the interface between Medicare and the FEHBP. And while
he wants to make it compulsory and I would quibble with some
other details of it, he innovatively includes Part D in that
calculus. I was pleased to see that. I hadn't, even myself,
focused on the Part D side. But the thinking there is good, it
is a basis for thinking about the entire FEHBP, and that is the
part that is most important to the Postal Service.
I find it hard to believe that they really think running
their own plan is going to save any money, but, regardless, it
won't. But fixing the interface between these two programs,
they have been going along side-by-side for 50 years and no one
has ever adjusted either program, Medicare or the FEHBP, to
take account of the other. It is almost bizarre. No
administration, no OPM director. I am not criticizing Mr. Barry
in particular, this Administration in particular. It is time
for the Congress to take a hard look at reform angles. So that
is where I see the positive in this.
Mr. Davis. But you answered the other question that I had
relative to cost savings, and it is your position that it would
not save any money.
Mr. Francis. It is my position that it not only would not
save money; it would cost more. Quite apart from the extra cost
of the older and sicker enrollees, Mr. Lynch had stepped out
and didn't hear my point about the premium thing for
prescription drug point, which I know is of particular interest
to you, sir. They are saying, and if you look at this Hay
report, they will say, I forget the number, the bulk of their
projected savings come from they are going to bargain better
for prescription drugs in their 2 million enrollee plan.
Well, the Blue Cross carrier with two plans today enrolls 5
million people. So the notion that mere size, that is illusory.
It is preposterous to say that just because they have a plan
with 2 million people they are going to save money. In fact, I
am, frankly, skeptical. I think OPM does a superb job in
managing the FEHBP in terms of keeping the plans honest and
frugal, and I have no reason to think the Postal Service has
that competence.
Mr. Davis. I must admit that with a limited pool and with
not as many subscribers or beneficiaries or individuals in the
pool, it is difficult for me to see how, unless you had a pool
that you could select out or cherry pick, I just couldn't see
the money saving. So let me just thank you for coming to share
your views with us. I appreciate it.
I have no further questions, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Davis.
Just real quickly. I will go briefly and then I think Mr.
Lynch wants to go also.
As I understand it, if the employees of the United States
Postal Service had paid for their health care at the same
amount that the other Federal employees had, then the Postal
Service would be showing a half a billion profit?
Mr. Francis. Yes. But let me restate it, sir, if I may.
Yes, they have been, if you will, I hate to say overpaying
because these were union negotiated rates.
Mr. Ross. Right.
Mr. Francis. But they have been paying about 10 percent a
year more than the rest of the Federal Government every year
for the last 20 years or so.
Mr. Ross. The Postal Service has been paying that.
Mr. Francis. The Postal Service has. They could have saved
multiple hundreds of millions of dollars every year.
Mr. Ross. If we had just let them pay--if we let the
employees of the Postal Service pay what the Federal employees
were paying.
Mr. Francis. Exactly.
Mr. Ross. Which begs the question that it is such a
sweetheart deal that it is almost killing the goose that is
laying the golden egg.
Mr. Francis. Yes. And it doesn't give one confidence that
they know what they are doing, though I must say this
Postmaster General is a bright light compared to----
Mr. Ross. I agree with you. I agree with you. I think he
has done an outstanding job in recognizing the problems and
realizing that something has to be done. He is very innovative.
Mr. Francis, I am grateful to you for your testimony today.
I hope that you do get a chance to work with Mr. Donahoe on
this because I think you bring a lot of things to the table.
With that, I will recognize Mr. Lynch.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Recently, Mr. Barry, the Director of OPM, has suggested
that the 9 million people, Federal employees, who are right now
in the FEHBP, the Federal Employee Health Benefit Plan,
prescription drug program, he has suggested that that 9 million
be taken out of that program so that they be allowed to use a
competitive process to pick a plan, pick their own drug benefit
plan and could probably get a better deal, because they are
being overcharged right now in the FEHBP, but they are a
captive group. What do you think about that proposal?
Mr. Francis. Congressman, I know it is probably near and
dear to your heart, but I am against it, and let me tell you
two reasons. One, let's assume it is correct that there somehow
OPM could bargain better than Blue Cross. I am not at all
convinced with----
Mr. Lynch. Well, no. They are suggesting that individuals
be given the power.
Mr. Francis. Oh, I thought they were talking about a single
drug contract. But let me just say, assume some money could be
saved. The problem is this: you want to have a drug benefit
integrated with the hospital and doctor benefit. It is less
important that you may be paying $21 for a certain pill instead
of $20, or vice versa. That is a lot of money for a lot of
people, but compared to, hey, if this plan is able to make sure
you take that pill and stay out of the hospital, that is where
the big savings are.
So you really want the health plan to be managing all the
pieces at once. That is disease management; it is done quite
well, I think, by many health plans, but not by all, and that
is the wave of the future. All the Medicare reforms that this
Administration is making, accountable care organizations and so
on are all aimed at that same idea. We want people to look at
the totality of costs and services that a person gets and
minimize cost and maximize their health.
Mr. Lynch. Well, thank you, Mr. Francis. Not the answer I
was looking for, but I certainly give you credit for that.
Thank you.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Francis, for being here.
That concludes our witnesses' testimony today. I appreciate
your taking the time from your busy schedule. Thank you for
your input and the Committee now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


