- PROGRESS OF THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S POLICY TOWARD IRAN

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROGRESS OF THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S POLICY TOWARD IRAN

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY,
HOMELAND DEFENSE AND FOREIGN OPERATIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 15, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-99

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-801 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on National Security, Homeland Defense and Foreign
Operations

JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah, Chairman
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho, Vice        JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts,
Chairman                             Ranking Minority Member
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                PETER WELCH, Vermont
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on November 15, 2011................................     1
Statement of:
Dubowitz, Mark, esq., executive director, Foundation for
Defense of Democracies; Kenneth M. Pollack, Ph.D.,
director, Saban Center for Middle East Policy, Brookings
Institution; and Suzanne Maloney, Ph.D., senior fellow,
Saban Center for Middle East Policy, Brookings Institution.     6
Dubowitz, Mark, esq......................................     6
Maloney, Suzanne, Ph.D...................................    44
Pollack, Kenneth M., Ph.D................................    23
Szubin, Adam J., Director, Office of Foreign Assets Control,
U.S. Department of the Treasury; Henry T. Wooster, Acting
Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs,
U.S. Department of State; and Colin H. Kahl, Ph.D., Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for the Middle East, U.S.
Department of Defense......................................    66
Kahl, Colin H., Ph.D.....................................    86
Szubin, Adam J...........................................    66
Wooster, Henry T.........................................    77
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Dubowitz, Mark, esq., executive director, Foundation for
Defense of Democracies, prepared statement of..............     9
Kahl, Colin H., Ph.D., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense
for the Middle East, U.S. Department of Defense, prepared
statement of...............................................    89
Maloney, Suzanne, Ph.D., senior fellow, Saban Center for
Middle East Policy, Brookings Institution, prepared
statement of...............................................    46
Pollack, Kenneth M., Ph.D., director, Saban Center for Middle
East Policy, Brookings Institution, prepared statement of..    25
Szubin, Adam J., Director, Office of Foreign Assets Control,
U.S. Department of the Treasury, prepared statement of.....    69
Wooster, Henry T., Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau
of Near Eastern Affairs, U.S. Department of State, prepared
statement of...............................................    79

PROGRESS OF THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S POLICY TOWARD IRAN

----------

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on National Security, Homeland Defense
and Foreign Operations,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 2247, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Issa, Tierney, Cummings,
Welch, and Quigley.
Staff present: Thomas A. Alexander, senior counsel; Brien
A. Beattie, professional staff member; Molly Boyl,
parliamentarian; Mark D. Marin, director of oversight; Rafael
Maryahin, counsel; Nadia A. Zahran, staff assistant; Jaron
Bourke, minority director of administration; Ashley Etienne,
minority director of communications; Paul Kincaid, minority
press secretary; Adam Koshkin, minority staff assistant; and
Scott Lindsay and Carlos Uriarte, minority counsels.
Mr. Chaffetz. Good morning. The committee will come to
order.
I would like to begin this hearing by stating the Oversight
Committee's mission statement.
We exist to secure two fundamental principles: First,
Americans have the right to know that the money Washington
takes from them is well spent; and, second, Americans deserve
an efficient, effective government that works for them. Our
duty on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee is to
protect these rights.
Our solemn responsibility is to hold government accountable
to taxpayers because taxpayers have a right to know what they
get from their government. We will work tirelessly in
partnership with citizen watchdogs to deliver the facts to the
American people and bring genuine reform to the Federal
bureaucracy.
This is the mission statement of the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee.
Appreciate everyone being here this morning. And I would
like to welcome Ranking Member Tierney and members of the
subcommittee and the people joining us in the audience and on
television.
The hearing today is ``Progress of the Obama
Administration's Policy Toward Iran.'' Today's proceedings will
examine whether the President's strategy is effectively
deterring Iran's nuclear program and bringing an end to human-
rights abuses there.
During his campaign for the Presidency, President Obama
promised that his administration would pursue an aggressive
strategy to end Iran's nuclear program. In his ``Blueprint for
Change,'' he stated that the Obama administration would, ``use
aggressive and direct diplomacy to prevent an Iranian regime
from developing a nuclear program. It will put an end to the
failed policy that has let Iran develop its nuclear program and
strengthen its position in the region, and present the Iranian
regime with a clear choice: end your nuclear program, support
for terror, and threats toward Israel or face increased U.S.
and multilateral pressure.''
In his inaugural address, President Obama reiterated his
preference for open diplomacy and the use of soft power by
saying, ``To those who cling to power through corruption and
deceit and the silencing of dissent, know that you are on the
wrong side of history but that we will extend a hand if you are
willing to unclench your fist.''
After a year and a half in office, the administration began
applying new pressure to Iran's leadership. In July 2010,
President Obama signed into law the Comprehensive Iran
Sanctions Accountability and Divestment Act [CISADA]. It
expanded the U.S. Government's authority to target Iran's
energy and financial sectors. It targeted those who commit
human-rights abuses. To date, the U.S. Government has imposed
sanctions on 10 companies for violations of this act.
Through the sanctions and other frameworks, has the United
States inflicted economic hardship on Iran? Is this enough? Is
that pressure being applied in the right way? If the goal is to
prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon, then apparently
not.
Just last week, the IAEA released their report indicating
that Iran has taken actions consistent with the manufacturing
of a nuclear weapon. The IAEA report stated the following:
``The agency has serious concerns regarding possible military
dimensions to Iran's nuclear program. After assessing carefully
and critically the extensive information available to it, the
Agency finds the information to be, overall, credible. The
information indicates that Iran has carried out activities
relevant to the development of a nuclear explosive device.''
Iran remains undeterred despite the various sanctions and
U.N. Security Council resolutions imposed against it. In fact,
Iran's rhetoric is more reckless than ever, especially toward
Israel. In sum, the aggressive and direct diplomacy against
Iran's nuclear program doesn't seem to be working very well.
What is the new plan? Is the administration pursuing
another strategy, or is it standing behind the current failed
approach? I look forward to hearing from our government
witnesses about whether the administration is revising its
approach.
A nuclear-armed Iran is an unacceptable outcome for the
United States and its allies. Unfortunately, Iran's destructive
behavior is not limited to its nuclear program. Over the years,
they have been known to provide material support to militias in
Iraq. Its covert war against the United States is designed to
bring instability to Iraq and the region. Fortunately, our
military has been a protective force and has been a significant
deterrent. It remains to be seen how that may change after
military withdrawal on December 31st of this year.
Will the State Department be prepared to defeat direct or
indirect military action by Iran? Will Secretary Clinton's army
of private contractors be able to protect the 16,500 personnel
under her care? I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
about the extent of the threat and how the administration plans
to confront it.
Before I recognize the ranking member, I would like to note
the absence of senior policymakers from the State Department,
Defense Department, and the Treasury Department. I extended
invitations to Deputy Secretaries of those agencies, but they
declined to make time in their schedule and appear today. The
Under Secretaries of those agencies were invited, but they are
either busy or away from the office.
I find it inexcusable that we continue to be rebuffed by
the administration for providing the witnesses most pertinent
to these types of hearings. It is imperative that they show up
before these hearings, and yet there is a continued pattern
here that is just unacceptable to the American people and to
this committee. I find it inexcusable.
The issues surrounding Iran are complex. The solutions are
difficult and dynamic. There is no excuse to hide from
oversight. Senior policymakers should be here to answer
questions about the President's strategy, and taxpayers deserve
nothing less than a full accounting for their investment in
these programs. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
I will also add, it was our initial request to have the
Members all appear on one panel so we could have a candid
discussion and it would be a better use of Members' time and, I
think, a better discussion for the American people. The
administration refused to sit next to people who weren't in the
government, and so, consequently, they have elected to be on a
separate panel. We will hear from them after, on panel number
two.
I would now like to recognize the distinguished ranking
member, the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Tierney, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank all of our witnesses for being here today. We
appreciate the advice and insight that you will provide for the
committee.
You know, the United States obviously has a difficult
relationship with Iran, and it has faced some significant new
strains in that relationship just in the past month. On October
11, 2011, the Department of Justice indicted an Iranian-
American for allegedly attempting to orchestrate the
assassination of the Saudi Ambassador to the United States on
American soil. Just last week, the International Atomic Energy
Agency [IAEA], released a report making the case that, over the
past 10 years, ``Iran has carried out activities relevant to
the development of a nuclear explosive device.''
How we respond to such threats to our national interest,
the security of Israel, and the stability of the Middle East is
a major question. Some have called on the United States to
punish Iran through harsher sanctions.
I do want to point out that President Obama made comments
during his election that he would make efforts to reach out to
the Iranian people and their government to try to work out some
solution to the problems that existed there. He made
extraordinary efforts to reach out. They were rebuffed. And I
think the only good thing that came of that, obviously, was
that the rest of the international community understood that
this President was at least making a good-faith effort and this
country was making a good-faith effort. And that international
community, and with our allies, have worked with the President
to put in more effective sanctions since that point in time
than any previous administration has put in place.
So I agree that we have to continue the pressure on Iran's
leaders, and we have to get them to comply with their treaty
obligations, and we also have to be sure to weigh all the
consequences of those sanctions. These are serious matters.
International sanctions should be narrowly focused to
inflict maximum pain on the ruling regime in Tehran while
minimizing the impact of the people of Iran and on global
markets. For example, many have suggested increased sanctions
on Iran's oil industry. Although this is an obvious target
given that oil accounts for 80 percent of Iran's exports and 70
percent of the government's revenue, any sanctions would likely
lead to a significant increase in global oil prices.
We have to weigh that and determine whether or not that
means we should move forward with those sanctions or take some
other course. Given our current economic conditions, any
significant increase in oil prices is likely to harm any
fragile recovery in the world and increase living expenses for
families both in Europe and Asia as well as the United States.
I have also been concerned by recent attempts by Congress
to tie the hands of the administration by mandating sanctions
of a particular nature without leaving suitable flexibility.
Although I believe Congress has an important role to play in
authorizing executive action and determining the scope of
potential sanctions, I think the Congress must also provide the
President with the authority to exercise sanctions and the
flexibility to determine when and how to use them in
conjunction with international partners. Only with this
flexibility will the President be able to continue to ensure
the support of the international community and ultimately
facilitate a change in Iranian policies, we hope.
I look forward to hearing from all of our witnesses today.
I hope they can help us explore our options at this critical
point in American-Iranian relations. As we discuss these
options, we must carefully evaluate all of the risks and all of
the potential benefits of each policy option and ensure an
effective approach.
I want to thank you again, all of our witnesses. I look
forward to hearing your testimony.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
I would now like to recognize the chairman of the Oversight
and Government Reform Committee, the distinguished Member from
California, Mr. Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I will be brief.
I came here to show solidarity over your concern that the
administration continues to rebuff any attempt at real
oversight by this and other committees of the Congress.
I could not fail to note the gentleman from Massachusetts'
opening statement that somehow there is a price of oil linked
to whether or not we have effective enforcement against Iran.
Mr. Tierney. If the gentleman will yield?
Mr. Issa. Of course.
Mr. Tierney. That was a question about whether or not there
ought to be and whether or not we ought to consider it.
Mr. Issa. Right.
Mr. Tierney. So I don't mind you quoting me; just please do
it accurately.
Mr. Issa. And in light of that full disclosure, I think it
is only fair that we understand that this committee has, and
other subcommittees, worked very hard to recognize what the
potential for replacement of Saudi Arabia, Iranian, and other
oil and natural gas. We are now becoming a net exporter of
natural gas, and Pennsylvania alone has more proven known
reserves of oil than Iran could possibly export. The fact is,
we can, in fact, become oil and natural gas self-sufficient and
even become an exporter, as we are, of natural gas.
So I do believe that we should go to the basic question.
The basic question before us today is not, ``What is Iran's
intentions?'' I was a first lieutenant in 1979. I have lived
through Iran's intentions for longer than most people in this
room have been alive. It is very, very clear that Iran's
intentions are to continue being a disruptive force to peace
and security in a region in which they live and extended well
beyond.
The only exception that I would make is for those who say
that what they might do miss the point that, every day, Lebanon
is held captive by a Hezbollah financed by Iran. Every day, the
Palestinian people find themselves having those who do not
support peace and coexistence with Israel financed by Iran.
Every day, the Syrian regime is kept together by money from
Iran. And that is only the tip of the iceberg. As the chairman
noted and the ranking member noted, the attempt to assassinate
a seated Ambassador from Saudi Arabia on U.S. soil is another
example of an Iranian connection that is ongoing.
So as we look today at what Iran will do with a nuclear
weapon, I would suggest strongly that this committee recognize
that Iran will do with a nuclear weapon, even if it never uses
it, everything it has done for more than three decades and
more. A nuclear weapon gives impunity to a government to be
taken by force--something that Iran has not had to face. Iran
has had to look at the existential threat of going to war with
one or more other nations.
Once they have a nuclear weapon, they simply will do more
of what they have been doing. They will fund terrorism around
the world. They will be, in fact, a greater threat to Israel
than they are today. I find that sometimes hard to believe, but
I believe that they simply will look and say, ``Now we can arm
in a higher way Hezbollah and Hamas.''
So the attempts to limit the economic capability of Iran to
fund that are woefully inadequate. I do reserve the right and
the authority of Congress to dictate to the President what he
or she can do with taxpayer dollars. And I think it is
extremely important that the American people understand that as
long as we allow $1 to be exported to Hamas or Hezbollah or
other terrorist organizations by Iran, we have not done all we
can do to limit the scope of their terrorism around the world.
I yield back.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
Members will have 7 days to submit opening statements for
the record.
I would now like to recognize our first panel. Mr. Mark
Dubowitz is the executive director of the Foundation for
Defense of Democracies. Dr. Kenneth Pollack is the director of
the Saban Center for Middle East Policy at the Brookings
Institution. And Dr. Suzanne Maloney is a senior fellow at the
Saban Center for Middle East Policy at the Brookings
Institution.
We appreciate you all being here and taking time in
preparation for this hearing.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn
before they testify. If you will please rise and raise your
right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. You may be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses all answered in
the affirmative.
In order to allow us time for discussion, please limit your
testimony to 5 minutes. Your entire written statement will be
part of the record, and we will move to questioning.
We will now recognize Mr. Dubowitz for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF MARK DUBOWITZ, ESQ., EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
FOUNDATION FOR DEFENSE OF DEMOCRACIES; KENNETH M. POLLACK,
PH.D., DIRECTOR, SABAN CENTER FOR MIDDLE EAST POLICY, BROOKINGS
INSTITUTION; AND SUZANNE MALONEY, PH.D., SENIOR FELLOW, SABAN
CENTER FOR MIDDLE EAST POLICY, BROOKINGS INSTITUTION

STATEMENT OF MARK DUBOWITZ, ESQ.

Mr. Dubowitz. Well, thank you, Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking
Member Tierney, and Chairman Issa, for the honor of testifying
before you today.
Now, many rightly question the effectiveness of economic
sanctions as the primary tool to frustrate or even thwart
Tehran's nuclear plans. Sanctions, indeed, have led to the
slow-motion demise of the Iranian energy industry as Iranian
oil production continues to materially decline. However, their
medium- to long-term impact is insufficient because Iran will
likely cross the nuclear threshold before these sanctions have
time to work. There is also no evidence yet to suggest that
economic pressure has made the Iranian regime rethink its
decisions to develop nuclear weapons.
U.S. sanctions policy has been crafted in a way that
reduces Iranian oil investment while giving the market time to
adjust to a reduction in Iranian production. The downside of
this medium-term sanctions strategy is continued near-term
annual export revenue of approximately $80 billion. These funds
provide sufficient resources to buttress the regime against
sanctions and its economic and political challenges and to fund
its nuclear and other nefarious activities.
To have any chance of success, sanctions need to target
Iran's oil sales, which account for up to 75 percent of the
government budget, 80 percent of export earnings. And they need
to do this without causing a significant increase in petroleum
prices. Otherwise, Tehran can sell less and make more money.
But effective energy sanctions don't have to raise oil
prices. They actually can do the opposite if Washington learns
how to leverage the self-interest of companies that won't
adhere to U.S. sanctions. The objective of sanctions targeting
Iran's oil sales ought to be to discourage white-hatted
companies--European and some Asian companies that have no
desire to risk their access to the American market--from
dealing in Iranian oil while allowing black-hatted companies--
mainly Chinese firms and some others--to continue to buy
Iranian crude in whatever quantity they desire. We should want
to reduce the number of potential buyers of Iranian petroleum
without reducing the quantity of oil on the market. With enough
white-hatted companies out of the market, black-hatted
companies can drive ruthlessly for price discounts from Tehran.
The Chinese, in particular, are aggressive businessmen with an
interest in securing cheap oil.
I recommend the following three policies to accomplish this
goal:
Number one, sanction companies buying oil from the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard Corps. The Obama administration can greatly
intensify the hassle factor in buying Iranian crude by
designating IRGC entities in the crude oil supply chain,
including the National Iranian Oil Co.
Number two, establishing the United States as an Iranian-
oil-free zone. Right now, there is a loophole in U.S. law.
American consumers are filling up their gasoline tanks with
refined petroleum made from Iranian crude oil. The Iranian-oil-
free zone would close this loophole by requiring that all
European refineries exporting refined petroleum to the United
States must certify that those products do not contain Iranian
oil and be subject to penalties for false certification.
We have done detailed economic modeling that indicates an
Iranian-oil-free zone would have a negligible impact on the
price of oil and gasoline but deny the regime between $2.8
billion and $39 billion in annual oil revenues. Even at the
lowest end of this range, this adds an additional 20 percent to
Treasury Department estimates that all sanctions will cost Iran
$14 billion in annual oil revenues over the next 5 years.
Number three, targeting the Central Bank of Iran. The
administration should designate the CBI in its entirety but
provide at least 6 months before implementation begins in order
to give oil companies time to find alternative suppliers and
calm oil markets.
This will be a critical 6-month period, however. In order
to take advantage of this period, Washington should immediately
and selectively prohibit certain oil transactions where the CBI
plays a role involving IRGC-affiliated companies and oil
buyers. Sanctions need not be enforced against Chinese energy
firms buying Iranian oil. Treasury will have more flexibility
to selectively enforce against some buyers and not others based
on evidence of IRGC involvement.
Energy traders will quickly sense that the quantity of oil
on the market remains unchanged while Iran watches its oil
revenues decline. This avoids price spikes as oil trades will
continue; only the number of buyers for Iranian oil will be
reduced.
This approach will be very costly for the CBI. It would
reinforce an important message, as well. The CBI is a critical
link in the IRGC-dominated oil supply chain and a key enabler
of IRGC activities. This will help Washington build
international support for a blanket designation of CBI, give
markets more time to adjust to the possibility of more severe
sanctions, and persuade oil purchasers and financial
institutions to assess carefully the risks of doing business
with the Central Bank.
These three approaches are mutually reinforcing and
designed to achieve one goal: shrink the pool of buyers for
Iranian crude and give the remaining buyers enough negotiating
power to extract significant discounts from Tehran. If oil
sanctions fail, no one could argue that countries threatened by
Iran did not exhaust all peaceful alternatives.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dubowitz follows:]

Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. And an impressive 2 seconds left
on the clock.
Dr. Pollack, my challenge to you is to--we appreciate your
testimony. We will now recognize you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KENNETH M. POLLACK, PH.D.

Dr. Pollack. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Congressman
Tierney, Congressman Cummings. It's a great pleasure to address
the subcommittee on this incredibly important topic.
Although I'm ready and willing to discuss the totality of
U.S. policy toward Iran and Iranian policy toward the United
States as we understand it, I would like to focus my remarks on
Iran's role in Iraq, especially in the wake of the mutual
decision by the United States and the Government of Iraq to end
the American military mission to Iraq at the end of this year.
For now, I would simply like to make three main points
about this extremely important topic--a topic that will have
profound influence on Iraq itself, on American policy toward
Iraq, and on the wider U.S.-Iranian competition throughout the
Middle East.
The first point is that Iranian influence in Iraq is
largely determined by how confident and strong the Iraqis feel,
principally with regard to their own internal politics.
Ambassador Ryan Crocker, when he was Ambassador to Iraq,
used to remark that there is a natural limit on Iran's
influence in Iraq. This is a true statement, but it is also a
relative statement; it is not an absolute. The ability of the
Iraqis to resist Iran is heavily dependent on their own sense
of self-confidence, the strength that they feel in themselves,
and the strength of their own political process moving forward.
To use an analogy from the cold war, I think that it is
safe to say that there was a natural limit on Russian influence
in Finland that was no less great than the limit on Iranian
influence in Iraq. But when the Finns felt that there was no
one who could come to their defense after the Second World War,
they unfortunately allowed the Soviets to dictate their foreign
policy. Again, this was simply a function of the inability of
the Finns to push back, of their sense that there was no one
who could help them do so.
We've seen the same thing in Iraq. When Iraqis have been
strong, when they have been confident, in 2003 and 2004,
Iranian influence has been extremely limited. This was perhaps
no greater than in 2008 to 2010, the period after the American
surge and Iraq's own Operation Charge of the Knights, in which
Iranian forces were largely routed from Iraq. Jaish al-Mahdi
and other Iranian-backed insurgencies and militias in Iraq were
driven from the country in a series of operations. From Basra
to Sadr City, the Iraqi people stepped out, demonstrated they
wanted nothing to do with Iran, and, as a result, Iranian
influence was greatly limited.
In contrast, Iran's influence was greatest in the period
2005-2006, when Iraq was descending into civil war and was able
to pry apart the many divisions within Iraq to play different
Iraqi groups off against one another and use the influence that
it has most of: weapons, intelligence, violence, money--all of
the things that Iraqis needed in that period of time.
My second point is that Iran is now, unfortunately,
stronger than it has ever been in Iraq before. And its
influence, unfortunately, is likely to increase, rather than
decrease, after the American withdrawal.
Iraq's 2010 elections were in and of themselves very good
elections, but the aftermath was very poor. They have led to
the formation of a national unity government in Iraq that is
deeply paralyzed, that is riven by its own divisions. And this
has allowed the Iranians to once again pry apart Iraq, isolate
different groups, make inroads with a variety. Ultimately, it
was Iran that put together this government in Iraq, not the
United States.
In speaking to senior Iraqi leaders in recent months, I am
struck by how many of them have said, mostly in resignation,
never with any sense of joy, that today no Iraqi can become
Prime Minister without Iranian approval.
Ultimately, Iran is the chief backer of violent extremist
groups like Asaib Ahl al-Haqq, Khataib Hezbollah, who are
running rampant in southern Iraq, who are recreating the
violence there. They are the patrons of the Sadrists. They have
exerted tremendous influence on a variety of Kurdish groups and
others in Iraq. And, ultimately, Iran is now becoming the
dominant external force in Iraqi politics.
My third and final point is that the best way that the
United States can help remedy this current situation is--and it
should follow from my previous two--by strengthening Iraqi
domestic politics. Unfortunately, our ability to do so has been
greatly limited. The withdrawal of American troops from Iraq
will be a tremendous limitation on American influence moving
forward. Ideally, the United States would massively ramp up its
aid to Iraq in the wake of the withdrawal of American forces,
but in the current budgetary climate this seems unlikely.
Moreover, the White House has signaled a desire to pull back
from the Middle East, not to move forward. This certainly is
the perception in the region.
Ultimately, the most useful thing that the United States
could do would be to find it in its heart to provide some
assistance to Iraq. The more that Iraqis feel that the United
States is helping them, guiding their politics, the stronger
they will feel, they will push back on Iraq--excuse me, on
Iran. And what we have seen is that they are far more able to
push back on Iran and to prevent Iran from exerting influence
in Iraqi affairs than we ever are.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Pollack follows:]

Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
Dr. Maloney, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SUZANNE MALONEY, PH.D.

Dr. Maloney. Thank you very much, Chairman Chaffetz,
Representative Tierney, and the entire subcommittee, for the
opportunity to discuss this very important issue of U.S. policy
toward Iran.
I'm going to focus my remarks on the central question of
today's hearing, and that is the track record of the current
administration in addressing the challenges posed by Tehran. I
will tell you that I see a sort of a good-news/bad-news story.
And so I will talk a little bit about both the elements of
success and the elements where we need tremendous improvement
and talk about a few principles that one might consider in
moving forward in terms of looking at policy toward Tehran.
It's notable that the Obama administration has come full
circle, from a tentative embrace of diplomacy and engagement to
a much more robust and effective international effort to
pressure Tehran than has ever existed. This transformation is,
in fact, quite typical. Every administration since that of
President Carter, since the 1979 Islamic Revolution in Iran,
has used a variety of tactics and implements at its disposal,
everything from diplomacy to sanctions, under every single
administration from both parties.
The good news is that the Obama administration has really
achieved unprecedented success. We have seen the assembling of
the widest and deepest international coalition of countries to
deal with the threat of Iran. And I think what we have seen,
particularly since 2010, is a real sense of momentum, that the
international community has come together, that there is a real
partnership, not simply between the United States and Europe
but also between the United States and Russia and other
countries as well, with China playing effectively a sort of
nonconfrontational, more passive role with respect to
sanctions.
I think that it's important to recognize, despite the fact
that we have not yet achieved our objectives with respect to
changing Iranian policy, that assembling this kind of a
coalition is no small achievement. Never before in the history
of the Islamic Republic, despite 32 years of egregious policies
and offenses against both its own people and its neighbors as
well as U.S. interests in the region, never before have we seen
the willingness of the international community to jeopardize
its economic relationships with the Islamic Republic in
anywhere near the degree that we have today.
And we know that these sanctions are having an impact on
Iran. The Iranians themselves, from the supreme leader on down,
are saying so in a very public fashion. And they're taking
actions to deal with it.
That, of course is the bad news, that the sanctions have
imposed a financial--heavy financial and political cost, but
they haven't yet convinced Iranian leaders to change their
policies, to relinquish their nuclear ambition, and abandon
their other reckless policies, or to engage in a really serious
dialog with Washington.
There are a variety of reasons why this is the case: the
political climate within Tehran, where we have seen the
elevation of a group of policymakers who, in fact, see
sanctions as part of an international conspiracy and who
believe, in fact, there is an existential demand on the regime
to resist these sanctions. They are less prone than ever to
bending under economic pressure or accepting the cost-benefit
logic of sanctions.
And the Iranians also have tremendous capacity and a long
history of working to mitigate and subvert sanctions. They are
also quite adept at encouraging sanctions busting. And they
have done quite a bit to exploit the disparity that exists in
the international sanctions regime, whereby companies from
countries such as China, which adhere to the bare minimum of
U.N. Security Council sanctions but have yet to enact their own
individual unilateral sanctions on energy investment in Iran,
effectively have free rein to continue to invest in Iran today.
So, as a result, I think that the difficulty that we face
is, sanctions are not going to have the impact that we want,
that the kind of dual-track, carrot-and-stick effort to bring
Iran to the negotiating table is less likely to work today than
ever before.
For that reason, let me lay out five principles very
quickly that I think are essential to moving forward, as we
reassess U.S. policy at a time where it is, I think, a very
opportune moment for doing so.
First, we must have multilateral cooperation. That is what
has made such an important psychological and economic impact
over the past 2 years since the latest U.N. sanctions, U.N.
Security Council sanctions, and unilateral measures by a
variety of countries. It's incredibly important in doing so
that we bring and keep China on board in a much more robust way
than we have to date. China plays the indispensable role in
terms of shaping the Iranian future.
Second, we have to acknowledge and we have to articulate
publicly, both to the American public and to our allies and
partners abroad, that tough measures will entail tough
tradeoffs. There is a lot of talk about crippling sanctions,
but there is too often, I think, an optimistic presumption that
we can--that those sanctions would have negligible impact on
the very economic parameters of the U.S. market or of the
international market. Oil markets are worldwide; oil supply is
fungible. As a result, anything we do to impact Iran's ability
to export its crude will have an impact on the price of oil
here at home.
Third, we should never unilaterally take diplomacy off the
table. Every administration has used diplomacy, and every
future administration will. Measures that tie any
administration's hand are irresponsible and counterproductive.
Fourth, the invocation of threats does little to advance
our interests with respect to Iran. It, in fact, empowers the
very people who we are looking to disempower in Iran.
Finally, we need to rethink the universe of possibilities
for advancing political change within Iran. And to do so, we
need to have a conversation that goes beyond the standard
discussion around the discredited terrorist organization, the
Mujahedin-e Khalq.
With that, I cede the floor. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Maloney follows:]

Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
I know you all had much more to say, but I appreciate the
concise nature. And 5 minutes is difficult with such a broad
and complex issue such as this.
I'm now going to recognize myself for 5 minutes, and then
we will have other Members proceed with the questioning.
And, Dr. Maloney, I really appreciate the comments you
made. I think I agreed with a lot of your points.
To suggest that there has been, in your words,
unprecedented success, I just--I beg to understand or I just
don't understand where you think there has been unprecedented
success, other than, you know, maybe getting some European
countries to say, hey, we support you.
Even when we list the five key points, one of the critical
nature--you mentioned China. China is not coming along. China
has not been helpful and persuasive in this. Do you see any
sense that China, being such a pivotal role in close proximity,
obviously, to Iran, that they are in any way, shape, or form
helping us in any way?
Dr. Maloney. I think, first, that the U.N. sanctions
Resolution 1929, which was approved in June 2010 was, in fact,
much more robust and much more meaningful. It includes a
conventional arms ban. It included measures that facilitated
European Union sanctions that effectively preclude any European
investment in the Iranian energy sector. That is unprecedented.
It's important. It has a real impact, both economically and
psychologically. The Iranians would much prefer to deal with
European companies, ultimately.
In terms of Chinese cooperation, I think, in fact, we have
seen quite a bit. They were cooperative during the process of
the negotiation of U.N. Security Council Resolution 1929. They
have gone slow with their investment. They have refused to sign
new deals with Iran. But they do continue to do business;
they're not legally prohibited from doing so.
And that is, I think, where all the upside potential is in
dealing with Iran, in making the point that the international
community is united. It's very, very important that we persuade
the Chinese to go beyond the current U.N. Security Council
sanctions measures.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. And I guess my concern is, I don't
think that we've been doing that.
Mr. Dubowitz, let me go to you. In your testimony, you list
18 firms connected to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
[IRGC], which form part of the crude oil supply chain.
These firms' activities were detailed in a report from the
Foundation for Defense of Democracies to the administration
back in February. To the best of your knowledge, has the
administration taken any action against the 18 firms noted in
that report?
Mr. Dubowitz. You're starting to see some action. They
sanctioned Tidewater, which is the largest ports operator in
Iran. I think that's important, it's consequential.
But there are literally hundreds of IRGC firms that are
dominant players in the oil supply chain, including the largest
Iranian energy front company in the world, the National Iranian
Oil Co. [NIOC], which is presented as a state-owned institution
and is usually the counterparty on an oil trade, but the IRGC
is a dominant player in the Iranian energy industry, including
in NIOC.
And so I think that the administration should move ahead
and sanction NIOC and other IRGC players in the oil supply
chain and send a message to what I call white-hatted
companies--those who have U.S. interests, who care about their
reputation, who don't want a front-page story in the Financial
Times that they're doing business with the Revolutionary Guard
Corps--and send a message that if you're buying oil from Iran,
you're buying it from the Revolutionary Guard Corps. And that's
bad for business, it's bad for your exposure, it's bad for your
reputation.
We could rapidly accelerate the pace of designations. The
administration could do much more and do it very quickly and,
in doing so, send a message that we will not impact supply of
oil, but we will go after price. We will put the remaining
buyers, including the Chinese buyers, in a position where they
will have stronger negotiating leverage to force a discount on
the price of oil without taking one barrel of Iranian oil off
the market.
I agree with Dr. Maloney, we shouldn't be going after
physical supply, we shouldn't be spooking oil markets, we
shouldn't be doing anything that sends a message that we'll be
taking 2.3 million barrels of Iranian oil off the market, but
put the remaining buyers in a stronger negotiating position. I
have a lot of confidence in Chinese oil traders that they will
drive ruthlessly for price discounts if they have the Iranians,
figuratively and literally, over a barrel.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
Dr. Pollack, let's talk about what is going to happen at
the end of the year and the concerns that the Iranians will
redirect many of their attacks. You know, we got 16,500 people
that will be left there starting January 1st, many of these
contractors. Let's talk a little bit more, if you will, about
the ramifications of what you see Iran doing now.
Dr. Pollack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think this is a
critical question moving forward.
Having spent quite a bit of time in Iraq and been rocketed,
been mortared, this is not something to take lightly. Muqtada
al-Sadr has already announced that the American Embassy should
be considered a residual occupying force and should be resisted
as staunchly as the American troop presence was.
What we have seen is a growth in Iranian-backed
capabilities among groups like Asaib Ahl al-Haqq, Khataib
Hezbollah, the Promised Day Brigades. And what we have seen is
very little willingness on the part of the Iraqi Government to
actually crack down on these because of its own complicated
internal politics.
I don't see any of that changing moving forward except that
our ability both to influence the Iraqi Government to get the
things they need to do is going to be dramatically diminished.
It took intervention by the administration and, in particular,
General Austin to get the Iraqis to do anything over the
summer, and even that has tapered off since then. And what's
more, our ability to respond directly is going to be
dramatically undermined. No matter how many Black Hawk
helicopters Triple Canopy may have, they are not going to have
the same capability that the Apaches, that our current forces
have.
Mr. Chaffetz. Okay. Thank you. My time has expired.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Tierney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tierney. And with your deference, Mr. Chairman, I am
going to defer to the ranking member of the full committee. I
think his schedule----
Mr. Chaffetz. Absolutely. Rather than do that, we will
recognize the ranking member, Mr. Cummings, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much for yielding.
Dr. Maloney, in your written statement, you say that there
is simply no mechanism for exerting game-changing pressure on
Iran without imposing unpredictable and probably unpleasant
consequences for the global energy balance and the worldwide
economic recovery.
Dr. Maloney, what do you think of Mr. Dubowitz's claim that
his approach to tougher sanctions on Iran's oil sales does not
risk driving up the price of oil?
Dr. Maloney. I haven't investigated the modeling that he
has compiled, but what I have seen and read of the mechanism
that he proposes is that many experts on oil markets suggest
that it would have an escalatory impact on the price of oil
both here and around the world.
Mr. Cummings. And, Dr. Maloney, do you think that
significant new sanctions on Iran's oil sales are worth the
risks of endangering the global economic recovery?
Dr. Maloney. I think we have yet to see that this regime in
Tehran is susceptible to economic pressure in terms of changing
its foreign policy.
I was testifying before this subcommittee 2 years ago, and
people said that refined petroleum products, cutting off supply
of gasoline to Tehran would be an Achilles' heel and change its
posture. We did not see that, in fact, occur.
I am not optimistic that incremental measures, even if they
make Iran's fiscal conditions more difficult, will alter their
approach to their security policy.
Mr. Cummings. So you just think they are hard-nosed?
Dr. Maloney. I think that this regime and this current
leadership in Tehran is tied to--its approach to the world is
deeply paranoid and defensive. Looking at the regional
environment, looking at what's happened in Libya, they are
unlikely to bargain away their nuclear advantage or any of
their other policies. They see these as existential defense
mechanisms against a world which is aligned against them.
Mr. Cummings. Now, the Obama administration can make a
persuasive claim to unprecedented successes in dealing with
Iran, and yet the ultimate objective of U.S. policy--
eliminating threats posed by the regime's pursuit of nuclear
capability, support for terrorism, and abuse of its own
citizenry--remains as distant as ever.
Dr. Maloney, do you believe that further economic sanctions
are necessary for the United States to make progress in
achieving this goal?
Dr. Maloney. I think sanctions which bring the entire world
together to send a message to Tehran will have an impact over
time, but I think we also have to recognize that they also have
an impact on our own economy. Iran is capable of change, but
the level of impact that we need to have is one that will
involve the entire international community coming together in a
united fashion.
Mr. Cummings. Speaking of that international community, I
think you said that the fact that all of these nations have
come together with regard to this effort is unprecedented. Do
you see any threat to that cohesion?
Dr. Maloney. I think as sanctions endure and the fact that
the Chinese can continue to do business in Iran, even if they
have been relatively cooperative to date in terms of not
expanding their posture in Iran since the 2010 U.N. Security
Council resolution, that will encourage other countries and
companies to sanctions-bust.
In particular, I would look toward Russia, which is also
not susceptible to other sanctions at the moment. The
leadership is not inclined to accept them, and they have no
unilateral sanctions which preclude their energy companies from
investing in Iran's energy sector. I would suspect that over
time, as China continues to do business in Iran, the Russians
will look to expand their own position there.
Mr. Cummings. Well, would unilateral sanctions by the
United States undermine the progress that was made in
convincing the international community to participate in a
comprehensive sanctions regime?
Dr. Maloney. Sanctions that make the price of oil more
expensive for customers of Iranian crude will alienate those
customers, in particular China and India.
Mr. Cummings. Uh-huh. And therefore?
Dr. Maloney. And, therefore, they will make it much more
difficult for us to attain the level of international
cooperation that's necessary to drive a decisive message to
Tehran.
Mr. Cummings. Well, in the wake of the assassination of the
Saudi Ambassador to the United States and the recent report by
the International Atomic Energy Agency, some have called on
Congress to pass strict sanctions against and to limit
diplomatic communications with Iran.
Mr. Dubowitz, do you believe Congress should pass strict
sanctions legislation that eliminates the administration's
ability to apply sanctions when needed and prevents further
attempts at diplomacy?
Mr. Dubowitz. Well, Ranking Member Cummings, I'm very much
focused on whether sanctions can actually work. Whether the
United States should be talking to the Iranians and what they
should be talking about is up to the administration. What I
want to do is respond to the point about sanctions.
I ultimately do not think sanctions will force the Iranian
regime to change its risk-reward calculus with respect to a
nuclear weapon. Let me be clear and on the record on that. I do
think that we have a moral and strategic responsibility to try
and to exhaust all peaceful alternatives. Otherwise, perhaps
everybody on this panel will agree, we may have to move to more
coercive methods.
What I want to suggest with respect to oil sales is that
there is a way to do this. Instead of only punishing greed--our
sanctions regime is always designed to punish greed, to punish
the self-interest of companies that want to continue to do
business with Iran--what I am suggesting is that there may be
an opportunity to leverage greed; in other words, to shrink the
number of buyers for Iranian oil using a variety of methods,
both unilateral and multilateral, designed to actually put the
Chinese and others in a position where they can buy all the oil
they want from Iran, but they have stronger negotiating
leverage because the pool of potential buyers of Iranian oil is
shrunk.
And we can do that through a variety of ways that have
already been used multilaterally. For example, the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard Corps. The idea of designating IRGC
companies that are active in the Iranian economy is something
that has received overwhelming international support, from the
United Nations, from the EU, the United States, Canada, Japan,
South Korea.
In fact, former Under Secretary Stuart Levey, his
successor, Under Secretary David Cohen, are using exactly this
method to persuade international financial institutions to stop
doing business with IRGC banks. I'm suggesting we do the same
thing in the crude oil supply chain: Designate IRGC entities
and then threaten sanctions against companies that do business
with the IRGC.
The reality is white-hatted companies--Europeans, Japanese,
some South Korean refineries--will respond to that pressure.
The Chinese and others will not. But that's fine. Let them
continue buying Iranian oil, let them drive for price
discounts, let them not impact physical supply. If the Congress
and the administration is too aggressive in calling for
sanctions against physical supply, then I agree with Dr.
Maloney, what you're going to see is a spike in oil prices. But
if we make the case that this is about price, not about supply,
I think we can have a much better alternative. And if it
doesn't work, no one could argue that countries threatened by
Iran have not exhausted all peaceful alternatives.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Tierney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
Dr. Pollack, President Bush entered a deal or arrangement,
contract with the Iraq Government that we would have our troops
out at the end of 2011, and President Obama has been trying to
fulfill that commitment, I believe.
So, given that background, you know, the President Bush
agreement to get the troops out by that point and the Iraqis'
apparent unwillingness to amend that in any sense of the way,
am I hearing that your response to this is that, at this point,
the best that we can do in terms of that is to try and give
some useful and robust assistance from the United States to
Iraq to try to help them resolve their internal problems and
strengthen their government and their ability to withstand
pressures from Iran?
Dr. Pollack. First, Congressman, I would certainly agree
that there have been a long, painful litany of mistakes made in
American policy toward Iraq, and they begin from the very early
days of the Bush administration's focus on Iraq. It is
certainly the case that the hand left to the Obama
administration was a weak one. Nevertheless, I think that we
have made--we have created additional problems for ourselves
since then.
There's no question that we are where we are. There is no
question that Iran's influence in Iraq has increased and will
likely increase as our troops withdraw. The best that we can
hope for is to help moderate Iranian behavior, and the best way
to do that is to strengthen Iraq's own internal politics.
That is going to be difficult in an era of declining
American resource commitments to Iraq. And, therefore, we have
to act as creatively as we possibly can. Much of what I have
proposed, much of what is in my written testimony is about how
we find creative ways to do that, to do things by giving things
other than just money: know-how, diplomatic assistance. But one
that's also worth thinking about, the position the Iraqis will
likely have the ability to buy it at some point in time, is
military assistance, which the Iraqis need and, as we have seen
in Egypt, can play an extremely important role in helping shape
Iraq's political development, which, as I have stressed, is the
key to keeping Iran out.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you for that.
Mr. Dubowitz, now I am going to call on your integrity to
help us out here. We don't have a witness up here who can
apparently counteract your theory. You know from having put
your position out there that other people have rebutted it in
some sense. I am sure you are fully aware of that.
Do us the favor, if you would, of presenting what those
rebuttals are, you know, what issues do people raise with your
argument. And then again I will offer you the chance to rebut
them back and give your position again. But I am curious to
know what people say. When you say this is the way to do it,
how do they couch the way that they think it is going to drive
up international prices and why? Is it because oil is fungible
on the market? Is it because they just think that China will
come in and buy up the 2.3 billion and it won't be any big
deal?
If you would.
Mr. Dubowitz. Yeah, no, there are certainly some weaknesses
to the argument. I think the first is that the assumption is
that the Chinese will actually use their trade and negotiating
leverage to force a discount. The Chinese may have other
strategic objectives, and they decide they're going to pay a
premium for oil in order to support the Iranian regime and
undermine American security. I think that's perhaps one
weakness.
I think a second weakness of the argument is that it
presupposes that our short-term sanctions policy is to stop
this Iranian nuclear weapon. If you believe that our sanctions
policy should be designed as a containment strategy, then a
medium- to long-term sanctions strategy is sufficient. And I
think that the administration has done a good job of putting in
place a medium- to long-term sanctions regime. And I think Dr.
Maloney articulated what that looks like.
Unfortunately, I think we should stop the nuclear bomb. I
think President Obama has made it very clear that an Iranian
nuclear weapon is unacceptable.
And I fear that we are in a bit of a sanctions sleepwalk,
where we have done a very good job--or the administration has
done a very good job of designing a regime that has decreased
foreign investment in the Iranian energy sector, that has
shrunk gasoline imports by about 90 percent, that has led to
many companies terminating their business ties, including
providing technology to Iran's massive natural gas industry.
And so the medium- to long-term sanctions strategy is working.
It's gone after investment, it's shrinking oil production. And
I think, in that respect, it's giving energy markets time to
adjust so that there isn't a reactionary or alarmist response
to the sanctions.
Part of the weakness of the argument is, if you're pursuing
a short-term strategy, it is not 100 percent clear how energy
markets will respond. And I think it is up to the
administration and Congress, when speaking about this, to speak
about oil sanctions responsibly and to make it very clear to
energy markets that the goal is not to go after physical supply
but, in fact, to keep every barrel of Iranian oil on the market
but at a discounted price.
So it's really a question of short-term to long-term
strategy. I fear, again, that we're in a bit of a sanctions
sleepwalk, where we all recite positive talking points about
how sanctions are working, but I think we're all beginning to
acknowledge that sanctions have not worked.
Mr. Tierney. So it appears that, once again, under your
proposal, China would hold the key again, depending on whether
or not we could convince China to not pay a premium, whether or
not they would find out that their goal was to, sort of, give
it to us by just paying the premium and watch the prices go up
and watch the West countries sort of figure out how they are
going to deal with that in the middle of an economic problem,
or they are going to just have their own self-interest in mind
on economics.It is both self-interest, I guess----
Mr. Dubowitz. Right.
Mr. Tierney [continuing]. But pick one over the other. Is
that fair to say?
Mr. Dubowitz. Well, I think it's fair to say. I mean, it
may be that the Chinese actually don't want to see a nuclear-
armed Iran. It may not be good for Chinese energy and national
security. So it may be an opportunity for them to actually
support both their economic self-interest and their political
self-interest. But I think that is an open question.
Mr. Tierney. So it would be useful for us to get some
Chinese experts in here to explore that further about what
their reaction may be?
Mr. Dubowitz. I think, certainly, from a political economy
perspective, in terms of their strategic objectives, I think it
is very useful to have Chinese experts who can elucidate that.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
We will now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Quigley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sorry, I was in another committee meeting. I understand you
touched on the issue of the Central Bank of Iran. I would just
reference the letter from the 92 Senators to President Obama
urging him to sanction the Central Bank and Mr. Geithner's
response, which was, ``All options to increase the financial
pressure on Iran are on the table, including the possibility of
imposing additional sanctions against the CBI.''
Is there a timetable for doing this? And have we discussed
this possibility with our allies?
Mr. Dubowitz. I believe those discussions are taking place
right now. There are amendments that have been offered in both
the House and the Senate to include a CBI designation in the
current legislation. I think there is certainly a lot of
discussion about how to do this.
I absolutely support a blanket designation of the CBI. I
think it needs to be done in a way, however, that's targeted,
incremental, and implemented rapidly.
In other words, if you today call for a blanket designation
with the view that you're going to strictly enforce that
designation, thereby essentially cutting off the possibility
that people buying Iranian oil can use the CBI to settle those
oil transactions, you may be sending a message to the markets
that there is no way to financially settle an oil trade. On the
other hand, if today the administration were to target the CBI
to make this very case, ``If you are buying Iranian oil, you
are buying it from the Revolutionary Guard Corps, and if you're
settling that transaction with the CBI, then we will sanction
that transaction,'' that's the selective, targeted way of doing
it.
And, again, it builds into this theory that there will be
some oil buyers who will respond to that pressure and will look
for alternative suppliers. There will be other oil buyers who
will believe the administration will never sanction them and
will continue settling those transactions through the CBI.
I think if we did that, number one, we could move today
targeting the CBI, instead of waiting for a blanket
designation; number two, we could lay the predicate for a much
tougher CBI designation down the road; and, number three, I do
think we need to give time to markets for markets to adjust to
a CBI designation. Again, there are major buyers of Iranian oil
using the CBI because the U.S. Treasury Department has done
such an effective job of shutting down other financial avenues
to settle an oil transaction.
Again, incremental steps, implemented rapidly, with a view
to minimize the opportunity or the risk of a reactionary or
alarmist response from oil markets.
Mr. Quigley. The reaction from the other doctors?
Dr. Maloney. I think it's simply just a fallacy that you
can begin to reduce the opportunities for companies to purchase
crude coming out of Iran and it will have no impact on the
price of oil anywhere else. You know, if it increases the
leverage of Chinese companies to drive other competitors from
the market for purchasing Iranian crude, then it will thereby
decrease the leverage of those other companies which are no
longer then available as purchasers of Iranian crude as they
deal with other countries and companies.
Right now, in fact, what we see is that the Iranians are,
in fact, gaining advantage. When the Greeks have had difficulty
making purchases elsewhere, they have turned to the Iranians.
This sort of idea that somehow the Iranians can become a kind
of niche market for only bad countries and bad companies to
purchase crude oil from simply doesn't reflect the realities of
the international marketplace.
And the idea that somehow we can inspect every barrel of
crude that comes into this country to ensure that not a drop of
oil was produced in Iran is, you know, simply inconsistent with
the way the international oil market works.
Mr. Quigley. Doctor.
Dr. Pollack. Thank you, Congressman.
I would like to take this to a slightly higher level and
say, you know, what I think we have all been saying is that it
is a mistake to believe that sanctions alone are going to
achieve our goals with Iran. I completely agree with my
colleague Dr. Maloney's statement. The sanctions have had an
unprecedented impact, and yet they are not achieving our goal,
and we should not assume that they will.
By the same token, it would be a mistake to scale back the
sanctions. That would send absolutely the wrong message to
Iran, to the Iranian people, to the rest of the international
community, to other would-be proliferators.
I think the real question is, first, can we in some way
find ways to help do a little bit more with sanctions, because
we do want to keep the pressure on, but, in particular, how do
we find other ways to bring pressure against Iran on issues
that this regime actually believes are important to it. The
sanctions have not been able to accomplish that. And I would
urge this subcommittee to hold additional hearings on other
ways that the United States might bring pressure on Iran on
other areas beyond its economy--which, again, are not
unimportant; they are important, but they clearly are not going
to get us to where we want to be.
Mr. Quigley. Mr. Dubowitz.
Mr. Dubowitz. If I could follow on what Dr. Pollack said, I
think that's absolutely right. I mean, we talk about sanctions,
we talk about economic sanctions. I think human-rights
sanctions have actually played a very important and
consequential role, particularly in focusing world attention on
the vast system of oppression that the Iranian regime has set
up and the egregious human-rights abuses that it has
perpetrated.
I think human-rights sanctions are also important because,
under U.S. law today, we should be sanctioning companies that
are providing tools of oppression to the Iranian regime. That
authority exists under CISADA. We have not sanctioned any
companies for doing so. They are providing technology and parts
and components for the Iranian nuclear industry.
So it's counterproliferation sanctions, it's human-rights
sanctions. We have the ability to be much more rigorous in
enforcing existing law. And I think let's start with cutting
the tools of oppression that are being sold to the regime, the
United States and international companies that are selling
multimillion-dollar hardware units and software that help the
regime target Iranian dissidents, roll them up, torture them,
and kill them. And that would be a good place to start in
expanding our view of sanctions beyond energy and economic
sanctions.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
With the concurrence of the rest of the Members, I think
what we will do now is we will move to the second panel, unless
Members had any additional questions.
We want to thank you for your expertise, for your
participation here today. Again, if you have any additional
comments you care to share with the committee, we would
certainly welcome those. Thank you again.
We will stand in recess for just a few minutes while we
change to the second panel.
[Recess.]
Mr. Chaffetz. The committee will now come back into session
and come to order.
We are going to move to our second panel. And we are going
to recognize Mr. Adam Szubin, who is the Director of the Office
of Foreign Assets Control at the Department of Treasury; Mr.
Henry Wooster, who is the Deputy Assistant Secretary with the
Department of State; and Mr. Colin Kahl is the Deputy Assistant
Secretary with the Department of Defense.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn in
before they testify. If the witnesses will please rise and
raise their right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. You may be seated.
Let the record reflect that all the witnesses answered in
the affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, we would appreciate
it if you would limit your verbal testimony to 5 minutes. We
will certainly submit your full testimony into the record.
We will now start with recognizing Mr. Szubin for 5
minutes.

STATEMENTS OF ADAM J. SZUBIN, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF FOREIGN
ASSETS CONTROL, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY; HENRY T.
WOOSTER, ACTING DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU OF NEAR
EASTERN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE; AND COLIN H. KAHL,
PH.D., DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR THE MIDDLE
EAST, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

STATEMENT OF ADAM J. SZUBIN

Mr. Szubin. Thank you very much, Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Tierney, distinguished
members of the subcommittee, thank you very much for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the Treasury
Department's contributions to the Obama administration's
strategy to address Iran and the threat posed by Iran's nuclear
program and its extensive support for terrorism.
I am pleased to be here with Deputy Assistant Secretary
Wooster and Deputy Assistant Secretary Kahl because the
progress that we have made has been due to a strong interagency
collaboration to confront the threats that we face from Iran.
And those threats are very real.
The administration is pressing Iran hard across multiple
fronts. Since just the fall of last year, the Treasury
Department has imposed sanctions against over 230 individuals
and companies tied to Iranian human rights violations, WMD
proliferation, and terrorist facilitation; and we have extended
the impact of these actions with concerted outreach to our
allies in the jurisdictions where Iran has operated
historically.
We have focused particular pressure on key actors and
commercial sectors that advance Iran's illicit activities
internationally and therefore represent real vulnerabilities
for Iran: the IRGC, Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, and its
expanding network of companies within and outside of Iran;
those Iranian banks that have served as agents for Iran's
proliferation and terrorist activities; and Iran's
international transportation arms, including its national
maritime carrier, IRISL, and its two largest airlines, which
have facilitated the movement of weapons, funds, and personnel
for the IRGC and its external operations arm, the IRGC Qods
Force.
Our efforts were powerfully advanced by Congress with the
enactment last year of the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions
Accountability and Divestment Act [CISADA]. CISADA presented a
stark choice to foreign financial institutions that were still
willing to do business with designated Iranian banks or the
IRGC. You can do business with these rogue actors or you can do
business in the United States. You cannot do both.
We have taken this message to over 45 countries now and
pressed this choice with over 80 foreign financial
institutions, making the successful point that these actors
should have no access to the formal financial system. The
message has been heard. Whereas a few years ago the United
States was the only jurisdiction in the world to restrict
dealings with Iranian banks, today Iran's largest banks are
struggling to maintain accounts and access in any bank in any
country.
The European Union, Japan, South Korea, Canada, Australia,
Norway, and Switzerland have all imposed sanctions with real
bite against Iranian financial institutions above and beyond
the four successive U.N. Security Council resolutions; and
banks across the rest of the world have severed their ties with
Iranian blacklisted entities to protect themselves and their
reputations.
In the meantime, we at OFAC have intensified our
enforcement efforts at home to ensure that our sanctions are
being fully implemented by U.S. persons and by companies doing
business here. In August, OFAC concluded the largest sanctions
settlement in our history with a U.S. financial institution in
which J.P. Morgan Chase agreed to pay over $88 million to
settle alleged violations of Iran and other OFAC sanctions
programs. And, increasingly, OFAC is acting in concert with
other U.S. Government and law enforcement agencies to penalize
and deter sanctions violators.
In February, we joined in a public announcement with the
Justice Department, the Commerce Department, the FBI, and other
agencies in the criminal indictment and designation of Milad
Jafari and his network for their illegal supply of specialized
metals from the United States to entities involved in Iran's
ballistic missile program.
In another coordinated action, we took public action with
the Department of Commerce and the Justice Department against
Balli Aviation and the Balli Group for its illegal export of a
Boeing 747 aircraft from the United States to Iran and obtained
a $15 million settlement with that company.
Finally, this past month we announced a joint civil and
criminal resolution with Commerce's Bureau of Industry and
Security and the Justice Department against Sunrise
Technologies, which had exported computer-related goods from
the United States to Iran via Dubai.
These coordinated multi-agency enforcement actions
demonstrate the concerted impact that we can have when we
harness our authorities across the government.
Overall, our strategy is yielding significant results. Iran
has never before been as isolated, and its leaders are worried.
I would be glad to expand further on these impacts if the
committee so desires.
But, of course, there is still much to be done. We have yet
to see the needed action by Iran to comply with its
international obligations. In the weeks ahead then, working
with our colleagues across the administration and with
Congress, we will seek to further deepen Iran's isolation and
increase the pressure on its leadership to alter their course.
We thank you for your continued support in seeking to apply
the most effective pressure possible. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Szubin follows:]

Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Wooster, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HENRY T. WOOSTER

Mr. Wooster. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Tierney,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me here to discuss the administration's policy toward
Iran and the progress we have made since January 2009.
The key objectives of this administration's Iran policy
remain to prevent it from acquiring nuclear weapons, our
foremost priority; from supporting terrorism; from committing
human rights abuses; and from destabilizing the region. We have
enacted the toughest sanctions Iran has faced. Our policy is
making Iran's current course unsustainable, reducing its
options and deepening its isolation. Indeed, Iran is an outcast
among nations.
The U.S. Comprehensive Iran Sanctions Accountability and
Divestment Act [CISADA] as we all know it, has been vital to
ratcheting up pressure on Iran. With CISADA as a tool, we have
shut down important sources of funding to Iran's nuclear
program and related illicit activities. Investment in technical
assistance in Iran's upstream oil and gas sector have dropped
dramatically. We have sanctioned 10 foreign companies involved
in Iran's energy sector and dissuaded energy firms like Shell,
ENI, Total, and INPEX from continuing or undertaking
sanctionable activities in Iran. Major energy traders from
Russia, India, Switzerland, Kuwait, Turkey, France, and the
Netherlands have stopped sales of refined petroleum products to
Iran.
As my OFAC colleague has described, we have used executive
orders to designate entities that support or facilitate
terrorist or proliferation activity, including Mahan Air, Iran
Air, and Tidewater Middle East Co.
Last month, we designated five individuals for their
involvement in Iran's plot to assassinate the Saudi Ambassador
in the United States. Others, including the European Union and
Canada, have already taken or will take similar actions against
these individuals.
Our policies have been effective in sharpening the choices
before the regime. As Iranian President Ahmadinejad recently
admitted in a speech to the Majlis, the Iranian parliament,
``Which government can work under so much pressure? This is the
heaviest economic onslaught on a nation in history.''
We are committed to the P5+1 framework to engage with Iran,
provided it is prepared to discuss seriously its nuclear
program. Until then, we will work with other nations on new
sanctions measures.
The latest IAEA Director General's report on Iran's nuclear
program deepens our concerns, and we are consulting with allies
on how to respond at this week's board of Governors meeting in
Vienna.
The Iranian regime's unacceptable behavior extends to its
human rights abuses. In response to the regime's systematic
campaign of violence and intimidation against protesters in
2009, we designated eleven individuals and three entities for
egregious human rights violations, and we continue to compile
evidence to designate the worst abusers. For the past 8 years,
we have co-sponsored a U.N. resolution calling Iran to account
for its human rights abuses. Last year, this resolution passed
with the largest margin to date. In March, we helped create the
position of the Special Rapporteur on Iran, whose recent
reporting has shone a spotlight on the regime's repression of
its own citizens.
We also equip Iranian civil society with capacity building
programs, training, media access, counter-censorship tools, and
exchanges to help Iranians defend their fundamental rights and
freedoms.
Turning to the broader region, we acknowledge the concerns
that our military withdrawal from Iraq will allow Iran to
expand its influence. However, we also know most Iraqis reject
Iran's interference. Iraqi leaders have rebuffed Iranian
political pressure, and Prime Minister Maliki has said he will
not tolerate the violent activities of Iran-backed militant
groups.
Iraq is diversifying its foreign relations and developing
relationships with EU countries and regional players. In
October, Iraqi Foreign Minister Zebari stressed in a press
conference with his Iranian counterpart, ``No other party can
fill the vacuum in Iraq except the people of Iraq and the
Government of Iraq.''
We are working with Iraqi Security Forces to strengthen
their capabilities beyond 2011, an aspect that Colin can speak
to more directly. We are helping Iraq establish credible public
institutions to protect its sovereignty and independence.
In closing, this administration has expanded the varieties
of tools and partners to deter Iran from developing nuclear
weapons, continuing its human rights abuses, and destabilizing
the regime--excuse me, the region. Sanctions are having an
effect. With the aim of compelling the Iranian regime to change
its strategic calculus, we will work with Congress and our
allies to increase pressure. It is Iran's responsibility and
its self-interest to join the international community of
nations. Until then, it only faces growing isolation and
condemnation.
Thank you once again. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wooster follows:]

Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you, Mr. Wooster.
We will now recognize Dr. Kahl for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF COLIN H. KAHL, PH.D.

Dr. Kahl. Chairman Chaffetz, Ranking Member Tierney,
distinguished committee members, I appreciate the opportunity
to appear before you today to discuss the Department of
Defense's role in the administration's policy toward Iran.
As you know, the President has made Iran one of his very
top national security priorities. The Defense Department plays
a supporting role in our whole-of-government dual track
approach of engagement on the one hand and pressure on the
other, which is led by the State Department and the Treasury
Departments.
However, a supporting role for DOD should not be
interpreted by anyone as a minor role. In support of
interagency efforts to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear
weapons and to counter its destabilizing efforts and activities
in the region, the Defense Department focuses on four main
lines of effort: first, ensuring Israel's security; second,
building partnership capacity in the region; third, developing
a regional security architecture, especially in the Gulf; and
four, prudent defense planning.
Let me begin with the first one, Israel. Iran's nuclear and
missile programs and its sponsorship for terrorism represent a
significant threat to Israel. In the face of this threat, we,
the United States, are working closely with the Israelis to
develop multi-layered ballistic missile defenses, and we
continue our efforts to ensure Israel's qualitative military
edge.
The U.S.-Israel defense relationship is strong and
enduring. Indeed, based on joint military exercises like
JUNIPER COBRA, and continued cooperation, both Secretaries
Panetta and Secretary Gates before him have called the
relationship with Israel, ``stronger than ever.'' We regularly
consult with Israel and maintain a close, extensive, and very
frank defense dialog.
We also continue unprecedented cooperation with the Israeli
Defense Forces to ensure that the qualitative military edge
extends to all present and future threats. As you know, Israel
is the only nation in the region that will receive fifth-
generation aircraft in the form of the Joint Strike Fighter.
Another example is your support for President Obama's request
to provide an additional $205 million to Israel for the Iron
Dome short range rocket and mortar defense system. As you are
probably aware, Iron Dome has already proved effective in the
field, successfully striking down rockets that would have
otherwise landed on Israeli civilian targets.
These efforts to buttress Israel's security help underline
our general message to Iran, which is pursuing nuclear weapons
offers Iran no true benefits and efforts to destabilize the
region through proxies and support through terrorism ultimately
will not succeed.
We also continue to work with our partners elsewhere in the
region to build capacity to defend them against Iran's
destabilizing activities. By the end of next month in Iraq, we
will complete the drawdown of U.S. forces in accordance with
the U.S.-Iraq Security Agreement. Some have expressed concerns
that we are leaving behind a vacuum for Iran to fill. However,
we are not disengaging from Iraq, and there is no vacuum for
Iran to fill.
Due to the extraordinary sacrifices of U.S. Armed Forces,
civilians, and Iraqis, Iraq has emerged as an increasingly
stable, sovereign, and self-reliant nation. Iraq has no desire
to be dominated by Iran or anyone else. Iraqi nationalism is
strong, and the Iraqis have consistently shown their
willingness to resist the Iranians when they have overreached.
Moreover, as Iraq's economy continues to grow, particularly its
oil industry, we expect that Iraqi self-confidence will grow as
well.
The Iraqis have also made clear that they have a strong
desire for an enduring relationship and strategic partnership
with the United States, including robust security cooperation,
as we will pursue this partnership under the 2008 U.S.-Iraq
Strategic Framework Agreement.
The recent decision, for example, for the Iraqis to
purchase U.S. F-16 aircraft is just one example of Iraq's
interest in a long-term defense relationship with us. Iraq is
now our ninth largest customer in terms of foreign military
sales and the fourth largest in the region. Continued security
ties through our Office of Security Cooperation in Baghdad and
security assistance activities such as Foreign Military Sales
[FMS], and theater engagement activities that U.S. Central
Command will engage in, will deepen this partnership in the
years ahead.
Similarly, in Lebanon we are working to strengthen
Lebanon's national institutions and its ability to exercise its
sovereignty and authority over all of its territory. Central to
this work is the development of the Lebanese Armed Forces
through our continued training, assistance, and military
efforts. Since 2008, the United States has been committed to
helping the Lebanese Armed Forces effectively counter the
operations of terrorists within Lebanon, secure Lebanon's
borders, and work alongside the U.N. to implement all Lebanon-
related U.N. Security Council resolutions.
DOD is also working closely with its Gulf partners to
develop a common regional security architecture, one that
includes both bilateral and multilateral elements. These
initiatives include a regional network of air and ballistic
missile defense, shared early warning systems, counterterrorism
and counterpiracy efforts, programs to build partner capacity,
and projects to harden and protect our partners' critical
infrastructure.
We currently have substantial missile defense assets in a
number of Gulf partner nations to protect U.S. forces and
partners from the threat of Iranian missiles, and U.S. Central
Command maintains robust theater engagement and exercise
schedules to buttress these partnerships.
As we improve our bilateral and multilateral cooperation,
we are also working to build the defense capabilities of our
partners. Indeed, the Middle East accounts for a large portion
of U.S. military worldwide FMS activity, particularly with
Saudi Arabia, UAE, Egypt, Israel, and Iraq. Indeed, in the past
10 years these five countries account for more than $66 billion
in active FMS cases.
Last, let me turn to DOD planning. When it comes to Iran,
we know that there are no overnight solutions; and we also know
that many of our diplomatic, economic, and security cooperation
efforts are just now beginning to bear fruit, as evidenced by
the Iranian President Ahmadinejad's recent statements that
Henry mentioned.
At the same time, we know that Iran has not ceased its
proliferation activities, nuclear activities, or support for
terrorism. For that reason, the Department continues to prepare
for all contingencies.
On this point, let me be clear. It is the Department of
Defense's responsibility to plan for all contingencies and to
provide the President with a wide range of military options
should they become necessary. That's a responsibility we take
very seriously; and when it comes to the threat posed by Iran,
the President has not taken any options off the table. But I
also want to emphasize our continued belief that, at this time,
diplomacy and pressure remain the most effective tools for
changing Iran's behavior.
With that, I thank you once again, and I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Kahl follows:]

Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
I know this is a very complicated and deep subject. To try
to summarize in 5 minutes is difficult, but we do appreciate
it.
I would now like to recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Szubin, you are the Director of the Office of Foreign
Assets Control [OFAC] as it is often referred to. How many
people do you have in your group or your department?
Mr. Szubin. It is about 165.
Mr. Chaffetz. And how many of them actually work on this
particular issue?
Mr. Szubin. Iran has been the number one priority for us.
It is difficult for me to give you an FTE number because we
divide up our functions by the operations. So we have licensing
officers, enforcement officers, people who prepare the
designation----
Mr. Chaffetz. If you had to guess, how many people would
you guess are actually working on this?
Mr. Szubin. It would be hard to put a number on it. I can
go back and try to come back to you with an estimate. But it is
our number one priority and has been for as long as I have been
at OFAC, which is 5 years.
Mr. Chaffetz. According to Mr. Dubowitz, who testified on
the panel just before us, China is the largest importer of
Iranian oil behind the European Union. Companies owned by the
Chinese Government are also suppliers of illicit materials in
support of Iran's nuclear weapons program. Is the United States
enforcing sanctions against the Chinese Government or any
Chinese entity?
Mr. Szubin. Absolutely. And I will defer in a moment to Mr.
Wooster, who can speak to the State Department sanctions, but
we at Treasury have imposed sanctions against Chinese
companies, including some state-owned firms that were providing
parts and equipment to Iran's missile procurement efforts.
Mr. Chaffetz. And how many companies are you investigating
at the current time? What does the universe of that look like?
Mr. Szubin. Chinese companies?
Mr. Chaffetz. Uh-huh.
Mr. Szubin. I am not at liberty to disclose that.
Mr. Chaffetz. Let me go to another part here.
Following the exposure of the Iranian plot to potentially
assassinate Saudi Arabia's Ambassador to the United States, the
Obama administration actually floated the idea of sanctioning
the Iranian Central Bank. In fact, 92 U.S. Senators out of a
hundred signed a letter suggesting in support of that. Where is
that in its progress? What would be the effect of that? Is that
something that the Obama administration has abandoned?
Mr. Szubin. As Under Secretary Cohen has mentioned,
including in testimony recently, the point is that proposal or
idea has not been abandoned. It is very much on the table, as
are all options that we could take that would credibly and
meaningfully impact Iran and deter its efforts.
Mr. Chaffetz. But why not do it? Why not do it?
Mr. Szubin. The issues are several. We need to analyze any
prospective option in terms of the evidence that is available
to us, of course, the impact that it would have on Iran, and
the impact that it----
Mr. Chaffetz. But we want to have the maximum effect on
Iran, right? So are we just--I mean, is there a spectrum here
that says, well, we don't want to be too hard?
Mr. Szubin. No, no, no.
Mr. Chaffetz. Okay. So why--I mean, you listed that as your
second consideration. Why is----
Mr. Szubin. Well, I think it needs to be measured against
my third consideration, which is what would the impact be on
the United States and our allies and other countries around the
world. If we are considering an action----
Mr. Chaffetz. So give me an example of how that would
impact the United States.
Mr. Szubin. I am happy to. If we are considering an option
that would have a low-to-moderate impact on Iran and would have
a serious negative impact on the United States or our allies,
then that is a way----
Mr. Chaffetz. What would be this serious? Can you give me
an example of where that would be a serious impact to the
United States?
Mr. Szubin. I am happy to. I would just apologize in
advance. I am not an economic analyst, and so my familiarity
with economic modeling may not be up to your satisfaction. But
in the oil discussions in particular, there are very real
scenarios in which an oil price spike might hit that could
result in somewhat of a decrease----
Mr. Chaffetz. So we are not willing--this is what is
mystifying. It came out in the first panel, too. But this is
the concern, that you are somehow gauging--the Treasury
Department is somehow gauging the price of oil--and I am trying
to figure out what price per gallon are we not willing to pay?
I mean, why is the price of a gallon of gas the primary driver
in the Obama administration's quest to supposedly make sure
that they don't get a nuclear bomb, for goodness sake? Why is
the price of gas one of those? Twice you have listed it off
right near the top of the list. Is that really the concern?
Mr. Szubin. The price of oil is not the primary driver. It
is certainly a consideration, because it is a primary driver of
the recovery that is going on worldwide and the strength of our
economy and that of many of our allies.
Mr. Chaffetz. When will you make a decision about whether
or not to pursue this Iranian Central Bank sanction? What is
the timeline here? When are we going to have a decision?
Mr. Szubin. I can't answer that.
Mr. Chaffetz. Why not? Who makes that decision?
Mr. Szubin. The decision will be made by the administration
as a whole.
But I do want to challenge the notion that it is a question
of how much of a price uptick are we willing to take on
ourselves in exchange for a profound impact on Iran. If there
is a hike in the price of oil, Iran gains. If there is a spike
in the price of oil, Iran could be facing a windfall. And so
there are scenarios in which--and they are plausible
scenarios--in which there could be profound harm to the global
economic recovery and a windfall to Iran. I don't think that is
what any of us are looking for. It is a scenario we need to
proceed I think with----
Mr. Chaffetz. My time has expired. We need to get to the
other Members.
But the fact you have 92 U.S. Senators, in a very
bipartisan way--and this is something, an idea that was floated
out there by the Obama administration, and now we are pulling
back on it, is really quite stunning.
I will yield now 5 minutes to the gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Tierney.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
Mr. Szubin, I didn't hear you say that you were pulling
back on it. Are you pulling back on it?
Mr. Szubin. No. As I said, the option remains on the table.
Mr. Tierney. That is what I thought I heard you say. And I
suspect you are considering whether or not doing it would have
an adverse effect of causing Iran to get enriched by that
action, therefore totally disregarding the effect on it and
making it useless, in effect.
Mr. Szubin. That is correct. And potentially worse than
useless, potentially resulting in a boon to Iran.
Mr. Tierney. Emboldening them even more on that. So that
would seem to me a useful thing to consider before you went and
did that. But others might feel differently on that.
So it seems to me that people that want to be critical
first on the one hand say what a great job this administration
has done on sanctions and internationalizing them and having it
move forward and then they qualify that by saying in the medium
and the long-range, but they don't think it is a going to be
immediate enough to actually reach the goal, which is to
somehow impede the development of nuclear power capacity on
that. So are we doing all that should be done to impede that in
time so that one doesn't always outstrip the other? And what
else ought we be doing?
I want to ask each of you that.
Mr. Szubin. First, I do think that experts across the
spectrum have acknowledged that the pressure on Iran,
especially in recent months, has grown to an unprecedented
level. Iran is more isolated than ever financially in terms of
trade, in terms of investment in its oil sector, and
politically. And the IAEA Board of Governors report and the
revelation of the Arbabsiar plot to assassinate the Saudi
Ambassador to the United States have greatly compounded Iran's
isolation and its problems.
In terms of are we doing everything? We are certainly
trying. This is my number one priority. And we are trying to
identify every possible option we can take. Whether it is a
U.S. unilateral action in the form of an OFAC or a State
Department designation, whether it is a multilateral concerted
effort we can take with allies, or whether it is action in New
York pursuant to a U.N. Security Council resolution, we are
trying to identify every possible lever that we can push that
would exert additional impact; and I commit to you that we will
continue to be relentless about that.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
Mr. Wooster.
Mr. Wooster. Congressman Tierney, in response to your
question about what we are doing, as Adam has rightly said, it
certainly occupies the bulk of my life and that of my team. And
we have 39 people in the Office of Iranian Affairs, 17 of them
overseas, 22 domestically. We are engaged on this all the time.
We are engaged on it in Washington. We are engaged on it in
terms of contributions that reporting officers are making in
the field well beyond the ones I named in terms of the office's
own assets. This is a whole-of-government approach. I believe
Under Secretary Sherman has been emphatic in declaring that
aspect of it.
Yesterday, I know Adam and I spent probably more time with
than we would care to with one another at the White House going
over the particular details of this issue with a host of other
actors as well.
On the diplomatic front in terms of the Department of
State, what we keep a particularly close eye on, of course, is
the point where we can obtain optimal leverage, maximum
leverage, and at the same time we are not alienating key people
that we need to work with in a coalition. Where these are
stronger, they are more effective, they are more fearful, even
if it is just the optics of it as well, and in actuality the
bite is much deeper when we have a united front, when we have a
coalition.
To date, we can report success, notwithstanding the points
that Representative Chaffetz has mentioned, in terms of China.
I know it is a continuing concern with the Congress. There just
aren't easy responses to that. But, nonetheless, we have six
U.N. Security Council resolutions where they, too, have put ink
on the paper; they, too, have assented to this; and they agree
on the fundamentals, as do the Russians, that the idea of this
regime having a nuclear weapon is not a good one.
Mr. Tierney. We have had people make the argument to us
that at some point you could take an action that in fact would
go beyond hurting the Guard, the Qods Force, the regime, and
hurt the Iranian people and make their lives so miserable that
at some point they start to support a government that right now
many of them might be inclined to resist. Is there such a
tipping point, in your view, and do you take that into account
in your calculations?
Mr. Wooster. Yes, sir. In terms of a tipping point, I can't
offer you an exact point on the curve where that is located.
But there is.
I mean, we have witnessed, most particularly around the
issue of the nuclear question, a lot of this data is available
through--in fact, the overwhelming amount of is it is available
through public polling, Iranian polling, third government
polling, academic institutions, think tanks, and, of course, in
terms of resources that each government has, particularly our
allies.
But it comes up resoundingly with the conclusion that the
nuclear issue is very much one of those events. There is a lot
of nationalism behind the notion of a nuclear Iran. There, of
course, are deleterious effects as well. But the fact is that a
good number of Iranians are very much united around the issue
of their country, too, being a member of the, if you will,
nuclear club. So it is something that we keep an eye on.
Our--as I mentioned at the outset of my remarks, the
paramount objective for us is ensuring that the regime does not
obtain a nuclear weapon. Between that point, the apex, if you
will, and the area below it, there is considerable room for
maneuver.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chaffetz. Now recognize the gentleman from Illinois,
Mr. Quigley, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Kahl, the International Atomic Energy Agency report
that just came out, obviously quite sobering but not a surprise
to anyone. We have been at this a little while now. A window to
do something seems to be narrowing. What is the plan? It seems
tough to say here, but it seems almost inevitable. What is the
plan? What do we do if we have a nuclear Iran?
Dr. Kahl. Well, first of all, it is obviously our policy to
prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon. The administration
sees that, the acquisition of a nuclear weapon, as
unacceptable. You know, how much time we have, I think there is
some debate in that.
Obviously, the IAEA report is troubling. I think that,
though, there is still time to keep on the path that we are on
now, which is to turn up the heat diplomatically and through
economic pressure.
Meanwhile, ensuring that the President has all options
available to him so that when he says all options are on the
table, those options are viable. So the Defense Department's
activities currently are oriented in the region to convey to
Iran our resolve to counter their destabilizing activities and
their aggression, to defend our partners, and to deny the
benefits of their nuclear and ballistic missile program through
our defense activities.
But I think it is our view that we still have some time and
that any discussion of military action or something else has to
be viewed very much as a last resort, given the highly
uncertain consequences that that action would have.
Mr. Quigley. I get it. But I have only been here a short
time now. I am in my second term. But I feel like Bill Murray
in Groundhog Day, right?
I mean, I have been at this meeting before. And we could
save the tapes--and no disrespect--we could have this meeting
again next year, and we could be talking--last year, I believe
we were talking about years. Now we are talking about a year
from a very credible agency.
And what we have also seen is that the window tends--every
time we hear something else, the window is narrower. There is
exponential growth. It is very scary.
So this last year went by very quickly since we had a
significant discussion about that. So I get it. And I voted for
sanctions, and I am up for all options. But, you know, I am not
sure we are--Monty Hall is pointing to door number two or door
number three at some point in time.
Are we ready, facing what is--whether there is a debate or
not--a very credible agency is less than a year now. We have
our allies, we have our troops, we have destabilization. Prime
Minister Netanyahu talked about exporting a very strong threat.
So, beyond all that--I know you don't want to talk about it--
but is there a plan? Are we ready?
Dr. Kahl. So I think we need to treat all these timelines
with--kind of put an appropriate context around them. So when
you have groups estimating 1 year, 2 years until they could
have a testable nuclear device, the important caveat in that is
from a decision by the Iranian Government to dash for a nuclear
device. There is no evidence that that decision has been made.
So that 1 year in a sense is sliding.
So part of the reason why you have this Groundhog Day is a
couple of years ago you might have heard a similar estimate,
but that was also based on the notion that the Iranians hadn't
made a decision. So what's clear is what the Iranians are doing
is trying to put themselves into a position in which the
Supreme Leader can make a decision, and we do have to be
worried that when and if that decision is ever made the time to
actually complete a testable device could shrink over time. So
we are watching that very, very, very carefully.
But I think we still do have some time. But it is the
responsibility of our Department to do prudent planning to
ensure that all options are available when and if we detect
that Iran has made a decision to do this.
Mr. Quigley. That's as good as it gets, Mr. Chairman. I
thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wooster, I am wondering, can you describe what the
competing arguments are within Iran, as you see it, on this
question of proceeding aggressively toward the development of a
nuclear weapon?
Mr. Wooster. I can comment, if you will, or make some
observations about the national level discussion. Is that what
you mean?
Mr. Welch. Right. And I am assuming there is some internal
debate, that there are forces that are arguing for an
aggressive approach. There are probably some forces that are
arguing against that. I am wondering about your Department's
assessment of what those arguments internally within Iran are,
who is making them, and who is prevailing.
Mr. Wooster. Thank you.
Well, the party lines, if you will, are drawn fairly
clearly. They have been for some time. Some of the names and
personalities have changed, but there remains a hard core inner
circle who are keen to develop a nuclear program. That has been
demonstrated for years.
The IAEA report demonstrates also what the United States
has known for a long time, that Iran had a nuclear weapons
program. We have continuing concerns about that. That is
emphatically clear to all of you. As one of your colleagues
mentioned, we have all seen that before.
In terms of the debate within the country, a good number--
remember, the astonishing--one of the astonishing facts about
Iran is that we have an extraordinary demographic, 70--75
million people, 70 percent of whom are 30 something or under.
It is really extraordinary. So you have a lot of folks who look
toward the future and who think about what their prospects are.
And when they do, the notion of living in a pariah state, where
options are foreclosed to them in terms of business, travel,
education, that's not a heartening prospect for them. And
they've demonstrated that.
Those folks obviously are keen, notwithstanding whatever
sympathy they may have to see their nation, if you will, belly
up to the bar with other nuclear powers, to be recognized as a
great country or a great power. Nonetheless, they haven't
demonstrated that element that I am speaking of, hegemonic
tendencies. They wouldn't fit into the camp of what we would
call those with desires for destabilizing regional influences.
Many of them are keen on rapport with the West, particularly
with the United States. But--and this is a big but--they don't
hold the power.
So the folks who have the power, the predominant power,
this is--again, you are familiar with the host of characters:
the Supreme Leader, the IRGC, its constituent elements such as
the Qods Force, and various other deeply conservative political
figures. But again, beyond that circle--and that is a
relatively small circle, but it is a very powerful circle--
there is room for maneuvering.
Mr. Welch. That being what?
Mr. Wooster. I am sorry?
Mr. Welch. What would that room for maneuver be?
And then Dr. Kahl can comment on that as well.
Mr. Wooster. We find that the Iranians remain
extraordinarily interested in the United States. It is the
aspiration of a good number of Iranians, the older Iranians, to
send their children here to be educated, to visit, to travel,
to have the opportunity to enjoy aspects of American culture
and education that they knew in another era. That's not an
option. They show up----
Mr. Welch. I am going to be out of time. I would just like
to hear a little bit from Dr. Kahl. I hate to interrupt, but it
is a time issue.
Mr. Wooster. Certainly. Please.
Dr. Kahl. I think in general, again, our role is to try to
convince the Iranian leadership that they will be less safe,
not more, if they keep going on this nuclear weapons path. So
we are doing that, again, by trying to deny them the benefits
of those activities through our security cooperation
relationships in the Gulf, our ballistic missile defense
architecture, our efforts to build up their capabilities, our
efforts to work with Israel on their defenses and provide for
their qualitative military aid.
So all of that is oriented, again, against--about sending
the Iranians a very clear signal that not only are they facing
increasing diplomatic and financial isolation but they are
aligning the rest of the region against them in a way that's
going to make them profoundly unsecure. And so this is trying
to create an incentive structure that leads them to one
conclusion, which is they should stop doing this. So that's our
number one objective.
I would just say, on the young people in Iran, you know,
there is a lot of evidence that they think--many of them think
very favorably of the United States. So I think we need to be
careful in a lot of what we do to make sure that we are not
alienating a group of individuals that we want to work with and
have a relationship with over the long term, as long as they
can stop being held hostage by their government.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much. Yield back.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
I now recognize myself for an additional 5 minutes.
Mr. Wooster, I want to make sure I heard you properly. When
talking about the IAEA report, you said that Iran had a nuclear
program. They currently have one, though. Is that correct? They
have had one, and they have one.
Mr. Wooster. Sir, it was that they had a nuclear weapons
program. Not a nuclear program but a nuclear weapons program.
Mr. Chaffetz. Do you believe that they have one now?
Mr. Wooster. They provided no assurance that they have
abandoned the pursuit of a nuclear weapon.
Mr. Chaffetz. I am asking what--do you believe the report
that was just issued or not?
Mr. Wooster. Sir, the administration's position is--and has
been for years--reflected in what you see in the report. The
report remains a restricted document, although I am aware that
it has been leaked to folks and it is available on the
Internet.
The limits--because we are having a conversation about
these issues with ministers today--excuse me, Thursday and
Friday in Vienna, there are limits on what I can say in this
setting. I can't offer my personal opinion.
Mr. Chaffetz. I am trying to get--I am sorry, I wasn't
trying to get your personal opinion. I want to understand the
administration's opinion as to whether or not they believe that
they have a nuclear weapons program. No or yes?
Mr. Wooster. We remain concerned that the Iranian regime
has obfuscated on precisely this issue. We don't have
transparency. We want to know, we want certainty that they do
not have a weapons program. That's what we are seeking.
Mr. Chaffetz. Mr. Dubowitz listed 18 firms--I will come
back to Mr. Szubin here. Mr. Dubowitz listed 18 firms connected
to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard, IRGC, which formed part of
the crude oil supply chain. These firms' activities were
detailed in a report from the Foundation for the Defense of
Democracies to the administration in February. So I want to
come back to this issue and say where are you at in sanctioning
these particular 18? And what's happening with this report?
This has been since February.
Mr. Szubin. And we have that report. And we have had our
analysts take a very careful look at it.
As you have seen, if you have been following the releases
from our Department, we have made sanctions against the IRGC
and its entities the key plank in our Iran strategy on the
reasoning that the IRGC is one of the most culpable actors for
supporting terrorism, supporting WMD development, and including
repression, including in Syria. But also on the reasoning that
IRGC is becoming increasingly unpopular in Iran. And so it
plays into this domestic discontent which I think is going to
be key if these sanctions do have the impact we are looking
for.
We have announced sanctions against lots of IRGC fronts,
including their largest port operator and a whole host of
companies; and we have also designated companies in Iran's oil
infrastructure. And we have been able to get the United Nations
as well to act in this area by restricting petroleum imports
into Iran.
Mr. Chaffetz. What about these particular 18?
Mr. Szubin. On these particular 18, I can't comment on
which we are poised to designate. We don't comment on upcoming
designations. But I can say that to designate any and all IRGC
companies is very much consistent with what has been our
strategy.
Mr. Chaffetz. I guess the concern is you have had this
report since February, and I just would appreciate an update as
one becomes more publicly available.
Let me go back to you again, Mr. Szubin, here. Is the
administration prepared to sanction Chinese firms like--I am
going to pronounce this improperly--Zhuhai Zhenrong, a
subsidiary of NORINCO, which is openly flouting these sanctions
at this time? Are you familiar with this organization? I am
sorry. My pronunciation is terrible.
Mr. Szubin. I believe that is an energy firm; is that
right?
Mr. Chaffetz. Yes, correct.
Mr. Szubin. So I would defer to my colleague from the State
Department, who administers the energy sanctions.
Mr. Chaffetz. Mr. Wooster, are you familiar with this firm
and where we are at on this?
Mr. Wooster. I am not so familiar with the particulars of
the firm. I am familiar with the concerns about China and the
energy sector.
Primarily, our concern there is that, because the Chinese
have in fact been pulling back in this area and because we have
engaged at the highest levels, the President has engaged, the
Secretary of State and others, we have also wanted them not to
in particular backfill behind any other energy firms that have
left. And to date--and to date we can report that what we are
seeing is satisfactory. We continue to keep an eye on it. We
continue to discuss it. It was discussed in Beijing less than a
week ago with Deputy Secretary of State Burns, and we continue
to keep a close eye on this.
Mr. Chaffetz. And the last point I would like to make here
before we wrap up, Mr. Wooster, there is deep concern about our
presence in Iraq after the 31st of December, with the
Department of Defense pulling out, 16,500 people there under
the control of Secretary Clinton. How prepared are we for what
may or may not happen come January 1st?
Mr. Wooster. Sir, I have limited capability to give you a
good response about the management particulars of the
Department in terms of its Iraq-particular preparations.
However, what I can say from the policy perspective is that we
are committed to a long-term relationship with Iraq. No one
should doubt the U.S. Government's commitment to that country.
We have a transition now in our relationship with Iraq. It
is tempting to see it as going from black to white, but in fact
it is not. It is a transition. We're moving from one phase in
our relationship to another phase in that relationship. Again,
our commitment to the region and to Iraq is longstanding, and
it endures.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
I appreciate your all being here, for your testimony here
today, and the work that you do on behalf of our country.
Again, we appreciate your presence.
The committee now stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:48 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


