- STATE AND MUNICIPAL DEBT: TOUGH CHOICES AHEAD

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STATE AND MUNICIPAL DEBT: TOUGH CHOICES AHEAD

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 14, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-39

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

68-361 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on April 14, 2011...................................     1
Statement of:
Biggs, Dr. Andrew, resident scholar, the American Enterprise
Institute for Public Policy Research; Mark Mix, president,
National Right to Work Committee; Dr. Robert Novy-Marx,
professor of finance, University of Rochester Simon
Graduate School of Business; and Dr. Desmond Lachman,
resident scholar, the American Enterprise Institute for
Public Policy Research.....................................    91
Biggs, Dr. Andrew........................................    91
Lachman, Dr. Desmond.....................................   121
Mix, Mark................................................   103
Novy-Marx, Dr. Robert....................................   116
Walker, Scott, Governor, State of Wisconsin; and Peter
Shumlin, Governor, State of Vermont........................    15
Shumlin, Peter...........................................    21
Walker, Scott............................................    15
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Biggs, Dr. Andrew, resident scholar, the American Enterprise
Institute for Public Policy Research, prepared statement of    94
Braley, Hon. Bruce L., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Iowa, atricle dated April 11, 2011................    44
Cummings, Hon. Elijah E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Maryland, prepared statement of...............     6
Lachman, Dr. Desmond, resident scholar, the American
Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, prepared
statement of...............................................   123
Maloney, Hon. Carolyn B., a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York, various articles....................    70
Mix, Mark, president, National Right to Work Committee,
prepared statement of......................................   105
Novy-Marx, Dr. Robert, professor of finance, University of
Rochester Simon Graduate School of Business, prepared
statement of...............................................   118
Quigley, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, prepared statement of...................    11
Shumlin, Peter, Governor, State of Vermont, prepared
statement of...............................................    24
Walker, Scott, Governor, State of Wisconsin, prepared
statement of...............................................    18

STATE AND MUNICIPAL DEBT: TOUGH CHOICES AHEAD

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 14, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Darrell E. Issa
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, Burton, Platts, Turner,
McHenry, Chaffetz, Walberg, Lankford, Amash, Buerkle, Gosar,
Labrador, Meehan, DesJarlais, Gowdy, Ross, Guinta, Farenthold,
Kelly, Cummings, Towns, Maloney, Norton, Kucinich, Tierney,
Clay, Lynch, Connolly, Quigley, Davis, Braley, Welch, Murphy,
and Speier.
Also present: Representatives Sensenbrenner and Moore.
Staff present: Ali Ahmad, deputy press secretary; Thomas A.
Alexander, Howard A. Denis, and Peter Haller, senior counsels;
Robert Borden, general counsel; Molly Boyl, parliamentarian;
Lawrence J. Brady, staff director; Sharon Casey, senior
assistant clerk; Katelyn E. Christ, research analyst; Benjamin
Stroud Cole, policy advisor and investigative analyst; John
Cuaderes, deputy staff director; Adam P. Fromm, director of
Member liaison and floor operations; Linda Good, chief clerk;
Tyler Grimm and Ryan M. Hambleton, professional staff members;
Frederick Hill, director of communications; Christopher Hixon,
deputy chief counsel, oversight; Sery E. Kim, counsel; Justin
LoFranco, press assistant; Mark D. Marin, senior professional
staff member; Laura L. Rush, deputy chief clerk; Peter Warren,
policy director; Kevin Corbin, minority staff assistant; Ashley
Etienne, minority director of communications; Carla Hultberg,
minority chief clerk; Justin Kim, minority counsel; Lucinda
Lessley, minority policy director; Amy Miller and Alex Wolf,
minority professional staff members; Leah Perry, minority chief
investigative counsel; Jason Powell and Steven Rangel, minority
senior counsels; Dave Rapallo, minority staff director; Suzanne
Sachsman Grooms, minority chief counsel; and Mark Stephenson,
minority senior policy advisor/legislative director.
Chairman Issa. Thank you. The committee will come to order.
Before I begin, and I don't think that I have to remind the
audience broadly, but I will, decorum will be maintained here
so that our two witnesses, both seated Governors, are heard
without any unreasonable interruption. If you agree with them,
smile. If you disagree with them, smile. The fact is that this
is about America hearing from two Governors who have a high
responsibility to serve their States, and we have a high
responsibility to hear them.
The Chair cannot allow any disruptions. And I appreciate
that all those who came to get a message out did so before the
gavel, and I appreciate that if you would like to remain, you
can remain for the entire hearing; we are open to the public.
But if there is any disruption, your seats will go to the
people waiting outside, who also would like to be in
attendance. This committee has a longstanding history of doing
that on a bipartisan basis.
I now recognize the ranking member for unanimous consent.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I ask
unanimous consent that Representative Gwen Moore of the 4th
District of Wisconsin be permitted to attend in this hearing
pursuant to Rule 11, Section 2(g)(2)(c), and ask questions of
the witnesses.
Chairman Issa. Per our rule, without objection, so ordered.
The Oversight Committee mission statement is that we exist
to secure two fundamental principles: first, Americans have a
right to know that the money Washington takes from them is well
spent and, second, Americans deserve an efficient, effective
government that works for them. Our duty on the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform is to protect these rights. Our
solemn responsibility is to hold government accountable to
taxpayers because taxpayers have a right to know what they get
from their government. We will work tirelessly in partnership
with citizen watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American
people, bring genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy. This
is the mission of the Oversight and Government Reform
Committee.
Today's hearing continues the committee's effort to examine
crises brought on by out-of-control spending and mounting debt
at the State level. Now, let me assure you that is not to say
every State is out of control, but virtually every State in the
Union, and many localities, have increased their debt load at a
time in which debt service is at an all-time low.
The American people are well aware of the fiscal crisis
Washington faces on a national level. They are ready for
Congress to cut spending, and even President Obama has lauded
recent spending cuts championed by the House Republicans.
What is less known is the severe fiscal problem that some
of our States and municipal governments face. Already this year
our Financial Services Subcommittee, under the leadership of
Chairman Patrick McHenry, has done a great service by
highlighting problems created by some irresponsible spending. I
thank Chairman McHenry for his efforts.
The facts we have learned from the subcommittee are
telling. Currently, States face a combined budget shortfall of
roughly $112 billion for fiscal year 2012, an amount equal to
approximately one-fifth of their budgets. That, if nothing is
done, will pile on more debt for the future.
The evidence why this has occurred is clear: since 1990,
State and local government spending has increased 70 percent
faster than inflation. When the recession hit, State and local
tax revenues simply no longer sustained that growth.
Looming just around the corner, unfunded or underfunded
pension liabilities pose a daunting threat to State municipal
budgets. This burdens taxpayers with an estimated $3 trillion
in debt. I say estimated because nobody knows the full exposure
the taxpayers have due to the fact that the bond markets are
not transparent and the reporting rules do not force adequate
disclosure.
Additionally, as we have seen here, when we have talked
about the correct amounts to be withheld for our postal
carriers, we find that there is up to $6\1/2\ billion of
discrepancy between two opposing sides on this issue. Indeed,
over the past 20 years, State and local governments have
promised to government workers that they knew they could not
keep in some cases, hoping that future wealth would continue to
propel them.
Today we have two Governors with us and we are pleased to
welcome Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker and Vermont Governor
Peter Shumlin. They come from two very different States: one
larger, one smaller; one in the midst of a tough downturn that
may in fact continue for a very long time as many of the core
industries that have created wealth begin to change, and that
transition may be long and painful. Vermont, on the other hand,
a wonderful State filled with a great deal of industry that may
be facing challenges today, but are likely to be slightly less
systemic than what Wisconsin faces. This doesn't change the
fact that both Governors are dealing with the issues of
shortfalls in their own way, and today we look forward to
hearing how they are going to retain the viability of their
State long after their terms have ended.
Unionized Federal workers don't even have collective
bargaining rights. Governor Walker's bold reforms seem
reasonable to those of us in Washington who understand that our
retirement and health care system at the Federal level is not
subject to collective bargaining, but in fact it is based on a
single system uniform throughout the Federal work force and not
debatable as to withholding or as to the benefits. That is not
to say that Federal workers don't have a good program; they do.
But their program has been based on a long list of requests
considered by Congress and funded.
So as we deal with Federal issues, hopefully we deal with
State issues who, in many cases, have less room to maneuver,
are looking for more room to maneuver, and believe that they
can achieve it through changes in their laws.
Last, the insolvency of Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece,
and Spain, most often called the PIGS, tells us that States
within a greater union can in fact be a challenge for the
union. The independent countries of Europe that belong to the
European Union are more loosely configured than our own States.
That means that if we have insolvency in three, four, five of
our States, we have a greater challenge to our common Nation
than does the European Union. And yet the European Union has
been constantly trying to figure out ways to maintain these
states within the European Union, help them bail themselves
out, and in fact insist that they change policies that have
gotten them into this problem.
We are not here today to intervene in the sovereign States
that are before us; we are here to understand what they are
doing in self-help.
With that, I recognize the ranking member for his opening
statement.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I ask unanimous consent that the statement of the National
Education Association, dated April 14, 2011, be admitted into
the record.
Chairman Issa. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I strongly support efforts to help States
continue their economic recovery and eliminate the budget
shortfalls caused by the most severe financial crisis since the
Great Depression. Many States have been forced to make
significant cuts in their budgets; trimming critical programs
that help our Nation's veterans, assist the developmentally
disabled, supply health care services to the poor, and provide
nursing home services to our seniors. These are difficult
decisions and I have great respect for our Governors who are
able to work with governmental and nongovernmental entities to
develop innovative ways to preserve as many services as
possible for their citizens, while making fiscally responsible
choices.
However, I strongly oppose efforts to falsely blame middle-
class American workers for these current economic problems. We
know better than anybody else in this committee why those
problems came about. This recession was not caused by them.
Working America, firefighters, teachers, and nurses, and so
many others, who are, in the words of Theologian Swindell, so
often unseen, unnoticed, unappreciated, and unapplauded, are
not responsible for the reckless actions of Wall Street which
led to this crisis in the first place.
I also strongly object to efforts by politicians who try to
use the current economic downturn to strip American workers of
their rights. Mr. Chairman, we are a country who has
consistently increased rights, not taken them away. As a matter
of fact, if it were not for that principle, I would not be
sitting here today, and the women in this Congress would not be
sitting here today; the right to negotiate working conditions
that are safe, the right to negotiate due process protections
against being fired arbitrarily, and the right to negotiate
fair pay for an honest day's work.
Today's hearing is a study in contrast. We are very
fortunate to have with us two State Governors, Governor Shumlin
from Vermont and Governor Walker from Wisconsin, and we are
glad to have them. Both face budget shortfalls this year. But
they approached the rights of workers in drastically different
ways. Governor Shumlin of Vermont faced a budget shortfall,
ladies and gentlemen, of about $176 million for fiscal year
2012. He negotiated with State employees, who accepted a 2-year
3 percent pay cut. Vermont teachers also agreed to work three
additional years before retiring and to contribute more toward
their pensions. And the Vermont State Employees Association
voted to increase their pension contribution by 1.3 percent
over the next 5 years.
In addition to obtaining these concessions, Governor
Shumlin also did something else: he proposed spreading
additional cuts across various State agencies as well as
raising additional revenue through select surcharges and
assessments. In other words, he developed a plan to spread out
and share sacrifices across the State. And we should note that
those employees went along with it because they too wanted to
strengthen their own State's fiscal situation.
Governor Walker took a very different approach in
Wisconsin. He faced a projected shortfall of $137 million in
the current fiscal year. Within days of the Governor's
announcing a budget proposal to address this shortfall, labor
leaders in Wisconsin agreed to accept all of his financial
demands. They agreed to increase their pension contributions
more than twentyfold and they agreed to double their share of
the health insurance premiums.
But Governor Walker did not accept these concessions.
Instead, he went much further by attempting to strip government
employees of their collective bargaining rights; he demanded
numerous provisions that had nothing to do with the State's
budget and had no fiscal impact. For example, he wanted to
require unions to hold annual votes to continue representing
their members and he wanted to prevent employees from paying
union dues through their paychecks. Governor Walker refused to
meet with union leaders and he declared publicly that he would
not negotiate with them.
One of the big questions we will have of Governor Walker
today is why did he not say yes to the unions when they agreed
to meet all of his financial demands. And on a broader level,
what is motivating this extreme effort to dismantle the unions
themselves? In my opinion, it is shameful to play politics with
American workers and their families. These are real people,
middle-class Americans who are trying to put food on their
table for their family, keep a roof over their heads, educate
their children, and plan for retirement that does not burden
their loved ones. We should be helping these workers, not
attacking them, because they are the engine and the author of
the American recovery.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Elijah E. Cummings
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the distinguished gentleman,
subcommittee chairman, Patrick McHenry, for an opening
statement.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you so much for
holding this hearing today and, Governor, thank you for being
here.
Over the past 2 months, Congressman Quigley, who is the
ranking member of my subcommittee, we have held hearings on
State budgets and pensions, and their impact on the municipal
bond market. Two essential questions immediately stood out:
first, what is the true debt burden facing our States and
municipalities, and, second, what must be done to mitigate the
immediate crisis and put all forms of government back on a
solvent, fiscal trajectory.
After holding hearings with scholars, State senators,
rating agencies, and other parties about State budgets and
pensions, we confirmed what leading economists are predicting
and what we will hear from the testimony today, that 2012 will
be one of the most difficult budget years for States and
municipalities on record. Forty-four States and the District of
Columbia are now projecting aggregate budget shortfalls
totaling $112 billion for this year alone, and it only gets
worse from here on out.
If that wasn't enough, there are unfunded pension
liabilities upwards of $3.2 trillion for States and $383
billion for local governments, some of which is kept off of
States' accounting books, representing trillions of dollars in
shadow accounting. Today, some of my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle will use the words like extreme, tax
increases, and use those words repeatedly to describe what is
either happening in terms of cuts or what is necessary to get
out of this situation.
We are not facing a revenue problem, it is a spending
problem. But, as always, the numbers don't lie. Since 1990,
State and local governments have increased spending by roughly
70 percent faster than inflation. In addition to this unchecked
reckless spending, the looming burden of paying out trillions
of dollars in lucrative public pensions and health care
benefits leaves State and local governments in dire straits.
I have stated before that there will be severe consequences
if we are dishonest about the fiscal obligations before us and
refuse to change course. The cost of inaction will be borne by
the young teachers who are told that their cash-strapped school
districts can no longer afford their retirement benefits
because it must finance the exorbitant benefits of others.
Many public servants like firefighters and policemen, faced
with the possibility that their vital jobs that they hold will
no longer provide a standard of living for their families will
simply choose another career. In the end, the people that we
count on to teach our children and to protect our homes and our
families will realize that their government has failed them and
actively hurt their retirement security. We have an opportunity
to change that.
Numerous States have seen the writing on the wall and
decided to take action. In recent years, at least 15 States
passed legislation reform some aspect of their pension system.
For example, Governor Mitch Daniels of Indiana successfully
reformed collective bargaining, leading to more efficient and
effective government. Governor Walker has boldly set out to
push through similar initiatives in Wisconsin. We have seen
this in the national news.
Even in the face of extremely heated political attacks,
Governor Walker has shown that he understands and has a genuine
commitment to reform and to prevent this fiscal calamity. The
Governor's proposals were recently welcomed by the bond market
and Moody's said that Governor Walker's plan will have a
positive effect on the credit rating of his State. In the end,
that will mean less cost and less expense to his taxpayers in
order to get lending.
Change is never easy. But if we wish to ensure an honest
retirement for those teach our children or protect our
families, and leave the next generation a country as
economically vibrant as the one that we inherited, we must be
serious about the problems we face. It is our responsibility to
be fair to our current retirees and honor our commitment to
them, while at the same time not punishing the next generation
of America for today's free spending ways. It is only possible
if we take the necessary steps before it is too late. It is not
too late. We still have the opportunity for change, and that is
what this discussion here today is about.
Moreover, in light of the hearings that we have had and the
discussion we will hear today, I think it is important that
taxpayers and the market generally have the transparency
necessary to understand the fiscal situation States are in.
Taxpayers deserve it, those that are paying into the pensions
deserve it, and the American people broadly deserve that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing and thank
you for your leadership. I yield back.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman and I thank him for
what his subcommittee on a bipartisan basis has been doing on
this matter.
We now recognize his partner, the ranking member of the
Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services, and Bailouts of
Public and Private Programs, Mr. Quigley, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
you for convening today's third hearing on State and municipal
debt. I would like to thank the chairman of the subcommittee
for his efforts in those first two committee meetings. I would
also like to thank our six witnesses for contributing their
time and expertise today.
Let me begin by saying in the end I do think we have a
revenue problem, and the revenue problem at the local level was
because of the economic downturn. It shrunk local governments'
revenue dramatically, cities and States alike. So it was a
revenue problem.
Now, that doesn't mean that you should raise taxes, because
I understand where you are coming from, but raising taxes
during a recession is a bad idea. But we have to recognize that
in the end this was in large part a revenue problem.
So having addressed that, the other things we will learn in
these hearings is that many States had these big challenges,
and you don't have to tell me; I come from Illinois. Illinois
failed to heed the Old Testament story that advised that one
should save during the seven good years to survive during the
seven lean years. While Illinois's current administration
didn't dig the hole that it got, it has to move forward on
substantive fiscal reform.
Illinois and other States in similar situations owe it to
their taxpayers to fix their budget. If States like Illinois,
New Jersey, and California don't get serious about reform, they
will never be able to keep the basic promises they have made.
Reform should be emphasizing, reinventing, streamlining
government and adapting to changing times, but reform should
not demonize public sector workers who have dedicated their
careers to government service. While States have the right to
make their own policy, I strongly support collective bargaining
rights for public sector workers, but recognize that we have to
work together, collectively, to solve these problems.
Collective bargaining rights didn't cause the recession,
and curtailing them won't fix State budget deficits. What will
fix State budget deficits are common sense reforms that restore
budgets through a sustainable path. Consider public sector
collective bargaining facts and figures. A simple calculation
shows that States that allow public sector collective
bargaining have an average projected 2012 deficit of 14 percent
relative to their budget. Fourteen percent is big, but States
that forbid public sector collective bargaining have projected
deficits at 16\1/2\ percent. Either way you spin it, ending
collective bargaining rights won't reduce budget deficits.
Workers have to play a role to meet these fiscal realities.
It is obvious we have to reduce deficits and long-term debt,
but we shouldn't take advantage of the economic downturn to
achieve longstanding ideological goals. Public sector should
continue to have collective bargaining rights and we need to
work together to achieve responsible reform.
Soon I will be releasing Part 2 of a series of reports on
reinventing our Federal budget. This reform will recommend over
a trillion dollars in savings over the next 10 years. This
report builds on Part 1 I released in November, but also on a
series of reports I released as a Cook County commissioner. I
bring this up because I remember how frustrating it was to try
to achieve substantive reform at the local level. The truth is
these same frustrations are present here in Washington. But we
can't let those frustrations get the better of us. States like
Illinois need fiscal reform. We need to streamline,
consolidate, and reinvent government not because it is
unimportant, but because its mission is so important; it is
where the wheels hit the street. And if we can remember the
true heroes of 9/11 were civil service workers. That is why we
should restore these local governments to sustainability rather
than tear them down.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Mike Quigley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
Members may have 7 legislative days in order to submit
additional statements and extraneous material.
We would now like to recognize our first panel of
witnesses. No one on this side of the dais, currently, can
introduce them as well as their own members, so with that I
would call on Chairman Jim Sensenbrenner to introduce his
Governor.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It is
my pleasure and honor today to introduce my friend and
constituent, Governor Scott Walker. I first got acquainted with
Scott about 20 years ago when he was starting to get active in
Republican politics. He was elected 17 years ago to the State
Assembly and in 2002 he won a recall election for chief
executive or county executive of Milwaukee County. He was re-
elected to two full terms as a Republican in one of the most
Democratic counties in the country, and his political success
has been based upon the fact that he tells people where he
stands and, once elected, implements that. He faced some very
tough times in Milwaukee County as a result of an outrageous
pension scandal that his predecessor was at the heart of. He
was able to pass nine county budgets or proposed nine county
budgets without a tax increase, and this background allowed him
to be elected as the 45th Governor of Wisconsin last fall.
Very few people here, I think, knew who Scott Walker was
until the last 2 months or so. However, those of us who have
known Scott Walker and his commitment to principle were really
not surprised that the proposals that he made to close not $137
million budget deficit, but a $3.6 billion budget deficit
through the end of the next budget period.
So, again, I am sure that you will find Governor Walker as
interesting as we in Wisconsin have. He is a very polarizing
figure, but those of us who love him in Wisconsin really thank
him for the job that he has done.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
With all the people that Governor Shumlin could have had
introduce him, he chose Peter Welch. The gentleman is
recognized.
Mr. Welch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member,
members of the committee that I proudly serve on. It is my
pleasure to introduce Governor Peter Shumlin of Vermont.
First of all, a couple things about Peter. He is a private
sector person. He and his brother established and expanded a
very successful private business, Putney Student Travel, in
Southern Vermont. He has been on the front line of creating
jobs, of having to pay good wages and good benefits, and deal
with the practical realities of keeping a business going day in
and day out, expanding it, growing it, and being an employer.
He also served in our citizen legislature in Vermont for
many years, first in the House of Representatives and then for
several terms in the State senate, and Peter, as the president
pro tem of the State senate, that is our senate leader, served
more years as senate president than any other Vermonter in
history, and that is 10 years.
So he comes to his job with legislative experience, with
private sector experience, with the obligation to pay bills and
make the trains run on time. He is now serving as Governor of
Vermont, after being elected in this past election. Just to
give you a sense of how Vermont operates, he won a primary with
four other Democrats, and there were a recount because his
original margin of victory was about 200 votes. During the
recount, Peter and the four other candidates, rented a van, and
while we were awaiting the outcome of who won, went on a unity
tour around the State of Vermont talking together, rather than
fighting each other during the recount. Every single member of
five excellent candidates all said we trust our town clerks;
just let them do the count and we will accept the result.
He also comes to the job with the benefit of the tremendous
history that we in Vermont are proud of, a bipartisan
tradition, and it embraces really two things: No. 1, we fight
hard in Vermont, Republicans and Democrats, just like we do
here, but in Vermont Democrats think that Republicans usually
have a merit to their argument and Republicans think Democrats
have something to say, and we actually do our best to listen to
each other because both sides have enough humility to
appreciate that, in fact, there is truth on both sides and we
have to come together for the good of the State.
Just a little bit of background, we had a Governor
Snelling, Richard Snelling, very respected and revered. We had
a downturn in the 1980's. He did something with the Democratic
Speaker of the House to try to adjust the fiscal situation,
because we pay our bills in Vermont. We don't have a balance
budget amendment, but we are cheap and we pay our bills, we are
frugal. The Democrats agreed to cut programs that were really
important to them, the Governor agreed to a temporary surtax
because we needed some revenues. It worked out; we came into
balance. The taxes went down and we were able to support our
programs.
We then had Governor Dean in good times. He cut taxes. He
is a Democrat. And when he did that, he implemented some tough
budget reforms to make sure we didn't spend just because we had
a surplus. We sent money back to the taxpayer and we put into
place budget controls.
Peter Shumlin is carrying on that tradition. When we got
into a fiscal situation, Governor Douglas, his predecessor,
Republican, worked with the unions and said, hey, we have to
share the sacrifice here. They negotiated pay cuts; they
started looking at benefits. They sat down at the table and
worked it out and there was a sense of common purpose, shared
sacrifice, and that is the second approach that has been
embodied in Vermont. If there is pain that has to be sustained,
we have to share that pain together, and what it has done is
helped us make progress even in tough times.
Peter, just to give you an idea, as senate president, when
we had a large Democratic majority, he did something that you
would get mentally tested around here if you did it; he
appointed Republicans to chair major committees. So in Vermont
the two principles are listen to each other, there is truth on
both sides, and work together and share sacrifice when
sacrifice is required.
So it is my pleasure to introduce Governor Peter Shumlin of
Vermont.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn
in. Would you please rise to take the oath and raise your right
hands?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Issa. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Please be seated.
Gentlemen, we have Congressmen who come before us, Senators
who come before us, and Governors come before us. Governors are
always the best witnesses; they understand that the 5-minutes
allows for the Q&A, that in fact your entire testimony will be
placed in the record. To help you with this, you will see the
typical green, yellow, and red lights. As my predecessor on the
committee said, in all 50 States we know what red means. So,
with that, I recognize--we didn't do a coin flip, so who wants
to go first? Governor Walker.

STATEMENTS OF SCOTT WALKER, GOVERNOR, STATE OF WISCONSIN; AND
PETER SHUMLIN, GOVERNOR, STATE OF VERMONT

STATEMENT OF SCOTT WALKER

Governor Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, distinguished
members of the committee, visiting Members as well. Governor,
it is good to be with you here as well; we got to know each
other a little bit after the elections with the new training
for new Governors. It is an honor to be here today.
As was mentioned by several in the testimony, we are not
alone in Wisconsin; there are 44 different States and the
District of Columbia that are facing deficits. In fact, in
total, over $111 billion in total deficits ranging from 2 to 45
percent of their budgets. In our case, in Wisconsin, for the
next biennial budget, which starts July 1st, we face a $3.6
billion budget deficit.
Now, Governors across the country, Democrat and Republican
alike, are facing that challenge; in many cases, proposals that
we have seen from one end of the country to the other,
Governors cutting, in many cases they are cutting billions of
dollars from aid to local government, school districts and
others; and in turn what it is forcing in many of those States
is one of two things, either massive layoffs or massive
property tax increases, and in many cases, sadly, some of both.
In Wisconsin we have a different option, a progressive, in
the best sense of the word, a progressive option. For us, we
are giving State and local governments the tools they need not
just to balance this year or for the next 2 years, but for
generations to come; and that is important. Now, some here and
other places around the country may say that is a bold
political move, but I would argue it is a very modest request.
What we are asking from government employees like myself is a
5.8 percent contribution for our pension and a 12.6 percent
contribution for health care. That is protecting the middle
class. That protects middle-class jobs and middle-class
taxpayers. And if you ask middle-class workers in my State,
they will tell you they think what we are offering is pretty
reasonable.
I will give you a good example; I don't have to go too far
for that. My brother David works as a banquet manager, part-
time as a bartender; his wife works for a department store.
They have two beautiful kids; one just turned 4 the other day.
They are a typical middle-class family. When this debate first
started, he said to me, you know, I pay some $800 a month for
my health insurance premiums and the little bit I can set aside
for my 401K. I would love to have a deal. I would love to have
a deal like what you are offering. I hear that all across my
State. When I go to plants and factories and small businesses
and farms, they say we would love to have a deal like that
because, on average, our middle-class taxpayers are paying
about 20 percent of their health insurance premiums.
In fact, you all know this with Federal employees. Federal
employees pay, on average 28 percent of their health insurance
premiums. As the chairman alluded to, Federal employees, for
the most part, do not have collective bargaining rights for
benefits and ultimately for salary. Makes me wonder why the
protestors are in Madison and Columbia, not right here in
Washington, DC. You have to look at the facts; it is very clear
out there. What we are offering is more generous than what you
offer Federal Government employees, and yet the outrage is not
here, it is in our State capital.
More important, though, than just the fiscal impact,
because what we are talking about here ultimately saves $1.7
billion in State and local government spending over the next 2
years in our biennial budget. It is not the only way we are
balancing our budget, but it is a piece of that. The other
important element to remember is this makes government work
better.
I can think of no better example than a young woman by the
name of Megan Sampson, who a year ago was named the Outstanding
Teacher of the Year, a teacher in the Milwaukee public school
system at the time, and a week later she got a pink slip. She
was one of the teachers laid off. Why? Because her collective
bargaining agreement required a contract that protected a
system that pays more than $100,000 in compensation, total
compensation per teacher, with no contribution for health care,
and ultimately has a system based on seniority.
Our reforms allows schools and other local governments to
hire and fire based on performance and merit, paying for
performance so we put our best teachers and our best workers up
front. That ultimately is going to make things work better. It
worked in Indiana, when Mitch Daniels did this 6 years ago. We
have seen the government more efficient, more effective, more
accountable to the public; and ultimately great workers were
rewarded in that State and continue to be rewarded today.
The last thing I would just tell you is this ultimately is
good for the economy and our State as well because, in the end,
investors want to look at a State where the State and local
government is stable. We are showing that Wisconsin is open for
business. And the thing, I guess, the most important point I
would bring up to you today is when you think about what we are
doing, we are really making a commitment to the future. I have
two high school sons; in fact, some of their classmates are
here today from Wauwatosa East High School. Our proposals are
about making a commitment to the future so our children don't
face even more dire consequences than what we face today.
For more than 200 years, this country has been based on
leadership, where leaders cared more about their children and
their grandchildren than they did about themselves. It is time
here in Wisconsin and across this country. We have leaders
again who worry more about the next generation than the next
election, and that is exactly what we are doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Governor Walker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. Thank you, Governor.
Governor Shumlin.

STATEMENT OF PETER SHUMLIN

Governor Shumlin. Thank you so much, Chairman Issa, Ranking
Member Cummings. Thank you so much for this invitation today,
to all members of the Oversight and Reform Committee, and
particular thanks to my friend and Congressman, Peter Welch,
who does an extraordinary job for us down here in Washington.
Thanks for that warm welcome.
It is great to be here also with Governor Walker. As
Governor Walker mentioned, we met at the baby Governors school
out in Colorado, and I don't want to give you any ideas, any of
you Congress people running for Governor, but if you do, you
get to go to school. We had a wonderful dinner together,
Governor Walker and myself and his wonderful wife, and we share
common challenges. We are among the biggest class of new
Governors in the history of America and we share a very
challenging job. In fact, I said to Governor Walker earlier, I
said, if they had told us at baby Governors school the message
that we were taking over, we might have rethought it, but it
was too late. But we are dealing with some really tough
economic times, as you know. And to help make Governor Walker's
trip to Washington more valuable, I brought a little bit of
Vermont maple syrup down, Governor. I just want to make clear
that we are the No. 1 maple producer in the country, Governor
Walker is No. 4, and our syrup, it doesn't come any better.
Chairman Issa. Governor, how did you get that through TSA?
Governor Shumlin. That is one of the advantages of being
Governor. Governor Walker can tell you about this. No more TSA.
That is how I brought the syrup down.
We are both facing the first 100 days, we have similar
challenges, creating jobs and raising incomes of those that are
earning less money in Vermont or, on average, the same money as
they were earning 10 years ago. That is both of our challenges
in our respective States and the other Governors share it.
Mr. Chair, I just want to directly address the question of
what is causing this fiscal crisis that both Governor Walker
and I find ourselves in. We know it is a result of the greatest
recession in American history. The result for us is declining
revenues and expanding expenses as we face higher unemployment
rates, higher service calls, and the rest, costs and the rests.
That is the challenge.
Now, without getting into how we got here, because I know
that has been debated and we will save that debate for another
day, I simply want to talk a little bit about what our
challenge is as Governors to create jobs, economic
opportunities, and balance our budgets. And when I look at it,
I don't start with collective bargaining and I don't start with
my public pensions; I start with the true costs. In Vermont,
and this is true of most of the States in the country, health
care is my biggest rising cost. I have watched health care
costs in Vermont double over the last decade, from $2\1/2\
billion to $5 billion a year. In 2015 my banking insurance
commissioner tells me Vermonters will be spending an additional
$1.6 billion on health care, and that is the biggest cost in my
State budget.
Now, what does that mean in real dollars? It means $2,500
by 2015, that is $1.6 billion, $2,500 out of every Vermonter's
pocket, from those that were born yesterday to those at the
other end of life, in a State where, on average, our people are
making the same wages they were making 10 years ago. So I am
going where the money is for both the State and the people of
my State to grow jobs and economic opportunities. We are trying
to get health care costs under control.
The second driver, believe it or not, is corrections. Our
corrections budget has doubled in the last decade. Other
Governors are facing similar challenges. So we are trying to go
where the money is.
Now, I just want to talk a little about our experience with
State pension and retiree health care obligations for State
employees, because I think it really matters in this debate.
What we have learned in this area is that there are steps that
you can take to significantly reduce the cost to taxpayers
without undermining traditional defined benefit plants, which
most objective parties agree provide better retirement
security, serve to retain quality employees, and are more
efficient than a defined contribution plan. That is what we
have learned.
How did we get there and how did we work together to get
the job done? What we did--and I was then president of the
senate with a Republican Governor and a Republican speaker--is
we brought the unions together and we understood that it was
going to be an example of shared sacrifice, and so did our
State employees, as Congressman Welch suggested.
What did we get? In those discussions, the lesson we
learned was that we get more with maple syrup than we do with
vinegar. We brought them to the table, we talked it out, and
here is the result: shared sacrifice, a 3 to 5 percent pay cut
for all State employees, depending upon your range of salary
over a 2-year period with no step increases; two, we got higher
retirement contributions from our State employees; three, we
raised retirement ages for State employees to help us with the
problem; four, we reduced health care benefits to our State
employees and some of our teachers; and, five, what this
resulted in was a 25 percent reduction in our annual payment to
pension funds and still have them fully funded.
So the point I am simply trying to make is you can get this
job done, you can balance your budget, you can create jobs in
your State without taking on the basic right of collective
bargaining. Now, the reason I feel so strongly about that is I
asked the question, Who got us into this mess and how do we
deal with it? I can tell you, from my perspective as Governor,
we just came through the toughest winter in about 20 years;
lots of snow, lots of ice. Our plow trucks were out almost
every day. We have eaten through our plowing budgets.
I have to tell you, I went out with a plow truck, as I am
sure Governor Walker has done. We get out as Governors. And
when I got behind the windshield of that plow truck in a
driving snowstorm, with my plow truck driver, who was working
seven or eight different levers with a 14-foot plow in front of
that truck and a tractor trailer truck passing him on the right
and some yahoo on the left, I have to tell you, in a full
whiteout, working a 12 to 14-hour day for about $14 an hour,
that plow truck driver didn't get us into this mess. When I go
and visit schools and I see the challenges our kids are dealing
with, they didn't get us into this mess. My public employees
didn't get us here. We have asked them to share the sacrifice
in getting us out, but it doesn't mean that we take away
collective bargaining, which is what made the middle class in
America strong and the folks that are under assault in this
recession.
So, in closing, Mr. Chair, I will simply say this: we have
found, as I mentioned, that you can bring folks together around
a table, compromise, get the job done, balance your budget,
create jobs, be fiscally responsible; but you don't have to
take on the basic principle of collective bargaining. You don't
take on your firefighters, you don't take on your police
officers, you don't take on your teachers; and you don't take
on your hardworking employees; you work together with them with
maple syrup, not vinegar. It works. Thank you.
[Applause.]
[The prepared statement of Governor Shumlin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. Thank you, Governor.
I will now recognize myself for the first round of
questions.
Governor, the sign behind me, we don't normally point to
the sign, it is just the title here today, but the last part
where it says choice or necessity, the cuts you made, in
cooperation with your various union groups of public workers,
because probably, like most States, 80 percent of what you
spend, you spend directly or indirectly on the people who work
for the government. Was it a choice, was it a necessity to in
fact find a way to provide essential services for less money
and not go into deficit spending?
Governor Shumlin. It was a necessity in the respect that
while we don't have a balance budget amendment, as Congressman
Welch suggested, we have to balance our budgets to get the job
done. So we made the choices that we do in Vermont because we
really like our AAA bond rating. I am a business person. We
want to be fiscally responsible, but we understand that we
can't take care of the most vulnerable unless we balance our
budget.
Chairman Issa. Good.
I would like to ask Governor Walker the same question. We
are rather in love with the title today, so why don't we get
that answer out?
Governor Walker. Well, I think in a rhetorical sense it
certainly is necessary. But we have seen in the past, in my
State's history, prior to us making these critical decisions
right now, for many it was a choice, and the reason they failed
to make the right choice is why we are here today, and that
includes Democrats and Republicans before. For many, many years
lawmakers and Governors in our State have failed to make the
right choice, deferred tough decisions to the future. They
raided segregated funds; they delayed payments; they used one-
time Federal stimulus aid 2 years ago to balance their budget,
and that is, along with the meltdown of the economy, largely
why we and other States, I think, are facing major budget
crises.
Chairman Issa. Thank you, Governor. One of the reasons we
titled today's hearing that way, knowing you would be here, is
I happen to be from California, and we too, in our State, under
Republicans and Democratic Governors, have been increasing debt
while claiming to have balanced the budget. And I am an old
businessman like Governor Shumlin. If your assets aren't, per
se, going up and your liabilities are going up, you don't claim
you are in balance; and that is a problem that I have seen in
many States, and particularly my own.
Governor Shumlin, you mentioned one thing in your opening
statement that was very interesting. You said a defined
benefits plan is more efficient. I would be interested to see
what efficiency do you get by having a plan which promises
something in the future that no one can be sure of? Actuarials
try, but obviously they often fail because you see these large
adjustments. What is efficient about that versus knowing that
an amount of money is going into a fund and that amount of
money will be invested fairly and, in fact, will be available
as it yields? Which one is more efficient from a standpoint of
predictability?
And I am not talking about 401Ks or individual, I am
saying, for example, trade unions in my State, if you are an
electrical contractor, you can't control a contractor that
hires you today versus tomorrow. So even though you try to be
defined benefits, you are a defined contribution plan because
you only get in the year in which you are employed as an
electrical contractor from that company that is employing you,
you only get that much money; and the next year you can't claw
back the way your employees can claw back.
So why did you say that it was efficient? The efficiency
question kind of lost me.
Governor Shumlin. Well, it is efficient for two reasons.
The first is it gives the employee a guaranteed retirement
plan. And I think there has been tremendous misunderstanding of
that around the country----
Chairman Issa. OK. And the second?
Governor Shumlin [continuing]. Which is that in Vermont, as
an example, our average pension----
Chairman Issa. No, I understand why it is more desirable
for the recipient.
Governor Shumlin. Right.
Chairman Issa. Here in the Federal Government we have a
defined benefits plan.
Governor Shumlin. Right. The efficiency from my
perspective----
Chairman Issa. Yes.
Governor Shumlin [continuing]. As Governor, is simply that
the returns for our investment, not taking a picture of it
during the worst recession, but over time--and unlike General
Motors, you don't go bankrupt, States don't go bankrupt; they
never have and I believe bankruptcy has been greatly
exaggerated----
Chairman Issa. Well, it is not within the Constitution.
Governor Shumlin. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. It gives you a choice.
Governor Shumlin. Therefore, we are held to a slightly
different standard than a General Motors retirement plan, the
point being the average return for us has been around 8\1/2\
percent, and it gives us the ability to efficiently deliver a
predictable defined benefit for an employee who is often
working for less than you would get paid for their lifetime----
Chairman Issa. OK, I think I have your answer. I would like
to get Governor Walker, along that line, why is that more
efficient than knowing the amount that you give in a given year
under the budget is the amount, and even if you invest it and
you try to make the same returns, ultimately the State knows
that the next year they are going to give a similar percentage?
And like I say, the Federal Government has defined benefits,
but why is that more efficient versus perhaps making sure that
you budget without these ups and downs that come when the yield
doesn't occur?
Governor Walker. Well, I think when you look at benefits,
be they in the public or the private sector, defined
contribution is ultimately more efficient. That is not what I
am advocating. In our case, just like you mentioned with the
Federal Government, just like Vermont, we have a defined
benefit as well, particularly for retirement with a pension.
Although I think it is important to note what we are asking for
is not changing the benefit itself; we are asking for people,
again, myself included, to pay more as a contribution for the
cost of that.
Representative Quigley talked in his opening statements
about the State of Illinois. I think that is an important
distinction. In Illinois, earlier this year, Governor Quinn and
the legislature raised taxes on individuals and on businesses
in a supposed attempt to balance their budget. Yet, today they
have a pension system that is half funded.
We went the opposite way; we lowered the tax burden on job
creators, we made it easier to do business in the State, we
show that Wisconsin is open for business, and we have a pension
system that is essentially fully funded. That is important
because you get to the heart of this, that is why Illinois is
in that category of California and others, because they failed
to make the tough decisions to get their finances under
control, and that is going to affect their economy.
Chairman Issa. Thank you, Governor. As I recognize the
ranking member, I just want to make one thing clear for the
record. The Federal Government currently, for regular Federal
workers, 28 percent of what goes into our health care benefits
are paid for by the Federal worker. In the case of the Post
Office, it has historically been 20 percent, but one of the
major unions has renegotiated it to 25 percent. That is what is
happening here centrally in Washington.
I recognize the ranking member.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
You know, the thing that I think stands out here is the
fact that, and I say this to both Governors, that sometimes we
may lose sight of and that is that, just like the postal
workers, we had them before us a few days ago, they were able
to shed 100,000 employees out of 700,000 in 3 years, and one of
the things that they said is that they are Americans too, and
they don't mind sacrificing.
And speaking of sacrificing, Governor Walker, when I
listened to your testimony, you made it sound as if you had
made very reasonable offers to the unions, but that they have
been unreasonable by rejecting your offers. For example, you
asked employees to contribute 5.8 percent for pension and 12.6
percent for health insurance premiums. You went on to say that
most workers outside of government would love our proposal. You
talked about your brothers and, like many other workers in our
State, he would love a deal like the one I offered the
government workers.
The thing that I did not hear, though, was that the unions
agreed to double their share of the health insurance premiums
and to increase their contributions to the pension system. That
is not true? Well, what did they do? I want to hear what you
have to say because I am reading an article from your local
paper and I am just wondering what----
Governor Walker. Sure. I will answer the question,
Representative. Two of the statewide union leaders made a
statement a week into the debate about suggesting that they
thought they could accept that. In the weeks that followed, up
until the bill was signed into law, nearly every local union
that settled the contract settled it without a pension or a
health care contribution. To me, actions speak louder than
words. Those two statewide leaders could not speak for the
unions and nearly 1,000 municipalities, 424 school districts
and 72 counties. They are the ones who decide at the local
level, and up until the bill was signed into law, they were not
following the actions of their leaders. To me, actions spoke
louder than words.
The other key difference here is we got into this trouble,
and I acknowledge both parties in our State, Republicans and
Democrats drove us into this by failing to make tough
decisions. If we have a short-term fix, we just push the
problem off to the future. What we give our permanent, long-
term solutions the tools that State and local governments need,
they can only get it if you make those sorts of changes. And in
terms of workplace protections, Wisconsin has the strongest
civil service protections in the country. That was passed more
than a century ago. Those remain even with this new law in
place. That protects grievances, that protects civil service
protections in both hiring and firing decisions. All those
protections remain even after these changes, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Well, I am looking at an article from the
Wisconsin Journal's Sentinel. I guess that is the local paper?
Governor Walker. One of them.
Mr. Cummings. In this article, Democrat State Senator Jon
Erpenbach makes crystal clear that all the State and local
public employees, including teachers, have agreed to the
financial aspects of your proposal, and all they were asking
for is that you not strip them of their collective bargaining
rights. That is not accurate?
Governor Walker. Again, that was the statement made by the
statewide leaders. The actions they took after those
statements, though, contradict those statements. If they agreed
to the 5 and the 12, you would have seen in Janesville and La
Crosse and all the other communities that settled contracts
that they would have put their money where their mouth is and
actually did that. That did not happen until after the bill was
signed into law. So I think you are right about the story
accurately explains what was proposed at the time, but in terms
of what they actually did, their actions did not coincide with
the statements of their statewide union leaders.
Mr. Cummings. Did you ever consider dropping your
collective bargaining demands? Did you ever consider that?
Governor Walker. For us, to me, I was a county elected
official for 8 years. We talk about shared sacrifice? Because
my county faced a crisis, I gave, over those 8 years, $370,000
of my personal salary back. I made a personal sacrifice, just
like I am going to pay for more for pension and more for health
care as Governor of the State of Wisconsin. During that time I
repeatedly met with my unions and asked them to make modest
changes, modest changes in pension and health care
contributions. In fact, 1 year I even asked them to consider a
couple 35-hour work weeks in order to avoid massive layoffs,
and every time the response I got from AFSCME was go ahead, lay
four or 500 people off, we don't care. To me, that is why, when
I talk about protecting the middle class, I am not just talking
about middle-class taxpayers outside of government. Those
middle-class workers that would have been laid off are people I
represent as well, just like I do in the State of Wisconsin.
If I have to choose between massive layoffs or making these
sorts of reforms, I would much rather stand on the side of
protecting those middle-class jobs and protecting middle-class
taxpayers, because, remember, the vast majority of people in
the middle class in my State and across the country have been
paying the bill for the expansive government year after year
after year, and, to me, those are the people I am standing up
to protect.
So you will never hear me speak an ill word throughout this
entire debate, no matter what others may say out there, I have
never said an ill word of any of the decent public servants who
work, the 300,000 decent people in my State who work for both
State and local government. I have great respect for them. I
just know that in this together we have to make changes to make
sure their jobs are protected into the future.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the chairman of the subcommittee,
Mr. McHenry, for his round of questioning.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Governor Walker, I certainly appreciate your testimony.
Governor Shumlin, thank you so much as well.
There is this discussion of tough choices. Now, when we are
looking at what the government does, there are services that
municipalities and States render to their people as a matter of
collection of their tax revenue, whether it is local
governments providing police and protection through the police
or making sure that if somebody's house is on fire, you have a
fireman show up. So there are tough choices between the
services that the government provides and the obligations it
has.
So, Governor Walker, can you discuss this challenge for a
Governor who walks into a very tough budget situation, the
challenge between do you continue to provide these services
people expect, taxpayers expect, or do you continue providing a
benefit for a select few, meaning you have a pension
obligation, you have health care benefits and these types of
things that the people that are getting the benefit are largely
not paying to receive, and then you have the taxpayers who are
footing the bill for that? Can you discuss that challenge?
Governor Walker. Sure. Again, I will tell you not only as a
Governor for the last couple months, for as a county official
for 8 years prior to that, for us, we saw the distinction. We
saw the challenge when, under the environment before we passed
this bill into law, for local governments in particular, we
were forced with the sacrifice like I faced or the problem we
faced where, when we had a tough budget time, and we had it
long before 2008 because of the pension scandal I inherited
back in 2002, so we were dealing with this ahead of the curve
even before the economic meltdown. When we tried to make, as I
mentioned before, I think, some very reasonable changes when it
came to what us, as government employees, paid for things like
pension and health care, even some other adjustments
temporarily as part of the work week, we did that for two
reasons: one, to try and protect as many jobs as possible and,
two, in turn, because those jobs provide services, to try and
protect core services for the people we serve. That is
essentially the impetus for me when I looked at the budget
crisis we were facing going into the next 2 year cycle of $3.6
billion. I knew we had to make a fundamental change if we
weren't going to go on the path that many other Governors
across the country are, Democrat and Republican alike, where
they are cutting billions of dollars from schools, from
university systems, from local governments and other areas that
affect all the things you mentioned.
And instead they are saying, OK, there are the cuts, now
you either make it up through massive layoffs or you make it up
through massive property tax increases. I said in my State I
can't afford to have anybody, either in the public or the
private sector, any more massive layoffs; I need more people
working. We are changing the business climate. In fact, many of
the issues Republican and Democrats alike, we brought together
to pass legislation that made us one of the most proactive,
pro-job agendas in the country. We had to do all that if we
want to protect jobs.
By the same token, we know one of the other things that
would cut down that recovery would be a massive tax increase.
We saw it 2 years ago when my predecessor raised taxes on
corporations and on individuals; we saw the jobs leave, we saw
the exodus. We want those people to come back.
Mr. McHenry. And I understand competitiveness, especially
in the Midwest, in terms of job creation, so there is
competition on tax rates, obviously, right?
Governor Walker. Absolutely. We love the fact that while
our corporate tax rate is 7.9 percent, the effective tax rate
in Illinois is now 9\1/2\ percent. We love that distinction
because we want more people to come up to Wisconsin.
Mr. McHenry. Well, thank you. The other question I have is
as opposed to a private sector pension, where those that are
receiving the pension benefit are the ones that are affected by
the changes, they are the only ones really affected, the
difference with that and public sector pensions is that we, as
taxpayers, have to foot that bill. So it is not simply a lie
perpetrated to the recipient of the pension, saying perhaps too
rosy a scenario on return on investment or underfunding these
pensions, so on and so forth, it is also a lie to those
taxpayers that have to foot the bill for those underfunded
pensions or less than funded pensions.
So my question to you, Governor Walker, is do you believe
that there is sufficient transparency and disclosure with
public sector pensions today?
Governor Walker. Oh, I think at both the State and local
level, as well, there needs to be more transparency. One of the
things we are the most proud about this budget is not only that
we balanced the $3.6 billion deficit, but the fact that 2 years
ago we had the largest structural deficit in State history. In
my budget I present at the beginning of March to the State
legislature, we reduced the structural deficit by more than $2
billion, a 90 percent reduction. It is where Moody's pointed
out that they called it credit positive. When is the last time
you heard anything called credit positive related to a
government budget? They called it credit positive because we
finally took control of what we should have been doing for
years, and weren't from both political parties. That is
incredibly positive. But the more people know about it, right
now, actuaries and a lot of others pay attention to pensions
and retirement systems. All of us should be because that is
just deferring, in many cases it has been about deferring the
problem to the next generation. We can't do that anymore.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. I know my time has expired, but
certainly those that are arguing now about public sector
pensions, you have those that are saying these pensions are
underfunded and it is bad, those are the optimists. Those that
look at the pension system and say this is a calamity are the
other side of the coin. No one is saying that public sector
pensions are too well funded or even sufficiently funded. So
thank you for your----
Governor Walker. Well, and the one thing important to
remember, I mentioned the Illinois-Wisconsin distinction, not
only do they half fund it, but you have the speaker of the
general assembly, a Democrat, a long-time union ally, spoke a
month ago about the possibility of reducing the pension benefit
itself. That is what happens when you don't take these issues
seriously. That is not a Republican or Democrat issue; this is
someone who has been a stalwart defender of unions who is now
talking about, in Illinois the prospect of reducing the
benefit. That, to me, would be unacceptable. We made a promise
to our public servants about what the retirement benefits were
going to be. We should protect that no matter what party we are
in; we just have to fix it in the way in.
Chairman Issa. Thank you, Governor.
We now recognize the former chairman of the full committee,
Mr. Towns, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Governor Walker, why do people in general, I have talked to
people from your State, people just around the Nation, feel
that your focus is on helping the corporations and basically
the wealthy at the expense of the middle class and the poor?
Why would they have that perception of you?
Governor Walker. It would be erroneous. Maybe it is because
they are watching some of the TV ads that groups from
Washington played in the State of Wisconsin, because what we
have done in the first month, first 2 months almost, Democrats
voted for many of the measures we pushed through that create a
better business environment in our State. Even the tax cuts we
put in place were things like removing the State tax and health
savings accounts, which isn't about corporations; it is about
small businesses, it is about family farmers, it is about sole
proprietorships. The incentives we put in for job creation were
targeted specifically for jobs. So it is ultimately about the
workers when a job is created and there is an incentive to do
that.
The other things we did in our legislative package were all
things that were about making it easier to do business in the
State of Wisconsin. And in our budget the things that we are
doing are about protecting jobs and protecting the middle
class.
Mr. Towns. When you say make it easy, what do you mean by
that, giving tax breaks to the big businesses?
Governor Walker. No, we don't give tax breaks to big
business. What we do is something that is targeted for small
business and big alike. We have a specific job tax credit that
if you create a job, there is a tax incentive in there, but it
is tied specifically to job creation. So the person who
benefits the most is the recipient of that job. If there is not
a job there, they don't get a tax break.
Mr. Towns. What is the unemployment rate in Wisconsin?
Governor Walker. We have a 7.4 percent unemployment rate.
Still too high; obviously less than the national average. First
2 months of this year we have had about 13,000 jobs created in
the private sector, about 8,200 new jobs in manufacturing, and
next week we will put out our new job numbers and I think we
are going to be well on the right path.
Mr. Towns. Did you have to lay off municipal workers or
government employees in order to put your budget in place and
to get the 13,000 that was increased? I am trying to get the
real balance.
Governor Walker. No, no, you are right. In our case, in
putting this budget together, we actually avoided it. For the
remainder of fiscal year 2011, the deficit of the budget put
together by my predecessor, Jim Doyle, we had to make up about
$137 million. We knew, to set the stage for the $3.6 billion
deficit, we had to balance for the next 2-year budget we had to
do a series of things. We made some other changes, some other
reforms. So what we are talking about here today was one part
of it; it saves about $1.7 billion over the next 2 years for
both State and local government, but for State government the
impact through the final couple months, through June 30th,
which is the end of our fiscal year, was a $30 million savings.
By getting that savings, we avoid having to lay off
approximately 1,500 State workers. So we avoided layoffs that
way.
Mr. Towns. Did you ever think about using maple syrup?
Governor Walker. Well, I have some now. It is pretty good.
It is not as good as the cranberry juice we make in Wisconsin,
but it is pretty good.
Mr. Towns. Rather than using the vinegar.
Governor Walker. Well, I have tried. As a county executive
I tried for 8 years, and the unions basically told me lay off
people, and to me that is just unacceptable. If you are truly
for the workers, to me, in this economy, the last thing I want
to do is see people laid off. And this was a much, much better
approach.
Mr. Towns. Governor Shumlin, how did you get people to have
a different attitude? I just don't quite understand why people
in Wisconsin would think that way when Wisconsin is just like a
lot of other States in this Nation.
Governor Shumlin. Well, thank you, Congressman Towns. I am
sitting here listening to Governor Walker and I am sitting here
realizing we all have similar challenges as Governors. Unlike
Congress, we all have to balance our budgets. So the real
question is what are we arguing about? And my point is if you
want to go after collective bargaining, which I believe helped
build this country, helped build the middle class that has been
under assault in this recession, just come out and say it, I am
going to go after collective bargaining. But if you want to
balance your budget, you bring people in, you talk to them, you
have a dialog.
I can guarantee you this, what Vermonters are looking for
and what they expect is the same thing that they expect in
Wisconsin and the same thing they wish for and expect in
America: they want reasonableness, they want compromise, they
want bright people working together to solve problems. And when
you use vinegar, when you refuse to meet with unions, when you
don't sit down and talk with them, when you take on an outright
assault on a basic principle in a Democratic society, which is
collective bargaining, the thing that my grandfather, when he
got off the boat, and others now rely on and relied on to make
a decent living, to come from a beet farmer to success in
America, the thing that built our country, well, that is a
different debate.
So I think really what we are talking about, because I sit
and listen to Governor Walker talk about how he is approaching
his challenges, all we Governors are doing the same things
here, folks. The question is are you going to bring people
together to solve problems or are you going to go after an
assault on a basic principle in America, which is collective
bargaining. I think we are trying to do two different things.
If you want to go after collective bargaining, just come out
and say, hey, we are taking you on. But don't try and blame the
worst recession in American history on the need to go after
public pensions.
I am listening to the question over here. You know, let's
be honest about this. Taxpayers have always paid for a part of
public pension retirement plans. This isn't something new,
folks. This started with pensions, with asking public employees
to give up economic opportunities that they might have if they
did what I did and went into public sector and built a business
and made a lot of money. In exchange for getting a lower wage,
in exchange for less economic opportunity, they get a
guaranteed $25,000, $22,000, on average, retirement once they
are all done.
Now, it is not new news that taxpayers pay a portion of
that and that employees pay the other portion. What is new is
that in my State and Governor Walker's State we are asking the
employees to pay more than they did before.
Chairman Issa. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Towns. Let me just say this, Mr. Chairman, in closing.
Governor, keep using maple syrup.
Governor Shumlin. We are going to try.
Mr. Towns. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. The gentleman from Utah, Mr. Chaffetz, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
Governor Shumlin, I would like to talk to you, if I could,
about the pension plan in your State. I come from Utah. We
have, I think, two things that have served us well. One is in
our State constitution we have a balance budget amendment that
has forced the issue to actually balance budget. No. 2, we have
a defined contribution plan, as opposed to a defined benefit
plan, and, consequently, our State has one of the lowest tax
rates, business is thriving, and we have hundreds of millions
of dollars in our rainy day fund.
Now, I went back and looked at the Pew study on Vermont and
you actually are doing better than most States, funded about 92
percent. But explain to me. You had made a comment to the
chairman here about the predictability of the pension program,
and I want to talk about the health of that program, because I
can't imagine that a defined contribution plan is not superior
to a defined benefit plan because how do you account for that?
Governor Shumlin. Well, all I can tell you is that it
served my and other States well that have used defined benefit
plans, and that we have had over time----
Mr. Chaffetz. But the healthy over the course of time--if
somebody told me they thought they were going to get an 8 to
8\1/2\ percent return, I said they are probably smoking those
maple leaves. I can't imagine that you are getting 8 to 8\1/2\
percent return on that investment. Nobody is getting that kind
of return right now.
Governor Shumlin. If you look at the averages for State
pensions across the history of defined benefit plans, you will
find that we get about an 8 percent return, on average. And
obviously there are good years and bad years, but unlike
General Motors, since we are not going bankrupt, you have to
look at the averages, and that is what we have gotten. That is
why Wall Street, when you----
Mr. Chaffetz. But do you think you are going to get that
going forward?
Governor Shumlin. May I just finish, Congressman?
Mr. Chaffetz. Yes, but going forward do you think you are
going to get that?
Governor Shumlin. We do. And that is why Moody's and the
other bonding agencies allow us to assume that rate of return
on our investments. We are not sort of making this up as
Governors; that is what Wall Street requires us to do. It is
based on history.
The second point that I think is really important, if you
are a Governor, you have to deal with the real world, and the
real world is if you were to move from a defined benefit to a
defined contribution plan, hypothetically, it would cost you a
ton of money in the first 10 to 15 years for the reason that
the current employees help to support the pension obligations
of the States in a defined benefit plan. If you pull the new
ones out, you immediately have a higher up-front cost than you
would otherwise because you have to support your existing
defined benefit as you move to a defined contribution. So there
are a lot of reasons why we Governors are not thrilled at the
idea, and you are hearing this from Republicans and Democrats,
this notion that if you just moved to a defined contribution,
all our problems are going to be solved isn't in the real world
for us Governors.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentleman yield, very quickly?
Mr. Chaffetz. Yes.
Chairman Issa. Governor, if you are fully funded, that is
not true. If you are fully funded, you would be able to stop
putting money in the moment you make the switch, because if you
are fully funded, your 8\1/2\ percent would pay out all your
benefits. So you can't have it both ways.
Governor Shumlin. We are adequately funded.
Chairman Issa. Well, OK. As long as we understand that
adequately is kicking the can down the road so that studies
show that if you only got the rate of return of the Treasury,
you would run out in 2023 with the current situation. You
depend on a high return that you cannot bank on in your own
statement.
I yield back.
Governor Shumlin. Well, if I can just finish. If I can
answer that, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Issa. It is the gentleman's time.
Mr. Chaffetz. Go ahead.
Governor Shumlin. If I can answer that, we don't make this
stuff up as Governors. Both Governor Walker and I travel down
to Wall Street to try and convince them that we are running
sound economic States, that our bond rating depends on our
economic future. We manage our retirement funds based upon the
expectations of Wall Street. Now, Vermont is obviously doing
that right since we have a AAA bond rating. One reason is that
we use the actuarial projections that Wall Street gives us,
which are higher than a Treasury return. And I am just telling
you that if you really study this issue, you will find that
Vermont is not doing anything radical here, we are doing what
Wall Street expects us to do, and it is a higher return than
the yield you would get on a Treasury yield, much higher.
Mr. Chaffetz. Governor, Chairman, as I conclude here, I
don't want to go over my time, I really do think that a
flashing red light for investors for this country, for the
Congress, because we fully anticipate that States will try to
be running back to the Congress to get--we can't even fund
ourselves. We can't even manage our books here. I don't want
the States to ever think the can come to the Federal Government
to get a bailout. I think the States that have not made that
difficult choice and made the difficult transition to a defined
contribution plan are putting themselves in peril and at great
risk. That is our experience in Utah. We made that difficult
choice. It is on a more sound trajectory, and I think you will
find that States who did make that effort and made that
transition will be much more sound financially. That is my
perspective of it. But I think it is going to be one of the big
issues moving forward, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the former mayor of Cleveland, Ohio,
Dennis Kucinich, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Governor Walker, you said the union leaders agreed to the
financial cuts, but then you blamed the local unions for not
following through on these pledges. That is because you refused
to drop your demand to strip workers of collective bargaining
rights that had nothing to do with the budget, and refused to
negotiate and rejected the unions' offer. Now, Governor Walker,
if the unions in Wisconsin agreed to the financial cuts you
sought, I don't understand how this can't continue to be
characterized as a debate about State budget deficits. This is
supposed to be a hearing about State and municipal debt. I
don't understand how repealing collective bargaining rights for
public workers shows us anything about State debt.
Let me ask you about some of the specific provisions in
your proposal to strip collective bargaining rights. First,
your proposal would require unions to hold annual votes to
continue representing their own members. Can you please explain
to me and members of this committee how much money this
provision saves for your State budget?
Governor Walker. That and a number of other provisions we
put in, because if you are going to put in place a change like
that, we wanted to make sure that we protected the workers of
our State so that they had the right to know what kind of value
they got out of it. It is the same reason we gave workers the
right to choose, which is a fundamental American right, right
to choose whether or not they want to be a part of a union----
Mr. Kucinich. Could you answer the question?
Governor Walker [continuing]. And whether or not they went
up to $1,000----
Mr. Kucinich. How much money does it save, Governor? Just
answer the question.
Governor Walker. It doesn't save any.
Mr. Kucinich. OK.
Governor Walker. In the same way that you----
Mr. Kucinich. That is the point.
Governor Walker. If you read the Federal budget----
Mr. Kucinich. It obviously has no effect whatsoever.
Governor Walker. I will answer your question.
Mr. Kucinich. I am reclaiming my time. It obviously had no
effect whatsoever on the State budget.
I want to ask about another one of your proposals. Under
your plan you would prohibit employees from paying union member
dues from their paychecks. How much money would this provision
save your State budget?
Governor Walker. It would save employees up to $1,000 per
year they could use to pay for their pension and their health
care contributions.
Mr. Kucinich. Governor, it wouldn't save anything, or a
minor administrative cost, if any. It is obvious what the real
intent is here, and I will back it up.
Governor Walker. It is to give workers a right. It is to
give workers the right to choose.
Mr. Kucinich. I will back it up.
Mr. Chairman, right here from the State of Wisconsin's
Legislative Fiscal Bureau, this is a nonpartisan State budget
agency much like the Congressional Budget Office, the Bureau
was asked to identify provisions in the Governor's bill that
are nonfiscal, nonfiscal policy items that have no State fiscal
effect. This letter confirms the obvious, that Governor
Walker's effort to repeal the rights of State workers is a
nonfiscal, nonfiscal policy item; no effect on the State budget
shortfall.
I ask unanimous consent that this letter be included in the
record.
Chairman Issa. Reserving the right, we will inspect it and
plan to include it in the record.
Mr. Kucinich. That is unusual you would reserve the right
to object.
Chairman Issa. The gentleman----
Mr. Kucinich. I am claiming my time.
Chairman Issa. The gentleman will suspend. Hold the time.
We fully expect to include it in the record. Because it is not
a publication that is widely distributed, we simply would like
to receive it, and as soon as it has been quickly vetted during
this hearing, it will be accepted. That is a consistent policy
from both sides.
Mr. Kucinich. I would like to respond.
Chairman Issa. Yes.
Mr. Kucinich. In the 14 years that I have been on this
committee, I have never had a chairman reserve the right to
object to putting an official document in the record that was
central to the purpose of this hearing, determining whether or
not you stripping collective bargaining rights, Governor, is a
financial issue or not. It is not; it is a political issue.
That is what I am proving.
Chairman Issa. The gentleman is incorrect. Chairman Waxman
did it repeatedly. In most cases, just as here, by the end of
the hearing, items which were not part of widely distributed
documents were accepted. I expect to do the same and I would
work with the gentleman to get it done before the end of the
hearing.
The gentleman may continue.
Mr. Kucinich. Well, I just made it a matter of public
record anyway.
The title of this hearing is choice or necessity. I think
that what we have been able to demonstrate here is that the
attack on collective bargaining rights is a choice, not a
budget issue. There are budget issues as well that need to be
addressed in Wisconsin. For example, according to the National
Nurses United in U.S. States facing a budget shortfall,
revenues from corporate taxes have declined $2\1/2\ billion in
the last year. In Wisconsin, two-thirds of corporations pay no
taxes and the share of State revenue from corporate taxes has
fallen by half since 1981. That is published in The Nation by
John Nichols. I won't ask to submit it by unanimous consent.
Also, in The Real News Network, they have a report here that
points out that the budget shortfall of $137 million in
Wisconsin could have been covered if the State had just kept
going its State legislated an estate tax, which they let expire
after 2008. Also points out that if they had gone to collect
the estate taxes from their wealthiest citizens, they could
have paid down the debt.
Now, I just want to say, in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, that
we really are here at the center of a great debate over the
purpose of government. Whether there is such a thing as a
public sphere with public servants who perform duties on behalf
of the public, using resources that belong to the public, or is
government going to be auctioned off to the highest bidder, to
corporations who privatize and, inevitably, drive up the cost
of government, drive up the cost of services, drive up taxes.
That is where this debate is headed nationally. I think that
Governor Walker has inadvertently done a public service by
exposing the extent to which this mind-set of privatizing what
is the public sphere, bringing this issue to the forefront.
So thank you for being here, both Governors.
Chairman Issa. I guess that is a thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma----
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa [continuing]. Mr. Lankford, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, both Governors, for taking away your time to
be able to be here with us.
Governor Shumlin, I want to be able to do a point of
clarification. You began your oral statement talking about how
you didn't want to balance the budget based on the backs of
those great employees, and I do concur, we have some terrific
Federal employees as well, but the employees as well by dealing
with benefits; you wanted to go after the real crucial issues.
But then you ended your statement by saying but in the previous
Governor's time, they did deal with payment pensions,
retirements, all those things. So while you are not starting
your time, you did say but we have just dealt with that few
months ago, is that correct?
Governor Shumlin. It has been an ongoing effort. Both the
previous Governor, Republican Governor--don't forget, I was
president of the senate----
Mr. Lankford. Correct.
Governor Shumlin [continuing]. So I actually helped
negotiate the----
Mr. Lankford. Correct.
Governor Shumlin [continuing]. With the speaker, the
agreement with the teachers union.
Mr. Lankford. I was just trying to provide some
clarification because you were talking about you didn't want to
do that on the backs of workers at this point. You sought
corrections and you saw health care as a major issue, but you
just dealt with some of the retirement issues recently as well.
Governor Shumlin. I don't mean to suggest that we did not
ask our State employees to make sacrifices, we did and they
did.
Mr. Lankford. Great.
Governor Shumlin. All I am suggesting is that we did it by
bringing them to the table.
Mr. Lankford. Sure. OK. So it is just the method on that
side in the cooperation that the others had with all the
leadership as well. Obviously, it takes two to tango on that
one, as well people to be able to come together.
Let me ask you a quick question. Do you think the Federal
Government should be involved in bailing out States when they
have debt issues? Is there a point in time that you say this
State is so far in debt and so far out of balance the Federal
Government should step in and bail them out?
Governor Shumlin. That is a question I am going to leave to
you. That is why I never want to run for Congress.
Mr. Lankford. Actually, that is a question I am asking you
because, as a Governor, you obviously represent the intents of
a State.
Governor Shumlin. I will answer it this way. I don't think
you are going to have to. And I think that the case for the
bankruptcy of States is greatly exaggerated for political
reasons. When I go to Wall Street and I say, hey, as I did a
few weeks ago, we are in pretty good shape in Vermont,
Wisconsin is in pretty good shape, tell us about some of the
States we are really worried about, California, New York,
Illinois, and others, and they say, this is Wall Street speak
and the rating agencies, we think that the case is being
exploited for political reasons; that there are not States that
need to go bankrupt.
Mr. Lankford. Right.
Governor Shumlin. That we are going to see our way through
this and that the case for pension crisis is being overstated
by Washington.
Mr. Lankford. OK.
Let me ask the same question to Governor Walker. Do you
think the Federal Government should bail out individual States?
Governor Walker. No.
Mr. Lankford. Let me ask a followup question to both of
you, as we have time, and that is are there things we are doing
as a Federal Government that drives up your cost as a State?
What I am looking for and what my committee has been dealing a
lot with are unfunded mandates, things that say I would like to
get my budget under control, these things I can manage, these
things I cannot because the Federal Government has these set of
requirements. Are there things we are doing to cause you more
debt and more problems in spending?
Governor Walker. I see I have 2 minutes. There is no way I
can answer that question in 2 minutes----
Mr. Lankford. I will allow your staff to submit all you can
for the record on that.
Governor Walker. No. 1 thing you could give us, block grant
Medicaid.
Mr. Lankford. OK.
Governor Walker. If you give us a block grant for Medicaid,
that is--I had to put $1.2 billion more of general purpose
revenue, that is State aid, State funding, into this next
budget even though I had to cut everywhere else. It is the
biggest part of my budget growing; it is the biggest challenge
out there. We have maintenance of efforts that require us to
maintain things by the Federal Government when we have other
things that would work better to manage those costs. We need to
get to a point--we have led the country, places like Gunnerson,
Luther have been ahead of the curve when it comes to the idea
and concept of medical homes, paying for performance, paying
for outcome, not paying for procedure. If we had that option, I
think any of us----
Mr. Lankford. Now, you are aware that--I am also on the
Budget Committee--when we brought up that idea, we have been
told that the Governors will certainly kick people out of
nursing homes and they were ruthless to their populations, and
you can't be trusted with any of these funds.
Governor Walker. Well, that argument was made back in the
1990's when my good friend, Tommy Thompson, was Governor and he
pushed welfare reform. Bill Clinton ultimately embraced that
welfare reform and, in the end, States were given block grants.
All those same sorts of charges were made back then and,
instead, we had some of the most successful welfare reform
during that generation. We can do the same thing now.
Mr. Lankford. Governor Shumlin, are there areas that we are
doing as a Federal Government that is causing you pain as far
as on the financial side?
Governor Shumlin. Yes. And just in terms of Governor
Walker's response, we are all concerned about health care
costs, Medicaid and Medicare. The only thing I would caveat
with is just a block grant makes me nervous because as our
populations grow older, which is happening in all of our
States, as costs and utilization goes up, I don't want it to be
an excuse for the Federal Government to get out of its
obligation on sharing cost and saying, hey, we are giving you a
block grant, you are on your own, if utilization goes up, it is
your problem. So how that flexibility gets translated is really
important to us; the details matter.
Second, another big driver for us is education costs and No
Child Left Behind, and there is no question that those mandates
are driving education expenses in our public schools, requiring
us to teach to a test, and requiring extraordinary paperwork of
teachers, when they could be teaching.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you very much.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Braley.
Mr. Braley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My name is Bruce Braley, and I am proud to be a public
employee. In fact, Governor Walker, when you were a 6-year-old
growing up in my district in Plainfield, Iowa, I got my first
job as a public employee with the Powesheik County Conservation
Board, and I learned how to clean toilets and I learned how to
mop floors and scrape gum off the bottom of school desks, and I
also worked out in the blazing sun building bridges on farm-to-
market roads, driving an ax into spikes into creosote-treated
lumber; and 1 day on the job my left hand caught on fire. So I
know a little bit about what public employees do.
You mentioned the TV ads that groups from Washington ran
against you, and yet you, yourself, had a large amount of
support from secret donor groups like the ones that attacked me
in my campaign. Are you willing to go on the record here today
and denounce the influence of outside secret money in political
campaign ads?
Governor Walker. I thought the purpose of today was to talk
about debt and----
Mr. Braley. Well, let's talk about that. You ran campaign
ads on the principle of good government, and I thought that is
what we were here to talk about today. In fact, you ran a
campaign ad called Real Leadership, and when the campaign ad
ran, it says your focus was bringing people together to solve
problems. Do you remember that ad?
Governor Walker. Yes. And I would argue if you want me to--
you asked me a question and I say I remember it, and that is
exactly what I did----
Mr. Braley. OK, you have answered the question.
Governor Walker. In my first month and a half, when
Democrats and Republicans came together to push economic
development----
Mr. Braley. Excuse me. This is my time, Governor.
Governor Walker. Well, you asked me a question.
Mr. Braley. You answered my question. I asked you if you
remembered it.
Governor Walker. If you want to do a political stunt, go
ahead.
Mr. Braley. I am not doing a political stunt. I think if
Dr. Phil were here, he would say how is that working for you?
You also ran an ad called Yes, We Can, and you said working
together we can put government back on the side of the people
again. You also ran an ad called Make it Right, talking about
scandal benefiting politicians. You ran all those campaign ads.
Well, this is your chance to make it right. Are you ready
to apologize to the people of Wisconsin for hiring the 27-year-
old son of one of your major campaign donors, who is a
lobbyist, and that individual had no college education, very
little managerial experience, and had two drunk driving
convictions and was hired for an $81,000 a year job, when you
obviously had better qualified applicants? Are you ready to
make an apology today to the people of Wisconsin? That doesn't
sound like good government to me.
Chairman Issa. The Chair will ask the gentleman to suspend.
Please turn off the clock.
The Chair would remind all participants, although Members
here at the dais have a right to speak for 5 minutes and say
anything they want and we will consider it germane, our
witnesses are only asked to respond to items which they came
here prepared to respond to that are consistent with the
subject of the hearing. So it is for the witness to decide
whether a question is germane, while in fact Members here have
an almost unlimited right to say what they want to say during
their 5 minutes.
The gentleman may continue.
Governor Walker. When I grew up in Plainfield, at least for
the years I lived there, and Chuck Grassley was our State
assemblyman back then, there were good, decent people, many of
whom were farmers, many of whom were deacons at my father's
church, who recognized when times were tough, you had to make
tough decisions, particularly when times were tough in the
finances of the church, and that is exactly what we are doing.
You may not want to talk about that, you may want to talk about
anything, and I will answer your question about the 27-year-
old.
Mr. Braley. I would be interested in your answer because
that is the question the people of Wisconsin want to hear
today.
Governor Walker. Well, I am glad you are interested in the
people of Wisconsin----
Mr. Braley. I am.
Governor Walker [continuing]. Because that person was five
levels below me. When that hiring was brought to my attention,
I and my staff go back and have that person taken out of that
position, and I acknowledged the fact that there were more
qualified people and I asked someone else to be put into that.
So that is the answer to your question.
Mr. Braley. Well----
Governor Walker. Now, would you look at----
Mr. Braley. I am reclaiming my time.
Governor Walker. Well, if you don't want to hear the truth,
then keep it up.
Mr. Braley. The Milwaukee Journal, Mr. Chairman, has
written an article about this and noted that two of the highly
qualified candidates for that administrative post were Oscar
Herrera, a former State cabinet secretary under Republican
Governor Scott McCallum, who had a doctoral degree and 8 years
of experience overseeing the cleanup of petroleum-contaminated
sites. The second, Bernice Madison, was a professional engineer
who served since 2003 in the post to which Mr. Duchenne was
appointed and had 25 years of experience in State government.
And since the whole focus of this hearing is on good
government practices and how that affects the debt that States
have, I think it is time that we got some straight answers from
the people who are radically reforming State governments, and
that is why this is so important. And I would ask the chairman
to hold a hearing, and I have a letter for the chairman, since
we have broad jurisdiction, according to the committee's Web
site, to look into the other factors that are impacting State
budgets, including cronyism in State government. And I have a
letter to the chairman to that effect. I ask unanimous consent
for the article from the Dubuque Telegraph Herald titled,
Walker Insults Young Worker With Cronyism, published on April
11, 2011, to be made a part of the record. And I yield back.
Chairman Issa. Without objection. The gentleman yields
back.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Florida, Mr. Ross, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Governors, thank you both for being here. This is very
insightful for me, especially in my home State of Florida,
where we are also going through some of the similar exercises
that you all have gone through. It is interesting because when
we look back at the history of collective bargaining,
especially with public sector unions, it was Franklin Delano
Roosevelt and both President John F. Kennedy who did not feel
that there should be collective bargaining or there should be
public sector unions. So being here today on this issue I think
shows the evolution of this and why it is such a crucial issue,
especially in light of the debt and deficits that each State in
this country is facing.
The Federal Government and the Office of Personnel
Management has published consecutively for years, up until
2008, a study of the amount of time that was spent by union
employees on official time. The last time this was published
was in 2008, and it shows that Federal Government union
employees spent 3 million hours of official time to engage in
union-related activities. This was a cost to the Federal
taxpayers of about $120 million in 2008. Unfortunately, upon
repeated requests by several Congressmen and the Competitive
Enterprises Institute under this President, we have not
received a response from that.
In your respective States, and I will start with you,
Governor Walker, do you keep track of any official or union
business done on official time?
Governor Walker. I wouldn't have the numbers off the top of
my head, but I know both at the State level and we see the same
thing at the local level. We certainly saw that when I was the
Milwaukee County executive. And it is an interesting cycle
because taxpayers in many cases are paying taxpayers' money
which not only goes to workers, but in many cases then goes to
government employee unions, who then use that money for
political purposes, when then elect candidates who then
advocate for more government and higher taxes on the middle
class. It is a vicious circle.
Mr. Ross. So Wisconsin does keep track of official time
spent on union activities?
Governor Walker. For example, there is time at both the
State and the local level that people who are employees of the
government who are designated as union officials have to
account for time that is taken as part of their contracts. In
many cases we saw at the local level, the county, the number of
individuals who were on the payroll who were working for the
union.
Mr. Ross. Governor Shumlin, is it the same situation in
Vermont?
Governor Shumlin. It is not an issue in Vermont. Our public
employees unionized work hard, and they work long days and long
nights, and we are certain that that is what they are doing and
that is what they do with their time. You know, we are a small
State where everybody knows what everyone is doing, and in
Vermont we work hard and our public employees work just as hard
as our private sector employees.
Mr. Ross. In Florida, we are deliberating now in the
legislature on something that was deliberated back when I was
in the legislature there, what was known as a paycheck
protection act, and it would require that the employees make an
affirmative acknowledgment and confirmation that they will sign
over a certain part of their paycheck to union dues, instead of
it just having taken out regularly. Is that something that has
been entertained in either of your States?
Governor Walker.
Governor Walker. That is in the legislation that I signed
the law approximately a month ago, and the concept of that is,
in the interest of workers, they should have the right to
choose. If they want to have that money taken out, if they want
to be part of a union and if they ultimately want to have the
choice of the way that they give that money to that union or
not, they should be the one that chooses it.
Mr. Ross. Governor Shumlin.
Governor Shumlin. It hasn't been any significant part of
the debate. You know, we are really, like Governor Walker, we
are facing a tough economy and a tough budget challenge trying
to balance it, and thanks to the largesse of Congress, the last
budget deficits for all we Governors haven't really had to be
dealt with because we got so much money from Washington. That
is over and we have to balance the budgets the old fashioned
way. So we are making tough cuts, tough choices, and I am doing
it by focusing on what matters, which is health care costs,
corrections, and other areas where I have explosive growth, and
I am not worrying too much about union dues.
Mr. Ross. In accomplishing these objectives, whether they
be pro-union or anti-union, whatever they may be requires
people to come to the bargaining table, it requires people to
come to consensus or compromise; and one of the issues that we
saw in Wisconsin was that there were senators on the Democrat
side who left the State and failed to come to the table to
address. And as a public official, as one who was elected, I
take personal offense to somebody who abrogates their
responsibility by not owning up to their obligations to make
these decisions, as difficult as they may be.
So, Governor Shumlin, I would ask you do you condone such
activities, where elected officials leave the State or abrogate
their responsibilities to enforce their obligations as an
elected official?
Governor Shumlin. Well, I have to tell you I have my hands
full dealing with the challenges that I am facing in Vermont
and I don't comment much on what is happening in the other 49
States. I am just focused on what is happening in Vermont. In
Vermont, everyone is working together with lots of maple syrup
to get tough things done.
Mr. Ross. Thank you.
Governor Walker.
Governor Walker. Obviously, I had great concern. When I
talk to factory workers over the last month or two, if you
walked off the job for 3 weeks, you wouldn't be working there
anymore. I think that is pretty clear out there. So I think
there is a real challenge and obviously the individuals in
those 14 senate districts are going to decide whether or not
that makes a difference in the long term.
But you said something else about working together, and I
believe in that. But I also believe more important than working
together is people want results. So in the beginning of this
year we worked together with Democrats and Republicans and one
Independent we have in the legislature. We passed the most
aggressive job-creating legislation in the country. We showed
that Wisconsin was open for business. But sometimes working
together is a problem. In the past, Democrats and Republicans
worked together and they pushed the problem off to the future,
and at some point leaders, no matter what part, have to stand
and say we have to do something about it, and that is what we
are doing here.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Issa. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Vermont, Mr. Welch, for his questions.
Mr. Welch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Governor Shumlin, I see that seated behind you is Matt
Finsey, who is a leader of the Public Employees Union, the
firefighters; he is sitting next to his brother from Wisconsin.
You are the Governor, he is a public employee union. Did one of
you not get the memo that you are not supposed to get along?
Governor Shumlin. I don't know if I didn't get it, but all
I can tell you is we get along great, as you know, and there is
nothing better than our firefighters working hard for us and
sacrificing their lives for us every single day.
Mr. Welch. You know, as I have listened to Governor Walker
describe his problems, it seems to me very similar to what you
described to me this morning when we had breakfast as to the
problems you face in Vermont. Governors cannot escape the
consequences of the greatest recession that we have had since
the Depression, and that recession is brutal and shows no
mercy, whether it is a Republican Governor led State or a
Democratic Governor led State. You have described your
approach, but clearly there are points of real contention that
you have to deal with as Governor. You have a legislature that
is pushing you, and you are resisting, to raise revenues; you
have public employees who, yes, they did cooperate, but, on the
other hand, they have to represent their members and stand up
for wages and benefits. Just maybe give a brief summary of how
you managed to get from here to there.
I am going to want to be able to talk to Governor Walker
too, and I don't have that much time.
Governor Shumlin. I will try to be very brief. You know,
really, as you know, my guess is that my approach isn't much
different than other Governors across the country. We are
trying to create jobs and economic opportunities, and I
mentioned the middle class has been kicked in the teeth over
this recession, harder than I think they have been kicked in
years, and we are trying to find ways to raise their income.
And we do that by going after real savings in health care, by
going after the recidivism in our corrections budget that is
costing taxpayers $47,000 a year, we have a high recidivism
rate, and by going where the real money is while we resisting
raising taxes so that we can actually grow jobs and economic
opportunities.
You heard Governor Walker talk about wishing to import jobs
from Illinois, and we are all doing that. I am hoping to bring
in a few jobs from New Hampshire and Massachusetts and New York
as we manage our budget. We are a great place to do business,
work, raise a family, the best place in the country, in my
judgment. And we do it by getting along and by using common
sense and reasonableness.
Mr. Welch. Let me ask Governor Walker. I just want to make
an observation. We have a problem here in Congress, and this is
my own personal observation after serving for 5 years. There is
too much of a winner-take-all attitude. Because when I hear my
Republican colleagues say we have to deal with spending, I
happen to think they are right. But I also think we have to
look at other things, too, like the tax code and revenues. I
would say that quite candidly. A lot of disagreement from some
of my colleagues.
But one of our problems in Congress is a winner-take-all
approach, where, even if you ``win,'' and you see this with the
health care debate, the Democrats ``won'' on health care last
year, but now the first act of the new Congress is to repeal
it. If you win in a way where the other side feels they didn't
have a seat at the table or things were crammed down, and both
sides can be doing this, there is a price because you end up
winning on the vote but you don't make progress on the policy.
And, obviously, your State is the center of the storm with a
very hard confrontation between two sides, and I am asking if
you would just observe or comment on your thoughts about
whether there is a price that may be paid in your State as a
result of the fact that the approach that was taken did result
in this enormous confrontation and a lot of controversy and a
lot of pain, that continues even after your policy, I think,
prevailed.
Governor Walker. Yes, and I think the results, obviously,
were frustrating. One of the things that frustrated me the most
is I think if you are going to participate in democracy, you
have to be in the arena. And when 14 of my colleagues in the
capital decided to leave for 3 weeks, it made it pretty
difficult to do that. In fact, in particular, one of them,
someone we worked with before on jobs initiatives, spent a good
chunk of that time trying to work with us and, as he revealed
in the Wisconsin State Journal a week ago Sunday, he was closer
to us than he was to his other colleagues. My hope is that
people like him and others will continue to come to the table
and work on our jobs agenda, the things we need to continue to
do, and I think we will be on the right track.
But, again, I go back to what I said before. People want us
to work together, but they want that because they want results.
When I look at what Mitch Daniels did 6 years ago in Indiana,
essentially for the State, he did what we are proposing and
what we propose in this legislation to do. His numbers were far
below mine in that first year, the first 6 months he was in
office. He was dealing with some of the same passions, just not
as big, because he did it through an executive order, not
through a piece of legislation. But 4 years later he was re-
elected with 58 percent of the vote because, in the end, people
saw the results. All the fears didn't materialize and the
results proved that in that State the government got better,
got more efficient, got more effective, and ultimately good
public employees in Indiana were rewarded.
Mr. Welch. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Kelly, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And both Governors, thank you for being here.
I come from the private sector, so I understand a little
bit about having your own skin the game and being able to sign
the front half of the check. I know that sometimes down here we
lose perspective about whose money it is we are spending. And I
have to tell you, when somebody else is picking up the tab, it
is easy to keep saying go ahead and keep on partying.
Now, I want to ask you this specifically, because the
chairman started off with a discussion, also Mr. Chaffetz,
about defined benefits in pensions, and I know in Pennsylvania
that while all of us took a hit when the stock market went down
with our pensions and we lost quite a bit of it, at the end of
the day that was a loss. If you can, in both your States, tell
me about who makes up the loss for the benefit that is
calculated. I really think defined benefits is a complete
illusion; it gives us the belief that somehow the future is
both predictable and reliable, and we all know it isn't. So
please tell me the deficiency, the difference between what the
defined benefit is based on what the actuaries are saying and
the actuality of it. Who makes up the difference for that?
Governor Shumlin. You know, I think it is really important
to stick with the facts, and the fact of the matter is, if you
look at Vermont, this is what happened: In the worst stock
market crash in a long time, we watched it go from roughly
$12,000 to $6,000, the Dow, the average person in a defined
contribution plan sold their stocks when they got discouraged,
somewhere between $8 and $6,000. Those who were in defined
benefit plans had people like Vermont advising them to hold on
and hold out, and that is what we did. So now our retirement
plans are higher than they were in the depths of the loss. The
average small investor now has lost what they saved for
retirement.
So, again, it is a great example where a defined benefit
plan protects workers more ably than a defined contribution
plan, and Vermont's example is exactly proof of that theory.
Mr. Kelly. OK, but my question is who makes up the
difference in the loss.
Governor Shumlin. My point is there was no loss; we have
gotten the gains back.
Mr. Kelly. I understand what you are saying, but there is
somebody who does provide the safety net, and we both know
that.
Governor Walker.
Governor Walker. Yes. It is the taxpayers. In our case,
before these reforms, you have talked a lot today about, for
example, my proposal of the 5.8 percent contribution. One of
the things I want to make clear, because it is different than
Vermont and other States., before this reform, other than
literally a handful of State employees, the taxpayers were
picking up both the employee contribution and the employer. So
I am not upping the employee contribution, I am actually having
the employees of the State, including me, actually pay the
employee contribution. Again, something that is done in the
private sector, as you know, the employer pays part, the
employee pays the other part.
And what I found out when I was traveling the State in the
midst of this debate, particularly when I go to manufacturing
plants and guys would point out they were paying 25 to 50
percent of their health insurance premiums, most of them having
a retirement plan, it wasn't a pension, it was a 401K, and many
of them, to keep people working, were suspending the employer
match just to be able to keep people from being laid off. That
is the reality. And then when I would walk them through what I
was asking, because they would see the ads and they would
think, hey, wait a minute, you are taking all this money away.
Just as an example, in the basic family plan that my family
has, we will go up to pay about $200 a month in premiums,
versus about $90 a month. Again, most people, in the private
sector, middle-class taxpayers wonder, wow, that is
unbelievable.
Mr. Kelly. And I have to tell you I think that is the
important thing to understand. If I have a defined benefit,
then I can go ahead and stick with that plan because, come hell
or high water, I am still going to get my defined benefit. When
you are a person whose real money, their money, is in the
program and you have a choice to opt out now and try to keep
what you have or lose it, then you are really put in a box; and
I think most people in this country don't understand. Now, my
daughter is a teacher, my wife is a teacher. I have a lot of
friends whose benefits are guaranteed, and they are guaranteed
by people in the private sector who will see a raise in their
taxes to cover the loss of these pensions, and I think that is
where the divides come.
This is not about union workers versus non-union workers,
Republicans versus Democrats; this is about Americans. And if
we are going to share the gains and we are going to also
participate in the pain, we better understand that when you
have your own money in the game, it is a vast difference
between somebody who is guaranteed a benefit, regardless of
what they put in, and that is the important thing. Taxpayers
make up the difference in all these losses. That is the model
and that is what is wrong with it. You don't have the safety
net in your private plan, but the public sector does, and I
think that is a vast difference and I think it makes it a lot
easier to stick with a plan that is upside down and say, you
know, what, I'll go ahead and ride it out because one way or
the other I am still made whole.
Thank you so much for both of you being here. I appreciate
it.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now go to the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome,
Governors.
Governor Shumlin, did I understand in your testimony that
you said that the pension fund in Vermont has an 8, 8\1/2\
percent return, annual return?
Governor Shumlin. That is correct. That is what we have had
over time. And I think it is really important to address the
question of who pays and the statement just made that taxpayers
do. At least in Vermont--maybe we are unique; I don't think
so--80 percent of the benefits that we pay out are paid for by
return on investment.
Mr. Connolly. Eighty percent?
Governor Shumlin. That is correct.
Mr. Connolly. You are a member of the National Governors
Association?
Governor Shumlin. Excuse me?
Mr. Connolly. You are a member of the National Governors
Association?
Governor Shumlin. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Is it your understanding from your fellow
Governors that Vermont is unique and that most State pension
funds are in fact under water or about to go so?
Governor Shumlin. It is not my understanding that most are
under water, no.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, I would ask unanimous consent
to enter into the record correspondence provided by the
National League of Cities, NACo, NASAC, ICMA, NSA, and a number
of other organizations pointing out, as a matter of fact, that
most State pension systems are very solvent and have been quite
stable for the last half century.
Chairman Issa. Have they been received by the
parliamentarian yet?
Mr. Connolly. We have copies here, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. OK. Bring them up. We will reserve and make
a final decision by the end of the hearing.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you very much.
Governor Walker, when you campaigned for Governor, did you
campaign on the issue of collective bargaining being a problem
with respect to Wisconsin's budget?
Governor Walker. I talked about wages and benefits overall,
even ran campaign ads on it. But I didn't specify exactly what
form; I talked about the broad spectrum. And, in fact, AST
Wisconsin, one of the unions that objected to us in campaign
flyers pointing out some of my statements about collective
bargaining and mediation arbitration and other issues. So that
was an issue that was part of the campaign.
Mr. Connolly. Explicitly?
Governor Walker. Again, I didn't run an ad saying I am
going to do exactly this, but I talked about the full range and
I talked about it in a couple of debates, about the fact of the
full spectrum of issues.
Mr. Connolly. Good. I had 43 debates when I ran for re-
election last year. That is a lot of debates.
Governor Walker. I didn't have that many, I am glad.
Mr. Connolly. Probably more than most Members of this body.
Governor Walker. That is impressive.
Mr. Connolly. And I enjoyed every one of them.
Chairman Issa. That is also more than most Members.
Mr. Connolly. Exactly.
But the collective bargaining, in your debates with your
opponent, you actually brought up collective bargaining and
said that is something I am going to address if elected
Governor?
Governor Walker. I talked about the whole spectrum. I
talked specifically about the 5 and 12 percent. They said how
far are you willing to go? I said I am willing to change the
law from one end of the spectrum, whether it is a modest change
or an outright change. I talked about it there; I talked about
it again in the transition; I talked about it----
Mr. Connolly. Governor Walker, I am asking a very specific
question. Did you explicitly single out----
Governor Walker. No. No. I talked about the whole range.
Mr. Connolly. So you might concede that some might be
surprised, then, that you made collective bargaining such a
centerpiece of your so-called reform efforts after you were
sworn in.
Governor Walker. No, I would say no because for 8 years as
county executive I not only talked about it, I actually brought
it up. I did what was called the Reality Tour, where we talked
about the challenges, that we were unsustainable and that
collective bargaining was driving that.
Mr. Connolly. So from your point of view nobody should have
been surprised once you were elected and sworn in.
Governor Walker. Hundred percent correct.
Mr. Connolly. Were you, then, surprised at the reaction
that generated in your State?
Governor Walker. Not in my State. For 8 years I took on the
status quo in a county that had never elected a Republican
before. I was elected with 54, then 57, then 59 percent,
because I think in times of crisis people aren't so much
concerned about Republican or Democrat; they want leadership,
and that is what we took on. That is what we are trying to do
at the State level.
What did surprise me, candidly, was the level of national
attention, the folks that came in from Washington and others to
be a part of that debate.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Let me ask a quick question. You
got a famous phone call from somebody pretending to be David
Koch, and he said, well, I tell you what, Scott, once you crush
these bastards, I'll fly you out to Cali and really show you a
good time. You responded to that by saying, all right, that
would be outstanding. What did you mean by that and what did
you think he meant?
Governor Walker. At that point I was down in the call, I
had two other people waiting for me and I was trying to get off
the call and get on to the next issue.
Mr. Connolly. It wasn't that you honestly thought it was
Mr. Koch and that he was promising to reward you for what you
were doing?
Governor Walker. Did not in that regard, no.
Mr. Connolly. The flying out to Cali thing didn't strike
you?
Governor Walker. No. I didn't even know what Cali is.
Mr. Connolly. Have you ever had a conversation with respect
to your actions in Wisconsin and using them to punish members
of the opposite party and their donor base?
Governor Walker. No.
Mr. Connolly. You have never had such a conversation?
Governor Walker. No.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. My time is up.
Governor Walker. I spent 8 years talking about the
challenges of the county official, the fact that I had a series
of unions in Milwaukee County who constantly told me to lay
people off, as opposed to making modest changes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. My time is up.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Dr. DesJarlais.
Mr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Governors, for being here today.
Governor Walker, I believe your home State and my home
State of Tennessee has constitutional requirements to balance
the budget. Obviously, that constitutional requirement does not
exist in Washington, DC. Do you believe that these
constitutional requirements give you additional support and
leverage you need to make the difficult decisions that need to
be made to get your fiscal spending under control?
Governor Walker. Yes. And I think both of us as Governors
talk about the fact that, as Governors, even with either party,
for us to succeed and to have States grow their economy, we
have to have a balanced budget. Whether it is a constitutional
requirement, a legal requirement or otherwise, I think the
States that are going to succeed, regardless of who are the
Governors, are the States that take their fiscal challenges
head on.
Mr. DesJarlais. Thank you. This last election it was pretty
clear to me, coming from the private sector, that the American
people have sent a referendum that they feel government,
overall, is too large and it is too intrusive, and it is in the
way of creating jobs. So I take heed to that as we sit in these
hearings and we justify a lot of the programs within the
Federal Government and whether they are good or not, and we
have had discussions whether or not private sector versus
public sector pay is fair.
Governor Walker, how would you gage the pay and benefits
afforded to the public sector workers in Wisconsin? Critics
have said that your reforms are hurting a group of workers that
are already worse off than their private sector counterparts.
Are they wrong?
Governor Walker. Well, let me just point out two quick
things in that. One, this debate, to me, has never been about
the level of pay or compensation, because I think there are
great people who work at the city, the county, or school
district State Government. I have said that repeatedly. What
this is about is balancing the budget and making sure we can do
it long-term and giving our State and local governments the
tools. There have been plenty of studies and there are studies
all over the map. There are studies whether you have a higher
education degree or not, whether it is higher or lower.
I think the key is, again, when I have toured the State and
when I talk to the constituents I have and I talk to the people
in the middle class working in our factories and farms and
other locations, they realize they are the ones that foot the
bill for more and more government, and they think it is
realistic that if they are paying, on average 20 percent for
health care, they are paying something for their pension or
401K, whatever they may have, they think it is realistic that
the rest of us who work in the government pay something similar
to that.
Mr. DesJarlais. Thank you.
Governor Shumlin, you had mentioned in your testimony
earlier that you went to where the money was to help get your
fiscal house in order, and you mentioned health care. I was
wondering if you had some insight that you could share with us
to how you went about that and if you have a solution to the
health care crisis and the cost.
Governor Shumlin. Wow. Well, how long do we have? The
answer is yes, we are working very hard to pass a health care
bill that will be the first in country where health care is a
right and not a privilege; where it follows the individual; is
not required by the employer, which we think will be a huge
jobs creator; but, most importantly, as Governor Walker
suggested earlier when he was talking about health care, where
we actually reimburse providers based upon keeping people
healthy, health care outcomes instead of the fee per service
model. And we have put together an ambitious plan which is
passing the senate almost as we speak; it has already passed
the house, so I am going to sign it into law. Then we are going
to come down to Congress and beg you for a few waivers. So I am
so glad that we have this opportunity to start begging now.
Mr. DesJarlais. OK. We will be interested to see how that
turns out, as we certainly have our challenges here. Do you
believe that collective bargaining is really a basic human
right?
Governor Shumlin. I believe it is a basic right in
democratic society. And I say that as a guy who grew up, born
and raise, in Vermont. My ancestors, like so many probably in
this room, came to this country with nothing, passed through
Ellis Island, ended up picking beets, my great, great
grandfather out in the Midwest somewhere; and, frankly, were it
not for the right to collectively bargain, I don't believe that
my relatives or most middle-class Americans would have the
opportunities for economic progress that they enjoy today.
Mr. DesJarlais. You had made a comment at the National
Governors Association meeting that the ability to collectively
bargain is a basic human right in democracy. This is in direct
contradiction with Franklin Roosevelt, who was a pro-union
person, and he said meticulous attention should be paid to the
special relations and obligations of public servants, to the
public itself, and to the government. The process of collective
bargaining as usually understood cannot be transplanted into
public service, and it goes on to say a strike of public
employees manifests nothing less than intent on their part to
obstruct the operations of government until their demands are
satisfied. Can you comment on that?
Governor Shumlin. I would just say that even someone as
great as Roosevelt could be wrong once.
Mr. DesJarlais. I might disagree on that point, but my time
is out and I thank you for your comments.
I yield back.
Mr. Gosar [presiding]. I thank the gentleman.
I want to acknowledge my colleague, Mr. Murphy, from
Connecticut.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Both Governors, thank you for you attendance today and for
sticking with us throughout this process.
I guess I just have a simple statement and question for
you, Governor Walker. I guess for those of us that have been
watching this debate play out, and I think this has been
covered by several of my colleagues, it is hard to square the
concessions that have been made by the unions, their
willingness to come to the table and the continued drive to
strip them of collective bargaining rights, and obviously there
has been a lot of conversation around the country as to how
this plays in to a much broader debate that is happening around
the Nation. When we look at the amounts of outside money that
has been spent in Wisconsin, both with respect to your
election, to the fight over the legislation, and then most
recently, in the last few weeks, with respect to this election
for the court, it is hard to make the argument that this debate
only plays out in the context of Wisconsin's budget fight. In
fact, some of the key players in this drama seem to be pretty
open about how this is ultimately about trying to kill a pretty
important constituency for working families, and I think we had
the quote on the board earlier when Mr. Connolly was asking his
questions, but let me read it aloud.
The State senate leader, Scott Fitzgerald, said recently
during an interview on Fox News, he said, ``If we win this
battle and the money is not there under the auspices of the
unions, certainly, what you are going to find is President
Obama is going to have a much more difficult time getting
elected and winning the State of Wisconsin.'' And in a fund-
raising letter that he sent out, he was making the pitch that
Republicans should be supported because they faced down big
labor's bully tactics in the Democratic walkout on the State
senate to break the power of unions in Wisconsin once and for
all.
This sounds a lot like a much broader political play to try
to defeat your opponents, to try to defeat the advocates for
working families, and I guess I am sure you have a good answer
to this question, but I would like to know if you agree with
the statements of your State senate leader, Scott Fitzgerald,
and how you address the concerns of many of ours that the
reason that you have $2.1 million being spent on behalf of your
candidate for the court, the reason that you have groups like
the Koch brothers pouring in thousands and thousands of dollars
is because this is about a much broader effort and it seems
that some of the key players in the fight, certainly in the
State legislative level, are very open about how this is a much
broader assault on unions and the allies of unions.
I guess I specifically want to know if you disagree with
that very specific statement made by the senate leader.
Governor Walker. Two things. One, I think any outside
observer of politics in our State would probably jump to that
conclusion for all the parties involved. They would look at the
$4 million the unions pumped in during the debate and the TV
ads that went on; they would look at the money you reference
and others and say outside of Wisconsin there is a lot of
people who are viewing this in a larger context.
Mr. Murphy. Except this fight wasn't started by labor; this
fight was started by----
Governor Walker. No, but you just asked about the money and
I clearly recognize that. I want to put in context that there
is a lot of money all the way around coming from all sorts of
sources, and I think a lot of whom are looking at multiple
reasons for this. I can't answer for Scott Fitzgerald, I can't
for others; I can answer for Scott Walker, and I can tell you
for me it is about, certainly in part, about the budget, but it
is also ultimately about making government work better and, I
think, protecting--when I talk about the middle class, it is
not just the paying middle class, it is even middle class
individuals who work for State and local government because,
for us, we ultimately believe, and we have seen the
alternative, we are protecting middle-class jobs by avoiding
what many other States are doing with massive layoffs at both
the State and local level, and by ultimately putting in place a
system where the government is going to work better,
particularly for schools. I have two kids in a public school. I
care very deeply about it. I would like to have a system, like
we do elsewhere in society, where we pay for performance, not
just reward based on seniority. I would like to have people
based on merit and performance. This measure, these reforms
empower us to keep our best teachers in the schools, to keep
our best city and county and State workers in place, and that
is part of the package as well.
Mr. Murphy. My time is almost up. I understand you can't
speak for him, but you can certainly opine as to whether you
agree with your State senate leader when he says that this is
ultimately about trying to defeat President Obama in Wisconsin.
Do you agree with----
Governor Walker. I can tell you what it is for me. It is
not about that, it is ultimately about balancing the budget now
and in the future; not just in the temporary, because we have
had too many people temporarily trying to push our problems off
to the future. This is a long-term answer and it is about long-
term reform in our government so our schools, our local
governments, and our States operate better. That is what it is
for me.
Mr. Murphy. There are millions of dollars being pumped into
the State who disagree with that vision, but I appreciate your
answer. Thank you very much.
Mr. Gosar. I thank my colleague.
I want to acknowledge my colleague, Mr. Gowdy, from South
Carolina.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Governor Shumlin, I noted the conciliatory tone in both
your introduction and your opening statement. I made a couple
of notes. You mentioned the Unity Tour, which I found
inspiring. You said come to the table. You mentioned the word
reasonableness and openness, and on four different occasions
you said come together. My question to you is how do you do
that when the side with whom you disagree has absconded from
the State and is essentially a fugitive from responsibility.
What table do you sit at when you are not in the same State?
Governor Shumlin. Well, you know, you don't apply the
reasonableness plea in the heat of the crisis; you avert the
crisis. And I will just tell you by way of our experience under
the Republican Governor, Jim Douglas, we needed to get roughly
$25 million out of our pensions for teachers to balance our
budget, and things weren't going so well in those negotiations
with the Governor. So the Democratic senate president, myself,
and the Democratic speaker sat down with the union and said,
listen, we are going to have to get these savings, and we can
do it with you or we can do it without you, and, really, we
would like to do it with you, and they turned to us and said we
want to do it with you. So my point is when you are going to
work together, when you are going to do what the American
people want most desperately from their politicians, and God
knows they want it from Washington right now and so do I,
reasonableness, compromise, common sense, you have to start
with that foot; you can't ask for it once you have created a
crisis.
Mr. Gowdy. But there is a concept of mutuality that is
inherent or required for that to happen. I know you would agree
with me. I also want to say inherent in your comments, to me,
and in your testimony, frankly, is civility.
Governor Shumlin. Right.
Mr. Gowdy. In the last 2 weeks alone, Members of this body
have been told by a colleague to go to hell. Not purgatory, not
shule, not haitis, not the river sticks, but hell. We have been
told that we want to kill women. And my colleague from Virginia
just made a reference to a surreptitious phone call that was
placed to an elected official. Will you help me and join me in
decrying the rhetoric and the tactics that I just laid out?
Governor Shumlin. You know, I think that civility has to be
applied to all public officials, and I think that we need to
raise the bar collectively, and that applies to Washington, it
applies to State governments across this country. We have----
Mr. Gowdy. Do you think that making surreptitious phone
calls, pretending to be someone you are not, enhances civility
and discourse in this country?
Governor Shumlin. All I can say is I have no disagreement
with you that the civility tunnel runs both ways, and we all
have a responsibility as public servants, and the American
people expect it, for us to be civil all the time.
Mr. Gowdy. You, in response to Dr. DesJarlais, I think,
and, again, I always allow for the possibility that maybe have
been misquoted, the ability to collectively bargain is a basic
human right in democracy. What is your authority for that
statement? What is your constitutional authority for saying
that?
Governor Shumlin. Well, free speech.
Mr. Gowdy. Beyond your ability to say it, where would you
point me in the Constitution for support for the underlying
notion?
Governor Shumlin. You know, it is my belief, as a Governor
of a State, that collective bargaining is a right and something
that has served this country with extraordinary progress and
distinction, and it has allowed, as I mentioned, families like
mine, who came from nothing, to succeed economically in the
best democracy, in the best economy, in the best business
climate that anyone could ever design. So all I can say is I
see it as a basic right.
Mr. Gowdy. Are there exceptions?
Governor Shumlin. We are allowed to organize.
Mr. Gowdy. Are there exceptions?
Governor Shumlin. Not that I can think of.
Mr. Gowdy. Law enforcement?
Governor Shumlin. I think law enforcement should be able to
collectively bargain just like anybody else. They have in our
State and it has had great results.
Mr. Gowdy. In my State of South Carolina, we laid off
prosecutors, law enforcement officers, and teachers; we
furloughed them for 5 days last year because we have a fiscal
crisis like almost every other State. Is that something that
you would entertain in your State? Could you ever see
furloughing the core functions of government, which all three
of those categories are, could you ever see that happening?
Governor Shumlin. We actually did move our courts from a 5-
day week to a 4-day week. I would not furlough----
Mr. Gowdy. Your Federal courts or State? Because the
Federal judges have always been on a 4-day week.
Governor Shumlin. We have noticed. Our State judges.
Mr. Gowdy. I see my time is up. Thank you.
Mr. Gosar. I thank the Member.
Acknowledge my colleague, Mr. Tierney, from Massachusetts.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Governors, for being here today.
Governor Shumlin, let me just ask you. When you were trying
to resolve your fiscal problems in the State, did you start off
with the unions by telling them that you were going to require
them to hold annual votes to continue representing the
government employees, that you were going to no longer deduct
union dues from the employees' paycheck, and then expect them
to come to the table and start a really good solid conversation
with you? Is that the way you began your conversation?
Governor Shumlin. No, Congressman Tierney, that is not what
I led with.
Mr. Tierney. OK. I just think that is a point worth making.
But let me also ask you what percentage of your annual State
government spending is the contributions to your pension
accounts?
Governor Shumlin. It is about 4 percent, and I think it is
important that we remember that. When I talk about the real
challenges of Governors having to balance a budget, my health
care costs are going up by double digits, my corrections budget
has doubled. My challenge is not pensions. Of course it is a
consideration, but our pension funds are now performing quite
well and we are doing OK.
Mr. Tierney. Governor Walker, what percentage of your State
spending is related to the pensions account?
Governor Walker. If you look overall--and I don't have the
exact percentage off the top of my head, but----
Mr. Tierney. Well, let me ask you this----
Governor Walker [continuing]. But I can give you the
numbers----
Mr. Tierney. I prefer you give me the percentage, but if
you don't know that, is it significantly more or less than the
4 percent----
Governor Walker. Well, the total budget for the next
biennial is about $60 billion. The total amount of savings that
we have from the reforms we put in is 1.4 for the----
Mr. Tierney. You don't choose to answer the question. Look,
the National Association of State Retirement Administrators
says that less than 3 percent of all State and local government
spending is generally used to fund public pension funds.
Governor Shumlin, you are at 4 percent, so you think that
is generally, roughly right?
Governor Shumlin. That is correct.
Mr. Tierney. Governor Walker, do you want to make an
opinion one way or the other or pass on it because you----
Governor Walker. Again, I can followup and give you the
percentage based on the numbers.
Mr. Tierney. I would appreciate it if you would do that.
Thank you.
We talked just a second, Governor Shumlin, about the
defined benefit versus the defined contribution on that. From
your earlier conversation, my understanding is that you
recognize that when you switch from defined benefit to defined
contribution, there is a tremendous shift in the risk to the
beneficiary, am I right?
Governor Shumlin. Risk and cost.
Mr. Tierney. And they both go more heavily onto the
shoulders of the employees, correct?
Governor Shumlin. And the taxpayers.
Mr. Tierney. And basically, generally, in your State and I
think in others, that when this original situation was set up,
that was part of the bargaining process, that the employee may
have taken less in pay or some other area they were negotiating
on in return for having a little more security in retirement,
am I right?
Governor Shumlin. That is the promise that was made.
Mr. Tierney. OK. So it was the employer making that deal,
as well as the employee.
Governor Shumlin. That is correct.
Mr. Tierney. Seems like a fair deal to you, fair thing to
negotiate?
Governor Shumlin. Yes.
Mr. Tierney. Let me ask both of you, if I could, on that.
Do either of you ask for the authority for bankruptcy for your
respective States?
Governor Walker. No.
Mr. Tierney. Governor Shumlin.
Governor Shumlin. No.
Mr. Tierney. OK. Do either of you believe that a bankruptcy
court is better able to overcome political differences than the
political process in your State, Governors and legislature?
Governor Walker. No.
Governor Shumlin. No.
Mr. Tierney. Do either of you think that the bankruptcy
court is better able to restore fiscal stability in your
respective States?
Governor Walker. No.
Governor Shumlin. No.
Mr. Tierney. And do either of you think that the bankruptcy
court would be a better manager of your State's finances?
Governor Walker. No.
Governor Shumlin. No.
Mr. Tierney. OK. So you both agree with the letter that
Governor McGuire, who is a Democrat from Washington, and
Governor Heineman, who is a Republican from Nebraska, sent to
congressional leaders that essentially made that point. Their
letter said that allowing States to declare bankruptcy is not
an authority that any State leader has asked for, nor would
they likely use it. States are sovereign entities in which the
public trust is granted to its elected leaders. The reported
bankruptcy proposal suggests that a bankruptcy court is better
able to overcome political differences, restore fiscal
stability, and manage the finances of a State. These assertions
are false and serve only to threaten the fabric of State and
local finance.
Would each of you gentlemen be pretty much in agreement
with that comment?
Governor Shumlin. That is the NGA's position and I support
it.
Mr. Tierney. Governor Walker.
Governor Walker. I agree.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cummings. Would the gentleman yield? Would the
gentleman yield?
Let's go back to you, Governor Shumlin. You know, you were
talking about the maple syrup and whatever and your
methodology. There was one word that you left out, and the
reason why I think you got the cooperation that you got is
because of respect. The workers felt that you respected them. I
heard your story, and I wouldn't be here either if it were not
for unions. No doubt about it. My parents were former
sharecroppers in Manning, SC, came up to Baltimore, got a union
job, and that is why I am here today. So I just wanted you to
know. And they felt respected.
Governor Shumlin. I appreciate your comment. Obviously,
respect for our firefighters, for our police officers, for the
folks that risk their lives every day, for the folks plowing
the roads and all of our public employees is incredibly
important to any chief executive.
Chairman Issa [presiding]. The gentleman from Arizona, Mr.
Gowdy. I am sorry, the gentleman from Arizona, Dr. Gosar.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you.
I want to get back to our original topic here, about State
and municipal debt. We are not talking apples to apples in your
States. Let me get this right. You actually are a tax giver to
the Federal Government and you are a tax taker from the Federal
Government, if I am not mistaken, right? For every dollar of
tax you get only 82 cents back and Vermont gets $1.12 back,
right?
Governor Walker. You know, I am an expert on the cheese in
our States, not the apples.
Mr. Gosar. OK. Well, apples and cheese go along with wine
and maple syrup.
Governor Walker. Yes, that is true.
Mr. Gosar. But there is a difference. So my link here is
that I am coming back to the basic core problem with all States
is the Federal mandate, and things that some of the States
should be doing, right? Particularly Governor Shumlin, you
talked about health care and corrections. Isn't that a 10th
amendment right? Wouldn't you like, don't you like the ability
to have some flexibility in regards to oversight of those
funds?
Governor Shumlin. Well, yes, frankly, but you need to
define what we mean by flexibility, because my fear is, as we
have this----
Mr. Gosar. Well, part of--I think you are going there.
Governor Shumlin. If I can just finish what we were saying.
As we get a little bit toward the next budget discussion is
that flexibility means we are going to leave the requirements
and take the money on behalf of the Federal Government, and the
States are going to be in tougher shape than we are in already
with under-reimbursements for Medicaid and Medicare.
Mr. Gosar. Well, and I understand, because with the
unfunded mandate there is this hidden cost that no one wants to
talk about, and that is for that Federal law to be enacted in a
State, we hire more workers that are not on the private sector,
they are on the public sector, and, therefore, these roles
continually go up. So part of this is based upon, or the
majority, if I look across the board, coming from Arizona, and,
holy cow, we will get to those numbers here in a second. But
the problem is the budget problems in each of the States are
derived by the unfunded mandate by the Federal Government.
Governor Shumlin. You know, I think that is an
oversimplification. I think the budget challenges in the States
are derived from the worst recession in American history that
was brought on by a lot of greed on Wall Street and a housing
bubble that got transferred to Main Street. That was the
culprit.
Mr. Gosar. Oh, I have to stop you there, because didn't we
also have a problem with the Federal Government in that? Didn't
the Federal Government establish itself in the risk pool and
all the aspects of risk telling the regulators and telling the
banks and telling the financiers you will do this? So there is
equal blame to go around, and that is not where we want to go
about.
Governor Shumlin. All right, but I would actually argue
that if we want to get into that, that it was the lack of
regulation----
Mr. Gosar. Thank you.
Governor Shumlin [continuing]. Of Wall Street that led us
to the crisis.
Mr. Gosar. And that is government. Once again, government
problems, and coming from the Federal Government. But what I am
trying to get back to is it is not an oversimplification,
because when we are telling you a rule, if it is intrinsic to
the Federal Government's mission, do you think they ought to
pass the buck to you or they should fully fund it?
Governor Shumlin. I think the Federal Government should
keep its promises to the States.
Mr. Gosar. And are you prepared to honor those promises to
communities?
Governor Shumlin. Absolutely.
Mr. Gosar. OK. So when we are talking about health care and
corrections, I am having a problem here on where this unfunded
mandate is coming from, because we constantly are kicking the
can down the road and these are the core principle problems
that you brought up, health care and corrections.
Governor Shumlin. Well, you know, it isn't the mandates. We
don't have Federal mandates standing in our way in the way of
corrections that are really a budget challenge. On health care
we----
Mr. Gosar. Wait a minute. I have a famous sheriff out in my
neck of the woods and the Federal Government is breathing down
his neck and telling him, yes, you can do that, no, you can't
do that. So there is some oversight in regards to the Federal
Government that dictates exactly how you can incarcerate a
prisoner or how you have to go through a process, does it not?
Governor Shumlin. I don't see it as a cost driver in my
State budget.
Mr. Gosar. Hmm.
How about you, how do you feel, Governor Walker?
Governor Walker. Well, there is no doubt that not only the
mandates from the Federal Government to the State government,
but many times the mandates that then go on to the local
governments are driven largely by the mandates that start here.
And to the extent that we get more freedom and flexibility, one
thing the Governor said earlier I would concur is I would love
to have a block grant. I want to make sure that that doesn't
mean that that is just say, here, have it, now we are going to
cut it in half, either. I realize that there is a core group of
people on things related to Medicaid, but I do believe if you
put the power back in the hands of the people at the State
level, the States are better equipped to tackle those
challenges and in turn can--one State versus another State is
going to have very different needs and very different outcomes.
And the more that we can adjust to that and not have a one-
size-fits all, the better off we are going to be.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlelady from New York, Mrs. Maloney.
Oh, she has returned. The gentlelady from California, Ms.
Speier.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mrs. Maloney and thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
And thank you both for your participation here today. I
don't know that I would have done this if I were the two of
you, but I am glad that you have.
Let me start off with Governor Walker. I have here a Web
site, www.standwithwalker.com, that is supported by the
Americans for Prosperity and it is, of course, funded by the
Koch brothers, and in it they say the following: When public
sector workers gain sweetheart contracts filled with plush
benefits unheard of in the private sector, the taxpayer loses
every time.
Do you agree with that statement?
Governor Walker. I haven't seen that statement before, but
I know one of your colleagues asked me earlier who pays, for
example, for the pensions and things of that nature, it is the
taxpayers. So I don't know about that statement in particular,
but conceptually who pays for the pension and health care
benefits? It is the taxpayers, including public sector
employees who are taxpayers as well.
Ms. Speier. Well, these are quite facts about Wisconsin's
budget repair legislation.
The second point is respecting the public trust. When
teachers choose not to teach purely to pad their already lavish
contracts. Do you believe that statement, that they have lavish
contracts?
Governor Walker. Lavish contracts? No. Again, you weren't
here earlier, but I was asked about that as well, and I pointed
out, to me, this is not about--I forgot which of your
colleagues, one of the doctors asked whether I thought public
employees were paid too much or too little, and I said that is
not what this is about. This is about trying to balance the
budget and provide long-term reforms that make government work
better.
One other----
Ms. Speier. Let me ask you this. Excuse me for reclaiming
my time. Do you think the teachers in Wisconsin are paid
adequately?
Governor Walker. If we could set up a system where we
rewarded based on performance and merit, I would be even
willing to pay more.
Ms. Speier. Well, let me just----
Governor Walker. But we don't have that system right now;
we have one solely based on seniority.
Ms. Speier. Do you know what the starting teacher's salary
is in Wisconsin?
Governor Walker. Starting? Depends on the district. I know,
for example, the Milwaukee public school system, the total
compensation package for an average employee is about $101,000.
Ms. Speier. Well, the starting teacher's salary in
Wisconsin is $25,222, and Wisconsin ranks 49th in the Nation in
terms of starting salaries for teachers.
Governor Walker. And the reason for that is because that
talks about starting salaries, not total benefit packages. So,
for example, if you are in a school district like many where
they don't pay anything for health care, that is an added
benefit in terms of what the costs are.
Ms. Speier. You are 49th in the Nation in what you pay your
school teachers.
Now, let's talk about contributions. How much have you
received in contributions from the Koch brothers?
Governor Walker. From the Koch brothers? None directly that
I know of. There are probably other groups that supported us,
but I don't know what the total is.
Ms. Speier. Well, I am under the impression you received
$43,000 from the Koch brothers during your gubernatorial
campaign.
Governor Walker. Could be. I had 50,000 contributors. I
couldn't tell you who they were.
Ms. Speier. Did you take the phone calls of all those
50,000 contributors when you were in the middle of that crisis?
Governor Walker. I talked to a whole lot of people every
day.
Ms. Speier. All right.
Let's move on to Governor Shumlin. I was really impressed
by one of the statements, many of the statements you made, but
one in particular, in which you said that Wall Street really
believes that this crisis creation is really relative to the
States and their potential bankruptcy is really a figment of
the imaginations of some who are politically motivated to
create that kind of angst. Could you expound on that a little
bit?
Governor Shumlin. Sure. And I want to be careful, because
if I misspoke, I want to be careful here. I hope I didn't say
it was a figment of the imagination.
Ms. Speier. No, it was my term.
Governor Shumlin. OK. What they said was, and in meeting
with rating agencies that I just went through, and Governors do
that, we go down and make sure that our bond ratings are strong
and that they know how we are managing our budgets, and what
they said in two of the three rating agencies is, when I asked
about this question, that they feel like the doom and gloom
about pensions of the States is greatly exaggerated for
political reasons; that they don't think any States are going
bankrupt; that they don't think it is the States' biggest
challenges; and that they are puzzled by the current perceived
crisis.
Ms. Speier. Now, in much of our discussion today about
defined contribution, what is missing is the fact that the
taxpayers have to pay 50 percent of that pension benefit every
single month, regardless. And in a defined benefit plan, as you
pointed out, 80 percent of the cost is actually borne by the
growth that the investments receive. The taxpayers then end up
only paying about 20 percent. Is that not correct?
Governor Shumlin. That is correct. And another point that
is important to remember is, which I mentioned earlier, but I
want to make sure it is emphasized, that in this financial
crisis we have asked our public employees, our unionized
employees to pay more. Both our teachers and State employees
have agreed to pay more, to increase the share that they are
paying. Somehow that is getting lost between the trees here.
The fact of the matter is, yes, you are correct, 80 percent of
payments come from investments in the fund; and, second, we
have asked our employees and they have agreed to pay more than
they were paying pre-crisis. So we are balancing this crisis,
to some degree, on their backs.
Ms. Speier. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentlelady and I thank Governor
Walker and Governor Shumlin for being here.
Mrs. Maloney. [Remarks made off mic.]
Mr. Walberg [presiding]. I am up next.
Mrs. Maloney. [Remarks made off mic.]
Mr. Walberg. I accept that. No, we are not closing. I am
just allowing the chairman a vote opportunity in Judiciary
Committee, as I was voting and chairing a subcommittee. I was
dealing with a noncontroversial issue and I apologize for not
being here. Davis-Bacon is what we were talking about, so I had
to be there. But I did read your testimonies and appreciate you
being here, so I did want to ask some questions.
Governor Walker, I also appreciate the fact of what you
build in Milwaukee and enjoy riding my Road King. I understand
you ride as well. And I have enjoyed both in Wisconsin and in
the beautiful State of Vermont. There are days I wish I were
there right now.
As a former State official in the State legislature, I am
very familiar with your situation, Governor Walker. When I
started my tenure back in 1982 there, we had a $1.8 billion
budget deficit. A process of a number of years we enacted 26
tax cuts, regulatory reform, a number of things that went to
ultimately, when I left in 1999, we had a budget surplus, a
rainy day fund of $1 billion. Hasn't history repeatedly proven
that lowering taxes encourages economic growth and ultimately
increases revenue for the States?
Governor Walker. Yes, we have seen that in the past, and we
saw the opposite of that 2 years ago when my predecessor and
the legislature moved to pass a budget repair bill in 24 hours
that raised taxes by about $1 billion, and we saw, obviously,
higher unemployment and job loss after that. So clearly raising
taxes in an economic crisis is not the right answer. The more
you put money back in the hands of job creators, I believe the
better off you are going to be.
Mr. Walberg. Build the economy.
Governor Walker. Absolutely.
Mr. Walberg. Well, right now Michigan, as you know, in
talking with our new Governor, we are at a $5.7 billion budget
shortfall. Governor Snyder is taking some aggressive steps and
being pushed back as well, as you have experienced, including
dealing with an emergency manager authority over
municipalities. That leads to my question. What do you think of
that type of authority and what are some other reforms that may
need to be pursued in order to strengthen the fiscal standing
of States like your own?
Governor Walker. I would have to look specifically at what
Rick is proposing there in terms of oversight of the local
government. I will tell you, though, this goes to the heart, as
a former county official, of what I am talking about and why we
pushed reforms that weren't just about the momentary. They
weren't just about fixing things together, or even over the
next 2 years, but about providing long-term relief. Let me be
clear, because I think sometimes people confuse this into
thinking this has an impact on private sector unions. It
doesn't; collective bargaining is fully intact for any of the
private sector unions out there. This legislation that we
signed into law doesn't have an impact on that for the public
sector. To be able to make changes that ensure stability,
financial stability in governments at the State and the local
level, we had to make these changes, and even more so to make
sure that government can continue to be reformed, and where we
can improve the system and ultimately reward good employees.
That also was a part of this package as well.
So, in totality, I believe we give local governments the
kind of long-term tools they need not only to balance their
budgets, but to make prudent decisions so they can protect core
services.
Mr. WAlberg. I appreciate that. Well, I was going to ask
both Governors, but let me continue my questioning here at this
point. What steps can, Governor Walker, or should not, I guess
the positive and the negative, what steps can or should not
Congress do to help you in your budget situation? And I guess
following up with that, do you agree that another State bailout
is not the solution?
Governor Walker. Well, to me, asking the taxpayers, and me
as a Federal taxpayer, which obviously we are reminded of this
week, asking me to bail out another State isn't something I am
particularly interested in as a taxpayer. To me, I think each
of us in each of the 50 States have to make, in many cases, the
tough decisions to ensure that we not only balance our current
budgets, but we make long-term decisions. And if we look to
other people at the Federal level or other entities to do that,
I think that puts us in a very precarious position.
One other thing, if I might digress for just 1 second from
your question. The gentleman from Massachusetts, and I
apologize, I think his nameplate is turned, asked me a question
about process, and one thing is just important to put in the
record. We didn't start the debate the way that it has been
characterized. In December, after the elections but before I
was sworn into office, the public sector unions in the State
rushed to the lame duck session in the legislature and to the
Governor and tried to pass through contracts that would have
locked us in to a more dire financial situation with costs that
I believe we couldn't account for with a $3.6 billion deficit
on the horizon. So that was the initial act.
Now, we were successful in appealing even to some of the
Democrats in the legislature to stop that from happening and
giving us a chance to do that, but when people ask why didn't
we begin by negotiating, it was really the tone was set early
on by the process that was taken after the election but before
we were sworn in, and that is why it became clear to us that we
needed to empower both our State and local government to make
those sorts of long-term changes.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the Governor and now turn to Ms.
Maloney. And I thank you for putting up with the confusion that
went on there.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, thank you and thank you for your very
thoughtful questions.
Welcome, Governor. I thank you for your testimony and for
being with us here today.
Governor Walker, many unions and some elected officials,
including some Republican Governors, have criticized your
actions as extreme, referring to them as some sort of fringe
effort to attack workers' rights and dismantle unions. How do
you respond to these criticisms? Do you feel your actions were
extreme or out of the mainstream in any way?
Governor Walker. No, because I believe fundamentally if
what we have heard said over and over again was a fundamental
right, you all in Congress would be acting on it right now. You
do not have collective bargaining, other than Postal Service
workers, for the vast majority of public employees who work for
the Federal Government for wages and for benefits. If it is a
fundamental right, why aren't you debating it right here now?
It is not; it is a government entitlement. Collective
bargaining is important for the private sector, for the
examples we have heard about the impact it has had on families
and legacies. Private sector unions are my partner in economic
development, I work with them, and I hope to work with our
public employees.
Mrs. Maloney. OK.
Governor Walker. But collective bargaining itself is not a
fundamental right. Rights come from the Constitution, and
nowhere in the Constitution does that clearly define that.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, many of the criticism does come from
unions, but I have a stack of editorials here from major papers
across the country, and I would like to go through some of the
headlines. We have the Chicago Sun Times, and its editorial
says, Cut Pensions But Don't Bust Unions. We have the
Philadelphia Enquirer, and it says, A Bridge Too Far. The Los
Angeles Times says, ``Wrong in Wisconsin.'' And the Boston
Globe, its headline says, By Overreaching, Wisconsin Governor
Hinders Reforms in All States. I even have some editorials from
your own State's papers, the Milwaukee Wisconsin Journal, the
Centennial, and the Green Bay Press Gazette. I would like to
read from a few of these and get your response.
The Philadelphia Enquirer calls your actions ``a partisan
plot masquerading as fiscal prudence.'' The New York Times
says, ``Even when unions have made concessions, Republican
officials have kept up the attack. The Republicans claim to be
acting on behalf of taxpayers, and this is not believable.''
The LA Times says your claim ``that public employee unions must
be crushed in order to balance the State's budget is deeply
disingenuous.'' And the Milwaukee Wisconsin Journal Centennial
writes that ``unions have conceded on benefits, but parts of
Walker's budget repair bill unfairly targets collective
bargaining for public employees.'' Even the Green Bay Press
Gazette, a newspaper that I believe endorsed you when you ran
for Governor, says your approach ``casts the debate as an anti-
union campaign and not a tough but fair shared sacrifice.''
So what is your reaction to these statements by respected
papers across our country?
Governor Walker. Sure. Thank you for your question. I would
point out two things. One, just a factual error that a couple
of those papers alluded to and I mentioned before. The unions
did not reach settlements. Two public employee unions made a
statement, neither of which was codified in any agreement and
none of which----
Mrs. Maloney. But, Governor, this was not referring to
those specifics----
Governor Walker. No, I will answer your other point----
Mrs. Maloney. But may I finish? Because my time is
expiring. I believe the point that they made in these
editorials is the same point that many of us on this panel have
been trying to make today, and we are trying to make the point
that it is one thing to ask for shared sacrifice for financial
reasons, but it is very unfair, and you appear to be trying to
strip American workers of their rights, and there does not seem
to be any financial rationale at all. That is what these
editorials are making.
Governor Walker. Sure.
Mrs. Maloney. Instead, it appears very much to me and to
others to be ideologically and politically motivated.
Governor Walker. Per your original question, I would say
many of those same voices said the same thing about Mitch
Daniels in 2005. After his time in office, after people saw the
benefits of the collective bargaining reforms he put in place,
where government got more efficient, more effective, more
accountable, and where ultimately public employees who were
doing a great job got rewarded, the people in his State re-
elected him with 58 percent of the vote. I think it is because
they recognized results. They wanted results, and that is what
they got.
Chairman Issa [presiding]. I thank the gentlelady.
We now recognize the former chairman of the full committee,
the gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Burton, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Mr. Chairman, may I put these editorials in
the record?
Chairman Issa. Without objection, so ordered.
Additionally, the earlier unanimous consent for Mr.
Connolly is accepted, so his will also be placed in the record.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Burton. Governor, you can't run out on me now; I was
going to say something nice about you.
Unidentified Speaker. Congressman Burton, he is going to be
right back, and we just----
Chairman Issa. Ladies and gentlemen, we are going to take a
2-minute recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Burton [presiding]. Governor Walker, I really
appreciate you mentioning Mitch Daniels. He is my Governor and
we think he has done one hell of a job, and we are proud that
you think so as well. And he did a lot of the things that you
have tried to do in Wisconsin by executive order, and, as you
said very clearly, the State is in good fiscal condition. He
has done an outstanding job and we are very proud of him, and
that is why he got re-elected by such a large majority. And he
won re-election at a time that, for the first time since 1964,
we lost a State to the Democratic candidate, Mr. Obama, for
President. So it shows you against the tide he did very well.
I would like to ask you, Governor Shumlin, you don't have a
balanced budget requirement in your State.
Governor Shumlin. No, we do not.
Mr. Burton. And you are going to adopt a single payer
system for health care?
Governor Shumlin. We are trying, yes.
Mr. Burton. And how are you going to pay for that?
Governor Shumlin. Well, our challenge in health care reform
across the country in both Federal and State, in my judgment,
has been that no one has gotten cost containment right. So our
first challenge is to design a system where we are using our
dollars more efficiently and ensuring that we are spending less
on health care. Once we figure out how to get cost containment
right, and that is a real challenge, as you know, we are then
going to figure out the best publicly financed method to pay
for it, and that decision will be made in 2013.
Mr. Burton. Are you familiar with the situation in
Tennessee with their plan or the situation in Massachusetts
with their plan?
Governor Shumlin. I am not clear what you are alluding to.
Mr. Burton. Well, I mean, they went to a program that is
not exactly like yours, but similar; the government was going
to control the health care and the expenditures and that sort
of thing.
Governor Shumlin. Well, I can tell you that I don't study
Massachusetts and other States as much as I study Vermont and,
frankly, we have already done that. We have Dr. Dynasaur, which
covers all our children. The Republican Governor, Jim Douglas,
passed Catamount, which covers you up to 300 percent of poverty
with a great benefits package. We have VHAP, Vermont Health
Access. So no one has better access, I don't believe, with the
exception of maybe Massachusetts, than the State of Vermont. So
my challenge is that we have done access; we now have a cost
problem. They are doubling every 10 years; it is driving
businesses and middle-class Americans who are paying more and
more money for less and less insurance. We think we can get it
right in Vermont.
Mr. Burton. Without raising taxes?
Governor Shumlin. Well, the point is we are raising taxes
right now because health care premiums are going up so quickly,
the tax being money coming out of Vermonters' pockets at a
higher rate than they can earn for rising health care costs. I
pay it as a business person when I give my employees health
insurance; it is a health care tax. Rising cost for a tax on
business and a huge hindrance to job creation.
Mr. Burton. So you probably will have a tax increase.
Governor Shumlin. No, we won't have a tax increase. What we
will do is design a system where we spend less on health care
than we are spending now and find a way to pay for it where it
follows the individual and isn't required by the employer. The
tax increase now is coming from the rate at which health care
costs are growing, about twice of our income. That is what we
are trying to fix.
Mr. Burton. I understand there is going to be an offset
there, but how do you make the offset? I mean, you have to have
the money to offset the rising cost of health care. How are you
going to get it?
Governor Shumlin. We are going to reduce the rising cost of
health care. We are getting the money right now----
Mr. Burton. No, no, I understand that. But if you can't
reduce the rising cost. Let's say it doesn't work----
Governor Shumlin. If we can't reduce the cost, we won't
pass the bill.
Mr. Burton. You won't pass the bill.
Governor Shumlin. That is right.
Mr. Burton. So you won't have a tax increase.
Governor Shumlin. Our goal is to pay less for health care
and ensure that we are delivering quality health care to all
Vermonters without the waste.
Mr. Burton. Well, I understand, and you are a very good
politician; you are skating the issue. You are not saying you
will not raise taxes, but, if necessary, you probably would
have to.
Governor Shumlin. What I am saying is that we are paying
the tax right now. It is on my business; it is on every
business in Vermont; it is every Vermonter's----
Mr. Burton. I understand, Governor.
Governor Shumlin [continuing]. Paying for premium.
Mr. Burton. I can see how you got elected, Governor; you
are sharp.
Let me just say, Governor Walker, I don't see how the local
municipalities in your State who are facing rising costs could
possibly have survived without huge property tax increases or
other tax increases unless you did what you did, so I was very
happy that you had the perspicacity to hang in there when you
had those problems. I would just like to ask you now--I know
this is before the court, your supreme court. Do you have any
idea when they are going to make a ruling on your case?
Governor Walker. Well, an appeal has been made to the
supreme court right now. Very well, maybe likely today, the
circuit court mentioned yesterday they may even, by today or
tomorrow, put forth a ruling on the original issue on the open
meetings law. But one way or the other it will probably end up
in the supreme court, but it could be as early as this week.
Mr. Burton. And that will probably be a close vote, I would
imagine, on the supreme court.
Governor Walker. It is hard to tell. I am not a lawyer, but
when I was in the legislature I had the audacity to actually
read the legislation I voted on, so sometimes I was accused of
being a lawyer. But I read the statutes, and in this case the
law is pretty clear, and I think in the end, whether it is the
circuit court, the court of appeals, or the supreme court,
ultimately they will rule in favor of the legislature. I have
said all along it is not if this will be the law, it is when.
Mr. Burton. They are providing a speed reading course for
Members of Congress so they can read 2,500 pages in one 24-hour
period, so I am happy that you in Wisconsin were reading the
bills.
As I understand it, the State and local governments, you
asked the employees to contribute 5.8 percent to their pensions
and 12.6 percent to their health care premiums, and the current
private sector employees are paying about 20 percent. So what
you were talking about was substantially less, even though you
were having an increase, substantially less than what the
private sector was paying.
Governor Walker. That is correct. Middle-class taxpayers in
our State are paying more and they are also, on top of that,
paying for the government that they will have to pay for.
Mr. Burton. Now, do you have a merit pay system in
Wisconsin?
Governor Walker. We have a civil service protection system
where we have some benefits for those non-represented
employees, but we don't have the same things under those
individuals who are represented employees. This would allow us
to do that not only at the State level, but ultimately at the
local level, which is particularly important in schools,
cities, towns, counties, so forth. We could pay for performance
and that would be exceptional.
Mr. Burton. Very good.
Well, I see the boss is back, so I will turn the chair back
to him and I yield back.
Chairman Issa [presiding]. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady from the District of Columbia.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Chairman? Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. The ranking member is recognized.
Mr. Cummings. I would just ask unanimous consent that Ms.
Norton be given 7 minutes, as was Mr. Burton. He just took 7
minutes. I just want to make sure we got equal time, that is
all.
Chairman Issa. Absolutely. We have run over on almost every
person, but certainly I expect that the next speaker may run
over a similar period of time.
The gentlelady from the District of Columbia.
Ms. Norton. Thank you. Thank you both.
I am very grateful for both of you to come this morning
because you present us with a contrast in approaches running a
State government in hard times, and I certainly want you to
know that I recognize that there would be great differences
between your two States. Both of you, though, come from States
with a history of strong unions and collective bargaining, so
in an important way you are comparable. But, of course, there
has been quite different results with those unions. You are
facing something of a backlash, Governor Walker, court cases
and all the rest of it. I do want you to know that I believe
you faced a terribly serious situation. For a new Governor to
come in and be faced with what you and, for that matter,
Governor Shumlin were faced with is nothing to do anything but
take seriously. There are certainly no more funds from the
Federal Government, as your predecessor had. We are not
mitigating anything for you out there. And cuts are proceeding
here. Now there are warnings that we could face a double dip. I
am telling you that is what happened in 1937. The history books
tell us that President Roosevelt experienced something of a
backlash to his spending to get out of the Great Recession, and
then in 1937 they called the results the Roosevelt Depression.
So I think the States don't even have what we have.
I would like to ask you, Governor Walker, have you yet met
with your top union leaders?
Governor Walker. As has been the practice in the past, the
head of the Office of State Employee Relations, Greg Gracz, has
talked to them about how we move forward from this point.
Ms. Norton. Wouldn't it be good, now that you have come out
of the worst of the fight, to seek a meeting with them so as to
mend as much of the breach as you could?
Governor Walker. Again, on not only this issue, but on
where the employee contracts go forward from this point, that
is why Mr. Gracz set up that meeting. And on other issues
beyond just the public employee contracts, but with the head of
the AFL-CIO, for example, on issues related to unemployment
compensation and changes that need to be made in the future or
may need to be made, we have an Unemployment Compensation
Council, and both he and----
Ms. Norton. You are the head of the government. You had the
press conferences; you called the shots. These people are not
going away. You would not have to be engaged in negotiation
with them or in the details, but a simple meeting, would that
not send a signal to the State that you at least had reached
out in hope of better relations in the future?
Governor Walker. Well, my better relations at this point
have been with the workers of the State. I have reached out and
talked----
Ms. Norton. Many of the workers are in fact represented,
and unless they believe that their unions have a better
relationship, I don't know why in the world they would figure
that somehow you could jump over them and have a better
relationship, given what has already happened to them, Governor
Walker.
Governor Walker. Again, the common practice in the past is
to work through the position that Mr. Gracz has right now----
Ms. Norton. All right, Governor Walker, I see that you are
just where you were. It is what happened in the past that led
to the most serious breach Governors had with his workers in
memory.
Let me ask Governor Shumlin. You have also had hard times
in your State, and let me see if the figures I have been given
are correct: that the State employees voted to accept the 2-
year 3 percent cut; that the teachers are agreeing to three
additional years of work before retiring and to contribute a
greater percentage of their pay toward their pensions, and
pensions are at the root of much of the trouble of the States;
that your State Employees Association voted to increase the
pension contribution by 1.3 percent over the next 5 years. How
have you been able to get unions to give up so much and
apparently to maintain some kind of relationship with
collective bargaining in your State?
Governor Shumlin. Well, Congresswoman Norton, you know, I
think you got to the heart of it right in the beginning of your
comments. The first thing that I did as Governor, after getting
sworn in, that every day, was call the Vermont State Employees
Association, our State employee union, into the office and tell
them that I needed to make $12 million worth of additional
cuts, and I wanted their cooperation, through hiring freezes
and other methods, which are not part of the list of
concessions----
Ms. Norton. Did you threaten them if they didn't----
Governor Shumlin. I absolutely didn't threaten them. I said
we have to work together to solve this problem. And guess what?
They stood with us and we have made the cuts. In fact, we have
exceeded the $12 million target that we needed to get for this
fiscal year.
My point is I have seen both examples. In the last 8 years
we had a Republican Governor who never invited the teachers
union up to his office and, therefore, turned to the speaker
and myself to get the concessions on the $25 million from them.
My point is that reasonableness, compromise, common sense, that
is what the American people are looking for. But what they are
looking for more than anything is for us to all sit around the
table together to solve real problems. We have done that in
Vermont. I know that other Governors are doing it. I think we
all would be well served by that approach.
Ms. Norton. Governor Walker, I wouldn't be so presumptuous
as to give you any advice. You know your situation better than
any of us. But if I may, Mr. Chairman, use an analogy based on
relationships here in the Congress, you are aware that the
Congress is considered to be very polarized. Now, the chairman
and I are on very different sides when it comes to matters
affecting national policy and affecting even the District of
Columbia. But when I have had a disagreement with him, while I
have not recruited him to my position, I have always felt that
this was somebody I could talk with and that we would have a
civil conversation. I am known to be combative, sir. I
represent people who have a vote in this committee but don't
have any vote on the House floor, second per capita in Federal
income taxes. But I don't say I never want to speak to these
Republicans who are going to vote for this congressional
resolution coming up. So I am not going to tell you what to do,
but I do want you to know I am in the minority here, and
whether I was in the minority or the majority, and even though
we vote often party line, we maintain good relationships.
Analogizing that to your situation, after you have had a
tough fight with a bunch of unions, I would want to take the
high road and say I am the big guy here; I am calling you in,
this is why I did it, I hope things go better in the future,
and be done with it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentlelady.
We have a vote. I do not want to hold the Governors over,
so we have two people left present who have not spoken. I am
going to ask you to be at or below 5 minutes so that you both
can get in, and then we will recess this panel and thank the
Governors.
Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank both you gentlemen for not only your
patience, but your very thoughtful responses. I am concerned
that there appears to be a systematic attack on American
workers, and part of that attack seems to be designed to blame
them for fiscal challenges facing the States.
Governor Shumlin, in your testimony you attribute State
budget shortfalls not to American workers, but to ``the
greatest economic recession since the Great Depression.'' As
you stated, our revenues are down and the need for government
services is up. Is that an accurate depiction?
Governor Shumlin. Absolutely.
Mr. Davis. The Washington Post columnist Ezra Klein
explained the same point with respect to Wisconsin; indicated
whatever fiscal problems Wisconsin is or is not facing at the
moment, they are not caused by labor unions. That is also true
for New Jersey, for Ohio, and for the other States. There was
no sharp rise in collective bargaining in 2006 and 2007, no
major reforms of the country's labor laws, no dramatic change
in how unions organize. And yet the State budgets collapsed;
revenues plummeted, taxes had to go up, and spending had to go
down all across the country. Blame the banks, blame global
capital flows, blame lax regulation of Wall Street, blame home
buyers or home sellers, but don't blame the unions, not for
this recession.
Governor Walker, how do you respond to that view?
Governor Walker. Thank you, Representative, for your
question. As I mentioned earlier in my testimony, I think there
are a number of reasons that brought at least Wisconsin to a
$3.6 billion deficit. One, like Vermont and other States, is
the economy, no doubt about it. You mentioned a bunch of
different reasons that people acknowledge were a part of the
recession. I won't get into the details of that, but tell you
that one significant part, without a doubt, is the economy. And
that is why we are working so hard to improve that and show
that Wisconsin indeed is open for business so future budgets
are easier to tackle.
In our State, though, beyond that, and something I have
acknowledged is not a partisan issue, it has been Democrats and
Republicans alike in the past, have deferred tough decisions.
For 16 years, the last 8 biennial budgets--and it goes back
before that, probably, but for at least 16 years since the
State started measuring the structural deficit, State lawmakers
and past Governors have deferred tough decisions by raiding
things like the transportation fund or the patient compensation
fund in our State, by pushing off school aid payments to the
next biennial, by----
Mr. Davis. Well, let me ask you----
Governor Walker. And then the last point I just mentioned
was 2 years ago the last budget was balanced with several
billion dollars of one-time Federal stimulus aid. All those
things, which I believe my colleague mentioned as well, all
those things collectively added to our problems. What we have
tried to identify are possible solutions, and my reforms that
we are talking about here today represent a portion of that.
About $1.7 billion with the savings in the next 2 years will
come from those, but I have a $3.6 billion deficit, so----
Mr. Davis. Well, let me ask you. There are those who
suggest that you have balanced your budget on the backs of
middle-class working families; you have cut funding for public
education, low cost prescription drugs, and in-home health
care; and at the same time gave tax breaks to wealthy
corporations. How do you justify that position?
Governor Walker. I would say that is just not true. If you
look down the line at the budget we proposed, the biggest
beneficiaries of our budget are middle-class taxpayers in the
State of Wisconsin. The biggest tax relief we provide is an
absolute freeze on the property tax levy in the State of
Wisconsin in our budget. That affects middle-class taxpayers as
much as anybody else out there.
In terms of the middle class, I would contend, in our
State, the middle class are the very people who have been
paying the largest share of taxes to pay for the expanse of
government in the past. If you look at just the numbers, $3.6
billion. Our reforms save $1.7 billion. That means the rest of
that, nearly $2 billion that has to be balanced, come from a
variety of other areas. Some of that has to come from a
reduction of State aid to local governments, but that is
because, in turn, unlike other States that are cutting aids to
local governments, we are actually giving them the tools to
balance their budget without massive cuts in service, without
massive layoffs.
Mr. Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. My time is
up.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlelady from Wisconsin.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. The Governor
and I have a really long history; we are friends. I am crazy
about his kids and his wife, but I am not going to spend my 5
minutes pretending that we agree on anything.
I am going to start by suggesting to you, Governor, that I
just believe your $3.6 billion structural deficit. I think that
I served on the finance committee for many years, and the
chairman has asked the right question. State and local
government spending cuts, choice or necessity. That $3.6
billion deficit--I am not going to call it a structural
deficit--is simply the difference between what the agencies
request and your austere budget. So in between there there is a
lot of debate about whether or not there is a $3.6 billion
structural deficit.
You know, even when you consider stuff like the Medicaid
payment, which was one-time only, $169 million, $200 million in
that patient compensation fund that the courts say you have to
pay back--but, of course, that wasn't even in your budget
repair bill--or the $58 million for the Minnesota Reciprocity
Fund, which also was not in your budget reconciliation bill,
the Fiscal Bureau for current year fiscal 2011, you had $121
million in cash, which is not a lot of money. So you started
out by giving $117 million worth of tax breaks, which reduces
revenue for the next fiscal year. And, in contrast to giving
these wealthy people tax breaks, you cut the earned income tax
credit, doubling the taxes on the poorest parents by cutting
their earned income tax credit.
With respect to collective bargaining, you know, you said
in your testimony that folks were running and having a fit to
settle contracts that they had been working on for a year. All
11 examples that you have given, members were already making
concessions around health care, every single 1 of the 11 people
that you raised. You said yourself that the pension fund is
99.67 percent funded. So the question is choice or necessity.
And in terms of public workers making more money than the
private sector, that is not true; they make 8.2 percent less
considering their education and training, and that is what
pension funds are, deferred compensations. They have bargained
for years for less money in order to have a pension, which is
deferred compensation.
Now, let me ask you, choice or necessity. Did you really
have to end Medicaid benefits for dialysis patients or put
waiting lists for disabled people who need home health care?
What in the world does balancing a budget have to do with your
program in Milwaukee to expand education vouchers so that the
richest person in Milwaukee County can take $6,500 away from
the poorest kids in the State for education? What in the world
does that have to do with balancing a budget?
You reinstate the 30-hour work week on welfare recipients
and you tax welfare recipients $20 a month to balance the
budget. Transportation. I know, if there is time, if the
chairman gives us time, because I am using my 5 minutes to make
my statement. You know, you are going to say you gave $410
million to your favorite fund and your favorite folk you love
to the highway people, $410 million, Governors in the past have
raided it for education. You took a billion dollars out of
education, which most Governors don't do. But you didn't do it
for transit. There are 12 communities in Wisconsin that give 24
million rides a year that are going to suffer because of what
you have done. And you know, you are going to lose $46 million
in Federal funding because you have taken collective bargaining
away, and that is against Federal law.
So, you know, Governor, I asked the question, if you have
time to answer, State and local government spending cuts,
choice or necessity? And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentlelady yield for a question?
Ms. Moore. Yes. I have 10 seconds left.
Chairman Issa. Well, in that 10 seconds, what Federal law
requires collective bargaining and you would lose money over
it?
Ms. Moore. Transportation. There is a transportation
prohibition against--we have communities in Wisconsin that
provide public transportation, and you have to have public
workers collective bargaining agreements in place in order to
get the transit reimbursement.
Chairman Issa. Would the gentlelady be willing to put that
in the record, the data supporting it?
Ms. Moore. Yes.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Moore. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentlelady and I thank our two
Governors. Members, left and right, have a lot of unanswered
questions, but only because many of us spent too much time not
asking the questions, and in some cases we simply ran out of
time. So I would ask both the Governors if you, with the aid of
your staff, would mind answering some supplemental questions
from the committee.
[Witnesses answer in the affirmative.]
Chairman Issa. Let the record show you have answered in the
affirmative, which I appreciate. Additionally, at the beginning
we received general leave for you to add additional information
that you choose to, perhaps expanding on any answers you gave
or providing supplemental information.
I thank you again. This has been great for the committee
and I am sure good for those who took the time to watch or to
attend.
With that, we stand recessed until about 10 minutes after
the last vote.
[Recess.]
Chairman Issa. It is now my pleasure to recognize the
second panel of witnesses. Dr. Andrew Biggs is a resident
scholar at the American Enterprise Institute for Policy
Research; Mr. Mark Mix is the president of the National Right
to Work Committee; Dr. Robert Novy-Marx is a professor of
finance at the University of Rochester Simon Graduate School of
Business; and Dr. Desmond Lachman is a resident scholar at the
American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research and an
adjunct professor at Georgetown University.
Pursuant to the House rules, all witnesses will be sworn
in. Would you please rise to take the oath?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Issa. Let the record indicate all witnesses
answered in the affirmative. Please be seated.
We will suspend opening remarks. I simply want to thank you
for your patience. I know that we had an audience that included
your presence, and your testimony is every bit as important
because ultimately the facts will determine a great deal of
what the committee does going forward.
With that, Dr. Biggs.

STATEMENTS OF DR. ANDREW BIGGS, RESIDENT SCHOLAR, THE AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC POLICY RESEARCH; MARK MIX,
PRESIDENT, NATIONAL RIGHT TO WORK COMMITTEE; DR. ROBERT NOVY-
MARX, PROFESSOR OF FINANCE, UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER SIMON
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS; AND DR. DESMOND LACHMAN, RESIDENT
SCHOLAR, THE AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC POLICY
RESEARCH

STATEMENT OF DR. ANDREW BIGGS

Mr. Biggs. Thank you very much. Chairman Issa, Ranking
Member Cummings, and members of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity to testify with regard to the financial and
budgetary challenges facing State governments. I will touch on
three topics related to State government finances: public
sector pensions, public employee compensation, and State
investment practices.
Financing for public employee pensions poses significant
challenges. But as bad as the current pension funding situation
may appear, the reality is likely far worse. The GAO reports
that funding for public sector pensions currently equals around
12 percent of public sector wages. But these figures are based
on current accounting rules which allows plans to discount
guaranteed benefit liabilities using expected interest rate on
a portfolio of risky assets. Economists are nearly unanimous in
believing this approach to be both technically wrong, as it
understands the true value of plan liabilities, and from a
policy perspective dangerous, as it encourages State and local
pensions to take excessive investment risk.
If public sector pensions were required to use economically
sound accounting rules, the cost of pension funding would rise
from around 12 percent of employee wages to an astronomical 46
percent. This latter figure represents the true value of the
pension benefits being promised and the true burden being
placed on the public. The difference between the 12 percent and
46 percent figures represents the value of the risk that State
pension funds are taking. States reduce the apparent pension
cost burden by investing in risky assets. But this merely
increases the contingent liabilities borne by taxpayers should
investment returns falter.
Whether States resolve rising employee health and pension
costs by increased taxes or reduced benefits depends in part
upon how they judge the overall compensation of public sector
employees. A number of recent studies have concluded that
public employees in Wisconsin and other States are
significantly underpaid relative to what similar individuals
would receive in the private sector. These studies have been
cited in arguing against changes to public sector compensation.
But existing analyses of State and local pay significantly
undercount future pension benefits, omit entirely retiree
health coverage, and ignore the value of higher public sector
job security. Correcting for these errors generates very
different conclusions.
In certain large States, such as California, average public
employee compensation is around 30 percent above what similar
private sector workers would receive. In Wisconsin we found a
public sector pay premium of around 10 percent.
While compensation varies from State to State, the broad
view that State and local employees are significantly underpaid
is almost certainly false.
Finally, I wish to touch on the investment practices of
State and local pensions. Public pension accounting literally
says that a plan that takes more investment risk immediately
becomes better funded, to the tune of tens or even hundreds of
billions of dollars. For policymakers seeking to avoid
difficult choices, riskier investment portfolios are an
attractive alternative. Since the mid-1980's, the typical
public sector pension portfolio has nearly doubled the share of
equities that it holds. Today the shift is toward so-called
alternative investments, which include private equity, hedge
funds, and the like.
In forthcoming research, I calculate that public sector
pensions have actually increased the risk of their target
portfolio allocations since the financial crisis of 2007. There
is the danger that rather than learning from experience,
pensions will seek to double-down in an effort to avoid the
inevitable. A number of States have also issued billions of
dollars of pension obligation bonds, meaning, in effect, they
are making risky investments with borrowed money.
But increased risk in pension investments make State and
local finances as a whole more subject to the shifting winds of
financial markets. Moreover, it is not clear that lawmakers
fully understand the investments they are making. The solution
to this problem is better pension accounting that removes the
dangerous incentives toward ever-increasing levels of
investment risk. Better information is the key to better
policy.
Lawmakers around the country can turn State and municipal
finances around, just as lawmakers here in Washington can turn
around Federal finances. But time is a luxury that is growing
short. While still mired in a recession, it is difficult to
contemplate painful long-term reforms. But there is reason to
believe that such reforms, if properly enacted, can generate
new confidence among citizens, businesses, and financial
markets that American government at all levels has the capacity
to get on top of its budgetary problems. And during an economic
slowdown, renewed confidence is essential to a recovery.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Biggs follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Mix.

STATEMENT OF MARK MIX

Mr. Mix. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to
participate.
May we live in interesting times. That was allegedly an old
Chinese blessing; more accurately a curse that seems to be
pronouncement appropriate for the topic of today's hearing.
Clearly there are tough choices ahead as States and
municipalities deal with the clear and present danger of fiscal
crisis. There is growing evidence that the fiscal house of many
States and municipalities are in desperate states. Several
questions arise as a takeoff point for this discussion, but an
obvious one is what municipalities and States must do to fix
it. But that question can't be answered until we understand the
cause of the condition. This is where I will comment.
I believe that the primary cause of the current condition
is the inability to implement reform as a result of actions
taken decades ago that empowered government union officials
with privileges that are inappropriate to the functions of
government. Specifically, I am talking about granting private
sector labor organizations the privilege of a monopoly
bargaining over government workers. Let's be clear here. This
does not mean that government workers don't have the right to
join a union and they can't associate; it means about
recognition. That right shouldn't be taken away for the right
to join and associate.
But it does mean that the model we ascribe to the private
sector is completely inappropriate for government, and that is
now becoming clear. And I am in good company with that premise.
As we have heard already the testimony of Members of Congress
citing President Roosevelt's opposition to government
bargaining. But he also agrees with George Meany, the new
President of the AFL-CIO in 1955, who said it is impossible to
bargain collectively with the government.
At the February 1959 meeting of the AFL-CIO executive
council, a statement prepared by representatives of the
Government Employee Council was endorsed which included the
following. It said, in terms of accepted collective bargaining
procedures, government workers have no right beyond the
authority to petition Congress, a right available to every
citizen.
In New York City, the petri dish of government union power,
Democrat Mayor Robert Wagner was advised to break a campaign
pledge made to government union officials because granting
union monopoly bargaining would grant too much power to union
officials and wet their appetites for even more. His advisors
told him it would give unions too much sway over elected
officials. And Wagner's advisors were right. After the New York
City model had been in place for several years, former New York
AFSCME Union President Victor Gotbaum boasted, we have the
ability to elect our own boss.
A New York State court spelled it out more precisely in the
years earlier, in a case called Railway Mail Associates versus
Murphy, in which they opined to tolerate or recognize any
combination of civil service employees of the government as a
labor organization or union is not only incompatible with the
spirit of democracy, but inconsistent with every principle upon
which our government is founded. To admit as true that
government employees have the power to halt the functions of
government unless their demands are satisfied is to transfer to
them all legislative, executive, and judicial power. Nothing
could be more ridiculous.
Fast forward to today. We see dramatic impact of the
process which is inconsistent with every principle upon which
our government is founded. In May 2010, the Business Insider
Web site published a list of the nine States most likely to
default. The news and analysis oriented site ranked heavily
unionized California, Illinois, Massachusetts, Michigan,
Nevada, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, and Wisconsin as the worst
default risks. An average of 61 percent of public sector
employees in those nine States with the worst default risk are
under union monopoly bargaining power in 2009. That is overall
public unionization of 20 percent higher than the typical
State.
In the nine States with the worst default risk from 1999 to
2009, aggregate private sector jobs fell 4.2 percent, but State
and local government jobs increased by 9 percent. Not one of
the 22 States with the 2009 public sector unionization rate of
under 30 percent was found to be on the Business Insider's most
likely to default list.
Further, Washington Examiner editor Dave Freddoso recently
analyzed the relationship between public sector unionization
and State per capita debt. Freddoso found that among the States
with fewer than 40 percent of State and local government
workers unionized, the median per capita State debt in 2007 was
$2,238. Among the States between 40 and 60, the median debt was
$3,609. But among the States with more than 60 percent of the
State and local government workers unionized with monopoly
bargaining laws, the median per capita debt was $6,380. And
these are 2007 numbers, before we even got to the economic
crisis.
Excessive spending, taxation, and debt are endemic to
governments everywhere, but there are large measurable
differences between the States that have handed monopoly
privileges to public safety union officials and States that
have resisted the pressure. In any discussion of State
municipal debt and the tough choices ahead, they must include
the issues of growing government union monopoly power and the
impact on the States, municipalities, and, most important,
taxpayers.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mix follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Professor Novy-Marx.

STATEMENT OF DR. ROBERT NOVY-MARX

Mr. Novy-Marx. Contrary several of the statements made here
this morning, State and local pension systems are significantly
underfunded. The shortfalls faced by these systems represent
massive debts that public employees and retirees expect State
and local taxpayers to repay. The amounts that are owed are
large enough to threaten the continuing viability of many State
and local government systems and impose considerable risk for
Federal taxpayers.
The exact magnitude of the problem has been concealed by
the flawed accounting methodology prescribed by the Government
Accounting Standards Board [GASB]. I can illustrate these flaws
with a simple example. If I take a dollar out of my right
pocket and put it into my left pocket, I presume that you will
all agree that doing so has made me neither richer nor poorer.
The idea that moving money from one pocket to another could
somehow makes you richer insults common sense.
Yet, this is the idea upon which the States' current claims
that pension funds are only a trillion underfunded is based.
Under GASB rules, a plan's reported financial status improves
when it takes on more investment risk. When a plan moves a
dollar from its right pocket bonds into its left pocket stocks,
it magically gets richer, less underfunded.
This logic is clearly flawed. A dollar of stocks is not
worth more than a dollar of bonds. When you, as an individual,
move money from your money market fund into the stock market,
you are not suddenly richer. You do not get to pretend that you
owe less on your home mortgage. The payments that you are
obligated to make on your house are completely unchanged. How
you invest your assets has no impact on the current value of
your liabilities. This is just as true for the States as it is
for individuals, despite GASB's claims to the contrary.
Properly accounted for, the unfunded portion of pension
promises already made to State and local workers is roughly $3
trillion, or three times as large as that recognized under
GASB. This exceeds all recognized State and local debt combined
and represents a debt owed to State and local government
workers of roughly $25,000 for each U.S. household.
These large unfunded liabilities are a serious concern, but
perhaps even more troubling is how the current methodology
accounts for new benefit accruals; that is, how governments
value the retirement benefits as a part of workers' total
annual compensation. Under current accounting, the annual
recognized cost of newly earned pension benefits averages
roughly 12 to 15 percent of total wages, with plan members
contributing, on average, slightly less than half that amount.
The true cost of these service accruals is roughly twice as
large, 25 to 30 percent of total wages, meaning that each year
most State and local workers earn employee financed pension
benefits worth more than 20 percent of their salaries.
This is not to say that public employees are
overcompensated. I personally value services provided by
government workers and am certain that many public sector
workers are underpaid. This does not, however, provide an
excuse for misvaluing the benefits they receive. Undervaluing
the deferred compensation these pension benefits represent has
serious negative consequences for the way government is
operated. It encourages excessive growth in the public sector;
it also encourages States to finance current operations with
off balance sheet debt, leaving even larger bills for future
taxpayers.
In negotiations between States and their workers,
undervalued retirement benefits give both sides at the
bargaining table incentives to trade current wages for future
pension benefits. Workers will happily give up a dollar today
for two dollars worth of benefits, but the government
accounting methodology values it less than a dollar. Current
administrations may happily agree to this arrangement if it
frees up money in current budgets. As a result, State, city,
and county pension plans have become a pervasive tool for
circumventing balanced budget requirements.
Because the current contributions fall short of the cost of
new benefit accruals, the State and local pension problem is
getting worse, not better, and this represents a concern for
the Federal Government. If the Federal Government cannot
credibly commit to allowing States to fail, then the States
have little incentive to fix their problems. In the event of a
Federal bailout, taxpayers in fiscally more responsible States
will subsidize those in more profligate States. So any State
that undertakes the unpalatable combination of tax increases
and service cuts required to address this pension problem now
risks losing its share of any Federal funds used in the future
to rescue the system.
The Federal Government, consequently, has an urgent need to
establish incentives for States to deal with their pension
problems. The Public Employee Pension Transparency Act, H.R.
567, is a useful first step. Congress should consider even
stronger measures, however, to ensure that Federal taxpayers
are not the ultimate underwriter of State debts. These should
include incentives for States to close current plans to new
workers and, instead, enroll new hires in transparent defined
contribution plans and Social Security. They should also
encourage States to fully recognize the true magnitude of their
legacy pension liabilities.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Novy-Marx follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Dr. Lachman.

STATEMENT OF DR. DESMOND LACHMAN

Mr. Lachman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
inviting me to testify before this committee.
The European sovereign debt crisis offers a cautionary tale
to the United States about the very high costs that could be
associated with continuous delays in fashioning a credible
medium-term plan to address its budget problems.
In 1999, when the Euro was first launched, the European
Stability and Growth Pact required that member countries
contain their budget deficits to no more than 3 percent of GDP
and that they maintain their public debt levels at below 60
percent of GDP. Despite those strictures, by 2009 Greece and
Ireland registered budget deficits around 15 percent of GDP,
while Portugal and Spain registered budget deficits in the
region of 10 percent of GDP. It is now expected that Greece and
Ireland's public debt to GDP will reach over 160 percent and
120 percent, respectively, by 2012, even under optimistic
assumptions.
A notable feature of the European debt crisis is that until
very recently markets failed to discipline profligate
governments in the European periphery, and those governments
were able to borrow at interest rates only marginally higher
than those required of the German government. Markets also
provided the financing that made possible massive housing
market bubbles in Ireland and Spain, and they failed to
exercise the desired disciplinary function in the mistaken
belief that this time was different and that eurozone
membership would automatically make countries in the European
periphery converge to the strong economic performance of German
economy.
The important lesson for the United States is that when
markets did finally turn on the European periphery, they did so
in an abrupt and dramatic fashion. Greek and Irish governments
were effectively shut out of the capital markets, they were
forced to seek bailout packages from the IMF and the EU, and,
more recently, last week, the caretaker Portugese government
was also forced to seek an EU bailout as external funding for
the Portugese government totally dried up. Despite these
massive bailout packages, markets are still demanding very high
interest rates now of these countries, and these high interest
rates imply that the market is attaching a very high
probability to the likelihood that these countries will
actually default on their sovereign debt within the next 3 to 5
years.
As a condition for the bailout lending, the IMF and EU are
requiring of Greece and Ireland massive budget adjustment of
the order of 10 percent of GDP over the next 3 years. Countries
in the European periphery are now finding that attempting to
dramatically tighten their budgets without being in a position
to weaken their currencies to boost export growth is a recipe
for steep economic recession in these countries. Sadly, Greece
and Ireland are already finding this out. Over the past 2
years, GDP has declined in Greece and Ireland by 8 and 12
percent, respectively, and the unemployment rates have both
climbed beyond 14 percent.
To sum up, Europe's recent difficult experiences with the
public finances would seem to offer the United States the
following four cautionary lessons. First, U.S. policymakers
should not take comfort from the fact that despite its very
poor public finances, the U.S. Government can still finance
itself at very low interest rates. Up until early 2010, the
Greek, Irish, Portuguese governments all were able to fund
themselves at relatively low interest rates, only to find
themselves subsequently virtually shut out of the capital
market.
The second point is that when markets finally do lose
confidence in the sustainability of a government's public
finances, they tend to do so in an abrupt and disruptive
manner. This tends to be highly disruptive to financial markets
and it tends to be associated with prolonged and deep economic
recessions. One also finds that once a government loses the
market's confidence, it proves difficult to regain the market's
trust.
Third, dependence on foreign sources of financing exposes a
government to the vicissitudes of foreign credit markets. It
also places a government in a position where foreigners can
dictate the terms of future lending that can be harmful to a
country's economic prospects.
Finally, disruption in a government's bond market can have
important implications for the financial system, which tends to
be a primary holder of government bonds. Experience shows that
a weakened financial system is generally associated with lower
long-term growth.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lachman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Issa. Thank you. I will yield myself 5 minutes at
this time.
Professor Novy-Marx, in some of your published studies you
seem to take issue with Vermont's Governor's theory that he is,
first, fully funded and then adequately funded. If we make
reasonable assumptions that today, for some reason, they chose
to go to a defined contribution, how much underfunding would
there be in the legacy of Vermont's system?
Mr. Novy-Marx. So I don't know if you are talking about a
soft freeze or a hard freeze. Are we talking about moving
forward to DC plans or just new hires?
Chairman Issa. Well, if you assume that it is all workers,
that whatever they have accrued they keep, and obviously there
is some middle ground of those who are 3 or 4 or 5 years, but
assuming you phased it out very quickly----
Mr. Novy-Marx. It would improve the position of their
financial status in the pension plan.
Chairman Issa. It would improve that, but what would be the
shortfall in their pension? In other words, if they achieve the
8\1/2\ percent starting the day that you shut it off, they
would be able to make all of their payments forever, is that
correct?
Mr. Novy-Marx. They would have a small shortfall, but not a
huge shortfall, if they made 8 percent on the assets.
Chairman Issa. What is the reasonable belief that 8\1/2\
percent can be made, particularly considering that they have
credit default swaps----
Mr. Novy-Marx. It is less than 50 percent that they would
make that sort of return. Essentially, they borrowed a lot of
money to speculate in the stock market. And if the stock market
does better than the cost of their borrowing, they will be in a
better position. If it does worse, they will be in a much worse
position. But I view this idea that you can achieve 8\1/2\
percent by investing in the stock market as essentially
borrowing public money to speculate in the stock market.
Chairman Issa. And if we assume for a moment that there is
some discount for inflation in the 8\1/2\ percent, let's call
it 2\1/2\ percent, they are really saying they want to say 6
percent over inflation, would that be correct, roughly?
Mr. Novy-Marx. So----
Chairman Issa. So they are looking at making----
Mr. Novy-Marx. In the terms of their own plans, they assume
inflation rates that are higher than the market or consensus
estimates.
Chairman Issa. If we were to use a baseline--and this may
delve into others--if we were to use a baseline, let's say, of
from any given time until 1980, in other words, not the last 30
years, is there any ability to achieve broadly 6 percent over
inflation in America's 20th century? Is there any 20-year
period in which you can earn that kind of money?
Mr. Novy-Marx. The two decades after World War II, the U.S.
market did very well and your returns would have exceeded that.
Chairman Issa. Are there any 20 years in which you can't?
Mr. Novy-Marx. There certainly are, yes.
Chairman Issa. So what we are really doing is we are saying
we think we are going to make it, but if we don't--and I want
to get to the next point--if we don't make it, then what
happens? And I am a Californian, so I live this every day.
During good times, good economic times, times in which the
market is performing and so is America, the need for the social
safety network generally goes down, so the government spending,
State government spending, Medicaid and so on, typically goes
down. If that is the case, then when you have lower spending
you have higher earnings within those 10 or 20 years.
Turn it around. When the market goes to heck in a hand
basket, typically you have people laid off and greater public
need. Is that sort of universally agreed to by all the panel?
[No audible response.]
Chairman Issa. So no matter what we are dealing with, we
are assuming that the present system is one in which you must
pay in more over a three, 5-year period--all of these plans
have a certain waiting period; typically they are trailing 3
years or something, some of them go five--but in any really
long bad time of 10 years, for example, you are going to have
to pay in more at a time in which you are paying out more. Is
that generally true?
Mr. Novy-Marx. That is true.
Chairman Issa. So for any of you on the panel, even
forgetting about ideological reasons that we may want to choose
other systems, the Governor of Vermont said this was more
efficient. Let's assume efficiency is as he defines. Is it
better for the reliability to the taxpayer, the people who will
count on services in bad times and who, in fact, don't want to
be misled in good times, is there any basis to say that that
system of needing more money paid into pensions at a time when
there is less to pay and more needed, and then needing less so
you look good exactly at a time when it is only because people
need less from the government?
Mr. Biggs. I think you have put your finger on the
fundamental error in the Governor's reasoning. The bad times
for the pension, the bad rates of return on its investments
will correlate with bad times in the rest of the economy, which
means more people out of work, lower tax revenues, higher
expenditures or unemployment benefits, things like that. So you
are asking taxpayers or contributors to the plan to pay extra
into the plan to make up for losses at exactly the time they
are least able to do that. So that is the problem. When you get
this correlation between the poor market outcomes and poor
outcomes in other parts of the economy, it makes it more
painful to do those things. A market valuation approach to
looking at pension financing implicitly takes that into
account; whereas, the current GASB rules ignore that fact.
Chairman Issa. Anyone else have a brief--yes, doctor.
Mr. Lachman. I would just add to the point that you are
making that we don't live in ordinary times, that we are living
in a period where we have had an acid price bust, where we have
had real strains in the banking system. There is plenty of
economic research that shows that those periods are followed by
unusually low growth, where you would expect to get very poor
returns on equities. All you have to do is look at the Japanese
experience right now. In 1989, the NIKKEI was at 39,000; today,
23 years later, it is at 10,000. So we are living in a
different time. To expect to get an 8 percent return after an
economic crisis like this would seem to me to be heroic.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
The gentleman from Maryland.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
You know, you all heard the testimony of the two Governors,
did you not? And you heard Governor Walker, numerous times,
saying that he liked what Mitch Daniels did in Indiana. Did you
all hear that? It sounds like he may be his mentor. But let me
ask about the legislation recently introduced in Indiana. This
legislation would make it a misdemeanor for an employer to
require an individual to become or remain a member of a labor
organization, pay dues, fees, or other charges to a labor
organization, or pay charity to another third party that
represents dues, fees, or other charges required of members of
a labor organization. Governor Mitch Daniels originally favored
this legislation and prior bills that opposed unions. In 2005,
he signed an executive order limiting collective bargaining for
State workers. As a result, according to an April 13th National
Review article, the number of State union workers shrunk from
over 16,000 in 2005 to now nearly 1500.
Mr. Mix, your organization supports Indiana's legislation,
is that right?
Mr. Mix. [Remarks made off mic.]
Mr. Cummings. I can't hear you, I am sorry.
Mr. Mix. Sorry. We oppose the statutory imposing of
bargaining rights in Indiana going back to the middle of 1990.
It was imposed by executive order by Governor Evan Bayh and
then there was executive order signed by Governor Frank
O'Bannon to force Indiana employees to pay dues or fees to the
union to keep their job. What Governor Daniels did was simply
repeal that executive order that authorized bargaining in the
State. There was never a statute there.
Mr. Cummings. So you----
Mr. Mix. We support what Governor Daniels did, yes.
Mr. Cummings. You support what he did. And despite your
organization's support, Governor Daniels has now withdrawn
support from this legislation. Have you heard that?
Mr. Mix. He has indicated that he opposes consideration of
a right to work bill, which was the reason the 39 Democrats
left the State for 33 days and shut down the Indiana
legislature. He opposes that right to work bill that is pending
in the Indiana house right now.
Mr. Cummings. And on February 22nd, an article featured in
Politico indicated that the Governor thought there was a better
time and place to have a debate. Is that right?
Mr. Mix. I think that is right. That is accurate.
Mr. Cummings. He also stated that even the smallest
minority has ``every right to express the strength of its views
and I salute those who did.'' Do you agree with that?
Mr. Mix. Well, if Governor Daniels is talking about the
fact that 39 Democrats left the State to stop this legislation,
I disagree with him.
Mr. Cummings. All right. I only have a limited amount of
time. I heard you. You disagree with him. OK.
Mr. Mix. I disagree with him praising 39 members leaving
their jobs to stop the bill, yes.
Mr. Cummings. You disagree with him.
Mr. Mix. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Your organization does not just support the
concept of this legislation, you have financially pushed it,
have you not, your organization?
Mr. Mix. What legislation are you talking about?
Mr. Cummings. I am talking about the subject matter that we
are talking about right now, that is----
Mr. Mix. The right to work bill is different than what
Governor Daniels did. We have been involved in Indiana for a
while now, yes.
Mr. Cummings. So you put some money in this. And according
to an article on March 23rd in the Fort Wayne Journal Gazette,
your organization began a ``$100,000 statewide media campaign
to try to get the issue back on the table.'' Does that sound
accurate?
Mr. Mix. Absolutely.
Mr. Cummings. ``And one newspaper tries to shame Daniels
and Bosma for bending to the unions.'' Mr. Bosma is the
Republican speaker of the Indiana house, is that right?
Mr. Mix. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. And, Mr. Mix, did you organization place
those advertisements?
Mr. Mix. We did.
Mr. Cummings. And staff have identified at least 10
Republican Governors, including Governor Daniels, who have
distanced themselves from Governor Walker and, in particular,
his assault on collective bargaining rights for workers. But
your organization continues to agree with Governor Walker's
actions, is that correct?
Mr. Mix. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. I think this hearing has demonstrated that
Governor Walker wildly overreached by insisting on stripping
the rights of American workers, even when such measures would
have had absolutely no impact on the State budget.
Mr. Biggs, I wanted to followup on a point that I think is
extremely important. As Governor Shumlin made very clear in his
testimony earlier, the budget shortfalls that are affecting
States today were not caused by middle-class American workers,
they were not caused by these teachers and nurses, policemen,
firefighters. Shumlin testified that ``I would like to start by
directly addressing the question of what is causing the current
fiscal crisis that most of our States are experiencing. Put
simply, these crises are the result of the greatest economic
recession since the Great Depression.''
Dr. Biggs, do you agree with that?
Mr. Biggs. I think that is generally correct, yes.
Mr. Cummings. And, Dr. Biggs, on March 15, 2011, you
testified before this committee and you seemed to agree with
Governor Shumlin's point. In your testimony you said this, you
said the fiscal crisis at the State and local level has many
causes. The proximate cause is the significant economic
recession, from which the U.S. economy still struggles to
recover. Did you say that?
Mr. Biggs. That's correct.
Mr. Cummings. And in your testimony today, Mr. Biggs, you
explained that different States may have different challenges
based on how the economic crisis affected them. You stated that
when looking at the financial challenges faced by States, the
differences arise from how hard the States were hit by the
recession. Is that right?
Mr. Biggs. That is also correct, yes.
Mr. Cummings. And so you are not alone, as I close, in your
views that these budget shortfalls are a result of the
recession, and let me read Ezra Klein, what he wrote in The
Washington Post. He says, ``There was no sharp rise in
collective bargaining in 2006 and 2007, no major reforms of the
country's labor laws, no dramatic change in how unions
organize, and yet State budgets collapsed.''
So I say this to all of the witnesses. If you want to talk
about balancing the State budgets, then let's talk about the
budget, let's talk about the real reasons for shortfall, and
let's talk about the real solutions.
I see my time has expired. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry [presiding]. I thank the ranking member.
Ms. Buerkle is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
panelists for being here today and for answering our questions.
My first question is sort of a followup to my colleague,
Mr. Cummings's, question. Mr. Mix, in your written remarks you
note that there is a close correlation between high State debt
and the existence of public sector monopoly bargaining. Can you
explain that for me and just expound on that a little bit?
Mr. Mix. Yes, ma'am. I think the correlation between the
cost of government and the proposition that union density is
something that is becoming clear, and if you look at the
numbers that I cited from the study regarding per capita median
State debt per person, I think you see that coming clearly. I
think it is important also to understand that the idea of
bargaining and the ability for a private third party to engage
themselves in the relationships between taxpayers and their
elected officials is something we need to address, and I think
if you look at the States, the nine States that are running the
risk of default, all those States had a union density over 60
percent in the government sector.
Ms. Buerkle. I represent an area of New York State and
actually, Professor Novy-Marx, it is close to Rochester, so we
are one of those 44 States that was spoken of this morning,
that we teeter on this delicate balance here, so I would like
to just followup, again, with my colleague, Mr. Cummings'
comment with regards to Governor Walker. Do you feel that he
overreached, Mr. Mix?
Mr. Mix. I don't. I think the idea that allowing workers
the choice to join or financially support a labor union is a
basic right. Part of the legislation that Governor Walker
talked about and was in question here today was a provision
granting Wisconsin public employees the right to work free of
union compulsion. Any member that believes the union represents
them well and wants them to speak for them can voluntarily join
that organization and have their voices heard, just like any
other citizen can. But we should not presume that every worker
out there supports what organized labor is doing for them and
that there is a benefit conferred on those people. What we
ought to do is give them the choice. And what union officials
ought to do is represent only those workers that want their
representation, because we know that any organization that is
brought together through voluntary means is inherently stronger
than any organization that is cobbled together by compulsion.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you.
My next question is for Dr. Lachman. You note in your
written remarks that the U.S. budget deficit has swollen, as we
know, to close to $1\1/2\ trillion, about 10 percent the GDP.
It is on a path to reach, within a year or two, the levels of
funding crisis that we have seen in other countries. What
common sense practical steps can we take as a Nation to just
avoid what we have seen from some of those countries?
Mr. Lachman. Well, you are absolutely right that the United
States is on a path that is clearly unsustainable and that will
lead to a debt crisis going down the road. The sensible thing
for the United States to do would be to have a medium term
budget program that seriously and credibly addressed those
problems that brought down the deficit progressively over time.
You are seeing that, for instance, in the United Kingdom right
now, where they have a medium term budget plan that is going to
be reducing the budget deficit by something like 1.8 percentage
points of GDP a year, bringing it down from something like 10
to 3 within a period of time, but they are doing it in a
credible way, with actual measures passed through the
Parliament. It would seem that that is what is needed if you
are going to be assuring markets that you are seriously dealing
with the problem, rather than just running up huge deficits and
then have the markets fear that the Federal Reserve is going to
monetize it and we are going to be off to the races on
inflation.
Ms. Buerkle. And just in the few seconds that I have left,
can you just define or expand on that credible way that you are
talking about?
Mr. Lachman. Well, I think that it is important to do
things in a variety of ways. To back-load a fiscal plan isn't
really credible; there are a lot of changes that might occur
down the road, that what one is wanting is wanting up-front
concrete measures where there is a clear congressional
commitment that measures are going to be actually implemented.
It is no good just talking about we intend to do things; you
have to back it up by action that markets are going to believe
that you are actually going to be delivering. Having
benchmarks, having a path on which you are going, having
concrete measures that you are going to be taking, actually
passing those measures would give those markets a lot more
confidence right now. And I think that the only point that I
was really trying to get across is not to be fooled by the fact
that the U.S. Government, with its huge deficit, is able to
borrow in the treasury market at, say, 3 percent on 10-year
bonds. That can move in a heartbeat.
Ms. Buerkle. Thank you very much.
Thank you to all our panelists. I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. I thank my colleague. I now recognize myself
for 5 minutes.
Dr. Biggs, I had this discussion before in the series of
hearings we have had about the State and municipal debt crisis.
There is a choice government has to make with the revenues it
gets from its people. So when we have pension funds, a
discussion about pension funds, if it is a private sector
pension fund, if it is underfunded, those that should receive
the pension are the ones that are getting harmed. If it is
underfunded in the private sector, there is another group, sort
of the forgotten man, if you will, that are the taxpayers, that
are either going to pay higher taxes because these pensions
were underfunded, whether it is through union contracts or
whatever it may be. Then you have not only the taxpayers, but
those people that desire a benefit out of their government. For
instance, you live in a city and they lay off half the fire
department or some of the police, or they don't have frequent
trash service. There are services you would diminish in order
to meet certain events.
Can you talk about this in terms of what that actually
means, those choices?
Mr. Biggs. Well, I think this plays very well into the
issue of how we measure the pension liabilities. One of the
arguments for the way current accounting rules for pensions,
government is different than the private sector; government is
infinity lived, it is very big, it will go on forever, so we
can ignore this risk. But when you look at how the risk is
actually allocated, government is a pass-through entity; it
doesn't bear the risk, it distributes it to different
stakeholders. So when we look around the country today, we see
individuals who are having to pay higher taxes to support
pensions; we see layoffs in government work forces; we see cuts
in other programs so they can make room for their pension
contributions. So it is not the government that is bearing the
risk of those market downturns, it is effectively individuals
who are bearing it. So that is why we should value these
pension liabilities the way that individuals do it.
I think one sort of troubling aspect of the way defined
benefit pensions in the private sector have worked in practice
is often the market risk is one-sided. In very good economic
times part of the money goes to help fund the pension, but
there is also the temptation to raise benefits. We saw this in
California, we have seen it in New Jersey, we have seen it in
Washington State. But in the down times it is the taxpayer who
takes that risk. So any time you have one-sided bets, you are
setting yourself up for some problems. But the key issue is it
is not government that is bearing the risk, it is people in all
aspects of our lives. So we want to catch that issue there in
terms of how we value these liabilities.
Mr. McHenry. Can you also discuss in terms of asset sales,
whether at the State or municipal level, that you have an asset
that local governments have sold in order to meet immediate
expenses. These assets sales is a form of indirect bankruptcy,
if you will.
Mr. Biggs. In a sense, I guess selling off an asset is like
borrowing, because the asset, in theory, would give you value
down the road. But if you are selling it off, you are saying we
are going to get some cash today but we are giving up all the
stream of payments that we otherwise could have had. But I
think the point you make is correct. If you are having to sell
off assets that you would otherwise want to keep in order to
make payments, it is a form of partial bankruptcy; it is, in
effect, eating your seek corn, because those are assets you are
going to need down the road.
Mr. McHenry. You mentioned the importance of getting the
accounting right and, Dr. Novy-Marx, you did as well, even more
specific. But, Dr. Biggs, can you talk about this in terms of
accounting and----
Mr. Biggs. The funny thing is my father was a certified
public accountant, and I remember growing up thinking all these
accounting things are so boring and why would you want to do
that. What I have discovered working in public policy is what
you do about a problem really depends on how you measure the
problem. The way we currently measure public pension financing,
we learn two things from that. The current measures tell us the
problem is small and can be solved by taking more investment
risk. Using proper accounting measures we realize the opposite;
the problem is large and taking more investment risk isn't
going to solve it. So talking about accounting sounds boring,
but I think if you really measure things correctly you get an
idea how big your problem is and what will and what won't fix
it.
Mr. McHenry. Dr. Novy-Marx.
Mr. Novy-Marx. Thank you. I am not an expert on unions and
don't have a lot to say about them, per se, but I think there
is a real danger in bargaining over things which are improperly
valued. So I think that the valuation of the pension
liabilities very much interacts with the bargaining, because if
we way undervalue these benefits, it makes it extremely hard
for the government side to bargain from a fair position.
Mr. McHenry. So, Dr. Biggs, in terms of this, there is the
GASB versus FASB. You have the government accounting--and to
you, Dr. Novy-Marx, because I think you both can shed some
light on this. There are different accounting standards for the
public sector, as opposed to the private sector. I am
interested in this difference. And I also have a very specific
question. So, if you will answer the specific question and get
to the larger point, because my time is running short.
Actually, I am over time, but with the graciousness of my
colleagues.
The SEC has designated FASB as the accounting for publicly
held companies. What about designating GASB in terms of being
able to capture--the SEC basically captures stale data at the
broker-dealer level. What about capturing that data more
upstream, from the issuer? Would that be better? Would that
give more transparency and more disclosure, and can you touch
on that?
So if you will answer that, then get to the larger point, I
would appreciate it.
Mr. Biggs. Pension disclosure in the public sector I think
is not as strong as it is in the private sector, where often in
the public sector the actuarial reports come out a year or more
after the events that they are trying to date. I have written
about private sector pension accounting and I have been
critical of it in ways, but it much more closely approximates
how you should measure the liabilities. A private sector
pension benefit is very secure, but it is not guaranteed. If
the sponsor goes bankrupt, the retirees can lose some of their
benefits. So those liabilities are discounted at a rate of
return derived from corporate bonds. That means it is very
safe, but it is not totally safe.
With public sector pensions, the benefits are effectively
guaranteed, often by State constitutions. That means they
should be discounted at a lower interest rate. Instead, they
are discounted at a higher discount rate. The GASB rules have
things just precisely opposite of the way they should be.
Mr. McHenry. Dr. Novy-Marx.
Mr. Novy-Marx. I have nothing to add; I agree with him
completely.
Mr. McHenry. OK.
Finally, and then we will go to my colleague, Mrs. Maloney,
Devin Nunes has introduced a piece of legislation in terms of
transparency, perhaps strikes at the heart of making sure you
have accurate disclosures for public sector pensions. Dr.
Biggs, can you touch on that? Are you favorable to this
perspective? What are your thoughts on it?
Mr. Biggs. I think the disclosure bill sponsored by
Congressman Nunes would be very helpful in that it would
require every State to disclose the market value of their
pension liabilities, which means, A, you would get the numbers
that would be much more accurate but, B, they would also be
uniform between States.
I testified several weeks ago alongside several individuals
from the ratings agencies, and I got the impression they simply
took the data from the public sector pensions as they published
it. But I think it is important if you have a better measure of
the liabilities and also a measure that is truly apples to
apples from State to State. So I think that would be a very,
very helpful step.
Mr. McHenry. Anyone have anything to add there?
Mr. Novy-Marx. I think it would be a very helpful step as
well. I think that there is actually a lot more information
they can disclose. They actually forecast expected cash-flows
every year into the future in calculating the liability, and
there is no reason that they don't disclose that; it should be
public information, they are public entities.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. Thank you.
Mrs. Maloney for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, and I thank all of you for your
testimony. I regret I had a conflict with another meeting, but
I did read your testimony and it contributes to the debate, so
thank you.
I would like to begin with Dr. Biggs, and I am going back
to a lot of the debate that we had in the panel before you.
Many people blame the poor financial condition of States on
public pension systems, as if pension underfunding is the
primary cause of a State's financial problems. In fact, the
Republican staff on this committee issued two briefing memos
that made this exact argument: ``The largest threat to State
and municipal fiscal security is the government-sponsored
pension plans.''
Yet, in the prior panel there were a series of editorials
that I put together for this hearing from clear across the
country, and they were saying that it wasn't a financial
problem in those particular editorials. So my question, Dr.
Biggs, is given what we heard from the Governors and from the
editorial boards, do you agree with this assertion that the
largest threat to State municipal fiscal financial security is
government-sponsored pension plans?
Mr. Biggs. Well, as I stated in my testimony, the drivers
and the cause of the deficits that State and local governments
are suffering from now were distinct from public pension plans,
were distinct from public employee compensation. The question
you are asking, though, is slightly different: What is the
largest threat to State and local finances? And that raises
some different questions because the pensions have shifted so
heavily toward risky investments that even a small change in
the rate of return they would receive would have significant
impact on planned financing and on State budgets. For example,
recently in California the Board of CalPERS, the public plan
there, rejected their actuary's recommendation they shift from
an assumed rate of return of 7.75 percent down to 7\1/2\
percent, and the argument the people made was we can't afford
the extra payments that would be required by assuming a
reduction of one quarter percentage point in our assumed rate
of return.
The problem is if you are investing in the sorts of assets
they are, which are heavy on equities, foreign investments,
hedge funds, if you can't afford to lose 25 basis points on
your rate of return, you are in very big trouble.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, actually, there is another hearing
going on in Financial Services I need to get to on a regulatory
reform bill. We tried to really bring some controls and safety
to some of these investments, but I would like to ask about an
analysis by the National Association of State Retirement
Administrators, and according to this analysis, less than 3
percent of all State and local government spending was used to
fund public pension benefits. Do you agree with this or do you
dispute this data?
Mr. Biggs. No, I agree that that figure is correct. The
problem is, first, that a lot of States, with the amount they
are paying today, are not meeting the obligations they are
supposed to pay under the more lax accounting rules from GASB
and, B, if they use more honest accounting, they would have to
pay significantly more than that. One example I looked at was
Illinois, which was not even meeting its sort of actuarially
required payments. If they had to pay the market value of their
payments, it would be something like 14 percent of their State
budget. That gets very, very difficult.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, I would like to cite another study from
the Center for Economic and Policy Research, and according to
this study, the primary cause of pension shortfalls in our
country was the economic collapse that we suffered in 2008,
rather than inadequate contributions to government retirement
programs.
Mr. Biggs. I think the argument made in that paper was that
the shortfalls we are looking at now were a result of the
downturn in the assets that they held. One reason they were
holding so much risky assets was because it allows them to
discount their liabilities at a high interest rate. So, in
effect, the poor state of funding we are seeing now is a
function of the investment choices they made, and those
investment choices they made were driven by the accounting.
Mrs. Maloney. We are trying to bring more accountability in
those investment choices, but I would like to ask Dr. Biggs
isn't it true that while pension plan underfunding is a problem
for some States, there are more than a dozen States rated by
The Pew Center as solid performers?
Mr. Biggs. Let me put it to you this way: The Department of
Labor has standards for the health of private sector pension
plans. I believe a private sector pension plan that is under 80
percent funded is considered endangered, and a plan that is
under 60 percent funded is considered critical. If public
sector plans were required to use private sector accounting
methods, I don't believe there would be a public sector plan in
the country that would be more than 60 percent funded. They
would all be considered critical. The account is very, very
important here.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, I agree you need accurate and uniform
accounting systems. We just came out of a national recession,
and it was certainly the greatest recession in my lifetime, and
probably yours. To me, it seems inaccurate and very unfair to
tie the current financial problems that some States face with
public retirement systems underfunding to a long-term pension
crisis. Most economists, even from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Dr. Hall, states that this was the first recession
that was caused by the financial markets; it caused this deep
pain and this recession. And to say that because some States
have some problems, that this is the cause of the problem----
Mr. Biggs. I don't believe I have said that public pensions
are the cause of the problems. I am not really aware of anybody
else who has said that. What I would say is that the public
pensions, because they were investing so aggressively, are
particularly vulnerable to the financial downturn that we had
and, second, even if the recession was caused by other factors,
we can't go back to Wall Street or we can't go back to the
housing market and say fix our problems. We have the problems
that we have and we have to make some decisions on how to fix
our budgets going forward and how to fix these programs so that
they are more robust in future years.
Mrs. Maloney. If I am hearing you correctly, you said many
of the problems came from investing so aggressively. So if the
managers of the pension funds are the ones that are putting
them in jeopardy, maybe we need stricter standards there and
capital requirements and so forth.
Mr. Biggs. It is not the managers. What happens in most
States is the legislature will set the discount rate that they
want to use for the pension; they will say we want to use a 8
percent discount rate. And they tend to choose a high discount
rate because that makes the liabilities look small; that makes
the annual payments small. Then the fund itself has to go out
and say, well how are we going to get 8 percent? You can't get
8 percent without taking a lot of risk. So now they are
shifting more and more into alternative investments. An example
I had, Wisconsin school districts were investing their pension
funds in synthetic collateralized debt obligations. It is the
chasing of returns that is driven by the fact that a high
return is imposed on them by legislatures who want to minimize
the payments they want to make today.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
If you have any final questions?
Mrs. Maloney. No. Thank you very much. Really, thank you
very much.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. I appreciate the gentlelady's
comments and questions and I appreciate the panel's testimony
here today. This is certainly a critical issue, as we have
heard from the Governors and as we have heard from previous
hearings on municipal and State debt crisis that they are
facing, budget crisis.
Dr. Lachman, I have heard you speak before. I wanted to ask
a final question, if I might. Does the Euro survive?
Mr. Lachman. It depends what you mean by that. If you mean
are countries going to leave the Euro, my strong conviction is
they certainly are going to leave the Euro. If we look where
the Euro is going to be in 5 years' time, I would be highly
surprised if Ireland, Greece, Portugal, Spain, maybe Italy,
whether they are part of the Euro. But that doesn't mean that
the Euro disappears as a currency. What you could get is you
could get the Euro which is going to have as its members the
original strong countries of the north; the Germanies, the
Frances, the Finlands, the Belgiums, and so on.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Dr. Lachman. I appreciate you
indulging me on that question.
I do appreciate your testimony, and if you have further
things for the record we would certainly welcome that.
Members will have 7 legislative days to submit questions or
comments for the record.
Thank you for your testimony and thank you for your hard
work.
[Whereupon, at 2:22 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Additional information submitted for the hearing record
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


