- DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION,
EFFICIENCY AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 13, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-49

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-522 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Government Organization, Efficiency and Financial
Management

TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania, Chairman
CONNIE MACK, Florida, Vice Chairman  EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York, Ranking
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma                 Minority Member
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas                  Columbia

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 13, 2011.....................................     1
Statement of:
Sherry, Peggy, Deputy Chief Financial Officer and Acting CFO,
Department of Homeland Security............................     4
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Cummings, Hon. Elijah E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Maryland, prepared statement of...............    31
Sherry, Peggy, Deputy Chief Financial Officer and Acting CFO,
Department of Homeland Security, prepared statement of.....     8

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

----------

FRIDAY, MAY 13, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Government Organization, Efficiency
and Financial Management,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, 11:36 a.m., in
room 2247, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Todd Russell
Platts (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Platts, Lankford, Amash, Towns,
and Connolly.
Staff present: Ali Ahmad, deputy press security; Adam
Bordes, senior policy analyst; Molly Boyl, parliamentarian;
Sharon Casey, senior assistant clerk; Tabetha C. Mueller,
professional staff member; Beverly Fraser Britton, minority
counsel; and Cecelia Thomas, minority counsel, deputy clerk.
Mr. Platts. This hearing of the Subcommittee on Government
Organization, Efficiency and Financial Management will come to
order. Before I make a brief opening statement, I do want to
thank both my colleagues for juggling schedules around the
floor schedule, as well as our witness for juggling her
schedule to accommodate the change in our starting time.
In 2003 and 2004, I was honored to work with then also
Ranking Member Towns to sponsor the Department of Homeland
Security Financial Accountability Act. That law placed the
Department under the CFO Act, requiring a Senate-confirmed CFO,
and imposed the first-ever statutory requirement for an audit
of internal controls at a Federal agency. When DHS was created
in 2002, it inherited substantial financial management
challenges, particularly from the legacy Immigration and
Naturalization Service, which had been a component of the U.S.
Department of Justice, as well as the U.S. Coast Guard,
formerly under the Department of Transportation. Financial
management at the Coast Guard presented a unique challenge in
that its books had never been subject to a financial audit.
Recognizing the many challenges facing the Department,
Ranking Member Towns and I wanted to address the root causes of
financial management problems before they became ingrained in
this new Department. Therefore, the law that we passed focused
on remediating internal control weaknesses by requiring a
separate assertion and audit opinion of the Department's
internal controls over financial reporting.
While the Department certainly has made progress, we still
have a long way to go. DHS still does not have a clean audit
opinion, and we are particularly concerned that the Department
does not currently have a Senate-confirmed CFO.
Our witness here today, Ms. Peggy Sherry, is a career civil
servant. And we certainly are grateful for your many years of
service to the Department, to your fellow citizens, to your
Nation. Ms. Sherry is the acting CFO. And while we applaud her
efforts, we certainly look forward to the administration, along
with the Secretary of the Department, working together to get a
Senate-confirmed CFO in place, as intended and required by the
law.
I am pleased by the progress that DHS has made to address
specific weaknesses, and I agree with the Department's strategy
of foregoing stand-alone audits at components in favor of
directing staff resources to correcting pervasive material
weaknesses.
The Department made a decision this past Thursday to cancel
its most recent procurement efforts regarding a major financial
management system, and I am glad that we have this chance here
today to have some discussion about that action. Mr. Towns and
I remember all too well the debate that surrounded eMerge2, and
the efforts in 2003 and thereafter that was abandoned after a
substantial amount of money had already been spent. The
successor to eMerge2, TASC, was able to leverage some of that
money, but there were certainly some sunk costs that were not
benefited to the American people. I understand the Department
is taking a new approach, and we look forward to hearing how
that change will focus DHS and help it reach its goal of good
financial management.
I will add that most of the material weaknesses still on
the books are related to processes and not systems, and
regardless of what decisions DHS makes on how it will integrate
its information systems, the underlying processes must be
fixed, must be corrected, for that system to function properly.
Again, we are delighted to have Ms. Sherry with us as a
witness. I yield to the ranking member, the gentleman from New
York, Mr. Towns, for the purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much. Let me thank the chairman
of the full committee, who is also here, and of course chairman
of the subcommittee, and my good friend Mr. Connolly from the
great State of Virginia. The DHS Financial Accountability Act,
which you and I cosponsored, as you indicated, Mr. Chairman, is
one of the most important pieces of legislation that affects an
issue that we are both committed to: proper financial
management within the U.S. Government. This hearing will
provide us with up-to-date information on how DHS is managing
its finances. And I thank you for holding this hearing.
Ms. Sherry, as the acting chief financial officer at DHS,
everyone in your agency reports to you how well financial
accountability is proceeding. I welcome you, and I am anxious
and eager to hear your testimony.
The Department of Homeland Security has an extremely
important mission: to ensure a homeland that is safe, secure,
and resilient against terrorism and other hazards. That mission
protects each and every one of us, and we must provide the
necessary support in order for it to be carried out.
The GAO and DHS Inspector General have been keeping your
financial management system under constant scrutiny. It is
encouraging to see that the Department has made some
improvements in internal controls over the years. Material
weaknesses are down from 18 to 6 across the Department.
Improper payments have been decreased from nearly $929,000 down
to $38,000. That is real improvement. That is truly great work.
However, there is still room for improvement. It is
absolutely critical that DHS establish an integrated financial
system. It is nearly impossible to achieve an unqualified audit
opinion without one. DHS has been on the GAO's High Risk List
since its creation. You have to work on not becoming a
permanent resident of that list.
I see from the testimony that your office is working very
closely with the Coast Guard to improve internal controls. I
would like to hear more about those efforts and the work being
done with the other DHS components.
I want to thank you for being here today. We look forward
to hearing from you as to how we might be able to improve
financial management, but also to say to you that we are here
to also help. If there are some things that we need to do, let
us know. We want to work together, because we feel this is
very, very important.
On that note, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Platts. I thank the gentleman.
We will now move to our witness' opening statement. We are
delighted to have Peggy Sherry here, acting CFO of the
Department, and deputy chief financial officer if we get a
Senate-confirmed CFO. Ms. Sherry has been with the Department
from 2007, as director of financial management. She is
responsible for developing Department-wide financial management
policy, preparing Department-wide financial reports, and
leading the Department's financial audits.
And prior to joining DHS, Ms. Sherry was deputy chief
financial officer for the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum, and
an auditor with GAO for more than 9 years, overseeing numerous
financial audits. And certainly appreciate your work at GAO, as
one who has great regard for the work of GAO and its important
partnership with Members of Congress as we oversee the
operation of the Federal Government.
Again, we are delighted to have you here, and look forward
to your testimony. The practice of the committee is to swear in
all of our witnesses. If I could ask you to stand and raise
your right hand.
[Witness sworn.]
Mr. Platts. Let the record reflect that the witness has
affirmed the oath.
And we will proceed to your statement. I think the clock is
set at 7 minutes. If you need to go over, you are it. So if you
need additional time, that is not a problem. And then we will
go to questions.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Platts. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. I just want to say in your introduction of
our witness today, one of the most singular and important
facets of her life is that she is a constituent of the 11th
District of Virginia. And we are proud to have her here.
Ms. Sherry. I am delighted to be there.
Mr. Platts. To the gentleman from Virginia, I sincerely
apologize. Not realizing that, I would have had you do the
introduction, Mr. Connolly. And I apologize.
Mr. Towns. I would have objected.
Mr. Platts. But we are delighted to have you, especially as
a constituent of the gentleman from Virginia. And we will allow
you to proceed.

STATEMENT OF PEGGY SHERRY, DEPUTY CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER AND
ACTING CFO, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Ms. Sherry. Thank you, sir. I appreciate it very much. And
thank you, Chairman Platts, Ranking Member Towns, and members
of the committee, for the opportunity to provide an update on
the Department of Homeland Security's progress in implementing
the Financial Accountability Act of 2004 and the financial
management improvements we have achieved since 2009.
The Accountability Act gave our Department the foundation
it needed to successfully structure and improve financial
management and corrective action planning for DHS through
internal controls over financial reporting, accountability
reports, and audit opinions.
DHS began improvements to our financial management
structure in fiscal year 2005. And since that time, we have
continued to show significant improvements in our annual
financial report and audits. DHS now has only six material
weaknesses, and has isolated the issues on the balance sheet to
one component.
I continue to work with Secretary Napolitano, Deputy
Secretary Lute, and our component CFOs to build on our
significant progress. Our approach to improving internal
controls over financial reporting focuses on identifying root
causes, executing corrective actions, setting achievable
milestones, and providing strong oversight to strengthen
Department-wide internal controls and to significantly improve
key financial areas. I am pleased to report that by using this
strategy in fiscal year 2010, improvements made by the U.S.
Coast Guard and other components increased the Department's
auditable balance sheet to approximately 90 percent.
After achieving several successful stand-alone audit
opinions, the Department is focused on receiving a full-scope
audit opinion. And my staff and I are working diligently toward
this target. In fiscal year 2010, Secretary Napolitano
committed to the goal of receiving a qualified audit opinion on
the DHS consolidated balance sheet this fiscal year. Once we
achieve this audit result, we are well-positioned to expand the
audit scope to include the other statements, as is required by
law.
In order to receive an opinion on our consolidated balance
sheet in fiscal year 2011, specific improvements and corrective
actions must be made at the U.S. Coast Guard. Admiral Papp, the
Commandant of the Coast Guard, issued an all-hands directive
memo to his staff, both civilian as well as military, this past
January that stressed the importance of corrections required to
achieve success with the audit in fiscal year 2011.
My staff meets regularly with the Coast Guard to monitor
their financial strategy for audit readiness, also known as
their FSTAR plan. I also meet frequently with the Coast Guard
leadership, staff, and our auditors to discuss progress.
Coast Guard is demonstrating controls over current year
activity, they are verifying the accuracy of accounting data,
and they are analyzing the financial impact of their legacy
systems. By executing corrective action plans and monitoring
risk throughout the year, the U.S. Coast Guard is putting the
Department on a path to attaining a balance sheet opinion in
fiscal year 2011.
However, because of the deficiencies in their current
financial system, the Coast Guard is still unable to fully
remediate all of its financial management issues. Many DHS
systems are not modernized and have system functionality as
well as security weaknesses. In addition to functionality
issues, most legacy systems do not comply with the Federal
Financial Management System Requirements, Accounting Standards,
and the U.S. General Ledger at the transaction level.
DHS is analyzing alternative strategies to meet the
Department's requirements based on recent Federal information
technology policy changes and various advances in IT and
security. DHS only requires system modernizations where there
are currently severe deficiencies in systems security, and
functionality. We are focusing on our most critical needs
first, and will approach correcting those needs in small,
manageable segments.
While the audit is A critical tool to measuring our
progress as a Department from year to year, we are committed to
expanding our success beyond the elements in the annual
financial statement audit. The Accountability Act rightly
highlights the importance of internal controls over financial
reporting and implementing planning, programming, and budgeting
for the Department. We strongly agree with those tenets, and
have established processes and controls to comply with
governmentwide initiatives like the Improper Payments Reduction
Act, and open government, as well as audit recommendations from
both the OIG and the GAO. I am pleased to report that DHS was
found fully compliant with the Improper Payments Information
Act since 2009.
We are committed to being strong stewards of the taxpayer
dollars, and we worked closely with OMB to make sure DHS was
prepared to implement new improper payment reporting
requirements. Today, all DHS components assess each of their
programs for risk, using standard guidance provided by my
office. And programs potentially at high risk for improper
payments are tested based on these assessments.
Since implementing these controls in fiscal year 2008, DHS
has significantly lowered estimated improper error rates at
FEMA, on average, from about 9 percent to 2 percent. Improper
payment amounts identified by recovery auditors have also
dropped, from about $929,000 in 2008 to just $38,000 in fiscal
year 2010, even though the amount of data provided for recovery
auditors to review has increased significantly from year to
year.
The Accountability Act also focuses on the need to report
internal controls over financial reporting. This set the
foundation for DHS to develop a financial management strategic
plan each year. My office just published the Department's Fifth
Annual Internal Controls Playbook, that establishes mission
action plans and focuses on our most significant internal
control findings. The playbook also supports moving our focus
beyond internal controls over financial reporting, and
expanding improvements to internal controls over operations by
using government charge cards and risk-management initiatives
to reduce the risk of waste, fraud, and abuse.
Based on risk areas in the playbook, my office has
established a bank card assessment team that meets weekly to
implement corrective actions to strengthen the Department's
internal controls in the bank card program.
The Department also continues to refine and update the
Financial Management Policy Manual. This provides all DHS
employees with standard processes to follow for budgetary
policy, financial reporting, and bank card management. A recent
update to the Financial Management Policy Manual is the
addition of our Financial Assistance Awards and Oversight
section, which contains 11 new policies to streamline and
standardize grants management at DHS. The policy manual puts
management control systems in place to efficiently achieve the
DHS mission.
In compliance with the Accountability Act, our program
analysis and evaluation division works with the formal
planning, programming, budgeting, and execution system to guide
the development of a 5-year budget and performance plan. These
efforts produce the annual budget request and the Future Years
Homeland Security Program report, another tenet outlined in the
FAA. Clearly, the Accountability Act has provided DHS with the
foundation for strong financial management and internal
controls.
However, to carry out this important legislation, we must
rely on our most valuable resource at DHS, our people. At DHS,
there are over 2,500 financial management professionals across
the Department. In order to hire and retain the most qualified
work force, I sponsor various departmental and training
programs within my office. I support a rotational fellows
program, provide new-hire training for the Department-wide CFO
employees. I host an annual CFO conference, attended by over
300 DHS financial managers. We offer resource training programs
for all program analysis and evaluation staff. And we offer an
appropriations law training course for all Department-wide CFO
employees.
Providing training opportunities and supporting career
development not only better equips our staff to perform their
jobs, but also helps us to retain our staff. Using the
objectives outlined in the Accountability Act, we continue to
make significant progress toward improving financial management
at DHS. And I am very fortunate to work with such a dedicated
staff and have the support of our senior leadership as we
continue these efforts.
I appreciate the support we have received from this
committee and Congress, and I look forward to working with you
in the future. And I am happy to take any of the questions you
may have. Thank you.
Mr. Platts. Thank you, Ms. Sherry.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sherry follows:]

Mr. Platts. Again, we appreciate both the written testimony
and your oral testimony here today, and your dedicated efforts
at DHS in trying to help rein in a challenging assignment.
I want to start first with kind of the premise when we did
the accountability legislation several years back and the issue
of the importance of the CFO position. As I mentioned in my
opening statement, we are anxious for us to get back to a
Senate-confirmed appointee. Again, not in any way a reflection
on or lack of faith and trust in you, but is sending that
message of the importance of the CFO role.
Can you give us any idea where we stand with the Secretary,
with the administration, on that process and what we can expect
here in the near future?
Ms. Sherry. Thank you, Congressman. First, I will say that
I think in the position that I have been in, and having had the
opportunity to serve as acting as well as the deputy CFO, I
have enjoyed very strong support from DHS leadership. Both the
Secretary, as well as Deputy Secretary Lute and Under Secretary
Rafael Borras, have provided very good support to my office. So
I will say that.
Having said that, though, your question is a very good one.
And what I would have to do is direct you to the White House at
this particular point, as they are really in charge of Senate-
confirmed political positions.
Mr. Platts. So there has been no discussions with you or
the Secretary from personnel at the White House about a
timeframe or where things currently stand?
Ms. Sherry. No, sir, not directly with me, as far as where
things actually stand. I do know it is clearly an important
initiative for the Secretary as well as for the White House.
Mr. Platts. We hope that the Secretary and the White House
do take it seriously, because bottom line is it is the law. And
we put it in law, Mr. Towns and I, with our colleagues in the
House and Senate and the former President, because of the
importance of emphasizing this position.
In your role as acting CFO and deputy CFO, how would you
describe your access to the Secretary? Is it a direct
communication? If you have an issue you can go right to the
Secretary? Or do you need to go to the deputy secretary, under
secretary?
Ms. Sherry. No, I do have direct access. In fact, stressing
the importance of getting the Coast Guard to get a clean
opinion, I had the opportunity to talk directly with the
Secretary and to emphasize to her the support--how important it
was for us to be able to reach out to the Coast Guard and to,
you know, kind of set that goal. And she went right out on
record and said that even though it is a high-risk prospect,
still, for us to be able to get a qualified opinion in 2011,
just because, as you all have indicated, it is a complex agency
and there was a lot of work that needed to get done and still
needs to get done at the Coast Guard, she absolutely went out
and provided in writing, as well as sent a memo at the
beginning of this calendar year, to remind everyone that no one
is letting up.
It is not just the Coast Guard, but all of the other
improvements that we have done throughout the Department. All
components were responsible for working toward this qualified
opinion this year.
So absolutely, the ability to be able to go and talk about
basic financial management needs, in addition to many, many
meetings with her on the overall budget itself. You know, it is
very critically important to the Secretary.
Mr. Platts. I am very pleased to hear that, a testament to
you and the Secretary to have and maintain that relationship
and that open communication. In fact, your being here to
testify as the acting CFO, we are appreciative of that
commitment as well by your presence here today.
On the issue of the decision to forego moving forward with
the TASC program and to kind of start again with a Department-
wide financial management system, a couple questions. The last
effort with eMerge2, we had spent about $9 million before a
decision that it just wasn't going to work. We got some benefit
I think from those costs as we moved to the new effort, with a
decision to kind of start over.
Can you give us a ballpark of what have taxpayers spent
that is maybe not totally lost, but not getting the result that
our hope was when we started over the second time?
Ms. Sherry. Sir, you are referring specifically to TASC and
the TASC program?
Mr. Platts. Yes.
Ms. Sherry. I am happy to do that. We received so far in
total--what we actually had was some carryover even from the
eMerge program, where the Department was not spending that, but
we were allowed to keep that as carryover. So in addition to
the funding that we have been fortunate to have received in
fiscal year 2009 and 2010, and then a little bit in 2011, in
total we had about $47 million. Of the $47 million, we have
obligated about $4.8 million. When I say ``obligated,'' what we
did is we initially went to award in November 2010. We issued
our first TASC order against the contract in late February
2011. That was to stand up the program management office, the
contract program management office, which would complement my
office, my program management office, which was really a
blending of components as well as the different disciplines.
But they were Federal employees. Ten days after the TASC order
was issued, we----
Mr. Platts. Protest.
Ms. Sherry. Exactly. So what we have obligated has really
been the $3\1/2\ as it related to the TASC order, as well as
$1.8 million as it related to program support within my office.
And since we had to stop work, I really don't have any invoices
against that. But that kind of gives you the magnitude of 10
days' worth of the contract. But what we did get for that was
an integrated master schedule, a draft integrated master
schedule, because we had really just gotten out of the gate on
this, OK. We got an integrated master schedule as well as an
earned value management, a draft plan for that, as well as a
draft training plan as well.
But what it doesn't speak to is the value that we have also
gotten from this time around, was really as it relates to the
data cleanup efforts, the things that the Department has been
doing, preparing, in order to be able to get to the contract.
And that would require working with the components that have
the most critical business need, really looking at the data
cleanup initiative.
Mr. Platts. So if I understand in numbers, $9 million that
was spent on eMerge2, and then a different direction, and we
spent somewhere in the $3\1/2\ million, or you obligated----
Ms. Sherry. We have just obligated it.
Mr. Platts. But you haven't gotten invoices.
Ms. Sherry. That is exactly right. That is exactly right.
Mr. Platts. So of the $40-plus million that was kind of set
aside for this, the overwhelming bulk of that has not been
spent.
Ms. Sherry. Yes, sir, that is correct. That is correct. And
any of the Federal energies that we have spent as a part of my
base budget itself has been preparing for the data cleanup and
the change management, many of the things that I am going to be
able to use anyway.
Mr. Platts. OK. That was my followup. So what you have done
internally, you are not going to lose that.
Ms. Sherry. Absolutely not. All it has done is set the
Department that much closer to really being able to manage this
really well. So none of that has been lost.
Mr. Platts. OK. I have some followups on that, but I want
to yield to the ranking member first, and then we will come
back around. So I yield to the gentleman from New York.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much.
Ms. Sherry, you mentioned that the most valuable resource
DHS has is its people. And I want you to know I agree with you
wholeheartedly on that. GAO reported in December 2009 that DHS
hired staff in anticipation of implementing the TASC system. My
question to you is, now that you have scrapped it, what
happened to these staff people?
Ms. Sherry. They are still part of my base annual budget.
So I still have them. And what we have been working on, even
before we went to award, what we have been working on is
working with the components that have that critical business
need, that still need to get their accounting systems replaced,
all right, or modernized, working with them to be able to get
their data cleaned up. Because what you can't do is have data
that is not really ready to move to the new system if it is not
cleaned up. Or if your balances aren't good, then there is no
sense moving garbage into the new system. So we have worked
with the components to be able to clean up their data.
We worked on developing change management plans, because so
much of one of these financial systems modernizations really
centers around change management, changing people, the way
people do their business; also focused around the business
process, standardization of business process. So what we have
been doing, sir, is really setting the foundation, getting the
Federal Government ready for the contract is what we have been
doing with my Federal staff.
Mr. Towns. Right. I think this points out in terms of the
statement that the chairman raised early on is the confirmation
part. Because when you have to scrap a program, and then you
move, and then you scrap another one, I think that the
consistency is just so important in terms of--and that is the
reason why I think that we really need to push for this
confirmation. Because I think that needs to be done.
But anyway, let me just move along to another question. In
your opinion, what is the worst-case scenario for DHS if they
fail to integrate disciplined processes that GAO recommends
before a new financial management system contract is awarded?
Ms. Sherry. What an integrated financial system really
brings, the value that it really brings to the Department is
really sustainability. It introduces effectiveness and
efficiency. And what we have at this particular point in the
Department--not throughout the Department, because some of our
components do have modernized systems, and they are in good
shape--but some of the components, about 75 percent of my
overall resources, they are on systems, these components are on
systems that are either they are legacy, they are proprietary,
they are not necessarily supported anymore. And in many
instances they are not integrated with an acquisition system or
with the asset system. And as a result, what that means is I
can't have strong internal controls. It is not just up to the
system to have good internal controls, but the sustainability
is really critical in order to be able to have these integrated
systems.
In addition, it allows you to be much more efficient in the
work that you do. I think that from a standpoint of where do
you actually have your people working, if they are doing manual
processes, where they are having to do manual reconciliations
in order to be able to make sure the contracts that are
recorded in your procurement system actually marry up with what
you are actually reporting in your core financial system,
having to do those manual reconciliation processes not only is
not overly efficient or effective, I could be using them maybe
to do heavy analytics, you know, especially as we need in these
current fiscal times.
But what it also does is introduce internal control risk,
the ability to be able to have something obligated in your
contract system; if for whatever reason it doesn't make its way
into your general ledger system, there is the potential to have
some severe funds control, internal control weaknesses.
Mr. Towns. Right. Thank you very much.
Let me just say to Mr. Chairman before I yield back, that
maybe what we need to do is to send a letter indicating the
fact that this is the law, and that we hope that they will move
forward with confirmation, and just sort of send it from the
committee. I think maybe to let them know that--I really view
this as being very serious. And I think that we should try to
state it. I yield back on that note.
Mr. Platts. I thank the gentleman, and certainly share that
perspective, and am glad to partner with you in urging the
White House to move as quickly. And maybe that will be the
first step, and then we will urge our Senate colleagues to move
quickly, too. That sometimes is one of the problems with
confirmation.
So I yield to the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I thank
you for holding this hearing, and again welcome Ms. Sherry.
USCIS, FLETC, ICE, have only one remaining material
weakness each, while the Coast Guard still has six. What are
some of the factors, in your view, that explain the differences
in internal controls among the different components that we
have such variance?
Ms. Sherry. The remaining material weaknesses at the
Department level, which is really the six, which is really
comprised of the various conditions throughout the various
components, really can only be corrected by having strong--the
tenets basically that come from the Accountability Act. What
you need to be able to do is to identify what is the root cause
of the material weakness or the significant deficiency. You
need to be able to--so rather than just responding to
potentially an auditor's finding, where they identify an issue,
if you just respond to that issue without really identifying
what was the root cause, what was the reason for actually
having that material weakness, what is going to end up
happening is you will continue to do work, but what you won't
do is actually correct the internal control findings.
And so by using the Internal Controls Playbook, which is
really our annual strategic plan for how to correct our
internal control weaknesses, we were able to work with
components--in particular, my Department--through the A-123
process, to work with them to be able to look at how their
internal controls were designed and whether or not they were
designed effectively, and to look at, through the performance
audits that we did also as a result of the Accountability Act,
to find out how well we were doing as far as developing
corrective action plans. So the idea that you could develop a
plan that may not be responsive to the problem is not going to
ultimately end up reducing your material weaknesses.
What we have done with the Coast Guard and with the other
components we were able to do before that, is to kind of crack
that code, all right, working with us. They were able to
identify--and I think the magnitude of some of their issues
were clearly a lot smaller than the Coast Guard as well.
But what we have done with the Coast Guard, working with
them over the last couple years, and it is detailed in what
they call their FSTAR, that is their audit remediation plan--or
their audit readiness plan--what we have been able to do is
work with them to have them understand how to do that root
cause analysis. So rather than just responding to an audit
finding, they are now able to actually dig into what is the
system issue, what is the process issue, what is the people
issue? You know, how does it actually relate to the remediation
on the financial statements as well as the internal controls?
Mr. Connolly. Are there incentives within DHS to make sure
that various components of DHS take material weaknesses
seriously and understand we have to have an unqualified audit?
Ms. Sherry. Yes, sir, there are. In fact, what we do is the
Department Office of CFO, what we do is we meet with each of
the component CFOs at, least annually, on an offsite retreat,
where what we do is we jointly establish what our goals and
objectives are for the year, as well as for the foreseeable
future. And then what I am able to do is I take those goals
that we all agree on, and getting the clean opinion and
correcting the material weaknesses as well as things that are
at the less significant level of a material weakness, we then
place them in the CFO's plans, performance plans, annual
performance plans, as an objective that they must meet. And
then what we do is we meet with them periodically, and then
again at the year to just basically assess where they are at. I
then report that up to the Secretary and to the deputy
secretary.
So what you have is really, again, what the GPRA Act really
wants us to be able do is put that performance--decide what the
outcome that you are trying to achieve is, and then put those
goals into the various plans. And then that is what we do, sir,
to be able to get them to understand the importance.
Mr. Connolly. Given the progress that has been made,
obviously people do take it seriously. And I think it is a
testament to your effectiveness as well, Ms. Sherry.
Ms. Sherry. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Going back to the TASC order--and I am going
to be running out of time real fast here--which breaks up the
contract into smaller component parts, is there an opportunity
here, though, for DHS, for especially acquisition personnel, to
gain better contract management skills and technical expertise
as we do that, so more people have a chance to participate and
develop the requisite skills? Because Chairman Platts and I are
both very concerned, and I know Mr. Towns is as well, about the
whole issue of acquisition training in the Federal Government.
So in the loss here of the reversal of the contract, is there
also, however, perhaps an opportunity?
Ms. Sherry. There is great opportunity. Yes, there is great
opportunity to do that. In fact, the under secretary for
management and the deputy secretary, as well as the Secretary,
are very interested in making sure that we start to get this
right. And I think that we have made some really good
improvements, as demonstrated by the integrated plan that we
have for addressing the GAO high-risk issue as it relates to
transforming management, not just financial management, but as
it relates to transforming management within the Department.
The other thing that we have done really well as it relates
to this particular acquisition is to start to have some of that
not only horizontal integration, but also the vertical
integration. One of the things that we are trying do in the
Department is to really invigorate the overall governance
process. So what we should be doing is we should be looking at
these major acquisitions on a more real-time basis. But we
should also be bringing all the right stakeholders and
decisionmakers to the table to really review these.
And what we had with TASC was what is called the executive
steering committee, which was made up--it is chaired by the
under secretary for management, has all the lines of business
chiefs on it, you know, within the Department. And then we also
have as members on there, members from the various components.
So you would have your CIO, you would have your CPO, you would
have your CFO, various components that actually participate on
this steering committee. So that, sir, also I think is a really
good way for us to be able to get our hands around that
acquisition management throughout the Department.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Platts. I thank the gentleman, and would just make a
note that I know the gentleman from Virginia is working on some
legislation to try to better train our acquisition personnel
across the Federal Government. And I look forward to working
with him as we seek to advance that objective.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend.
Mr. Platts. We are going to do another round of questions
to give you a chance to kind of catch your breath and settle
in. I am going to followup on the TASC recent announcement. It
is my understanding that DHS is no longer requiring that it be
housed in an enterprise data center, and that it not
necessarily is going to be a single contract vehicle for the
financial management system.
Does this mean that we are going to have permanently, some
legacy systems that are kind of on their own; or is it just in
the immediate term, but eventually the goal still is to have
all systems kind of be united in one Department-wide system?
Ms. Sherry. I think we will have to look at that as we go
forward, you know, as we analyze the various strategies. But
where our real requirement is at this particular point is to
modernize those systems that are in critical need to be able to
do that. And that speaks to over 70 percent of the budgetary
resources, components that need those modernized systems, or
well over half the Department as it is anyway.
So what we really want to do, based on the changes in IT
policy, governance, just the way that we look at financial,
these systems modernizations, in addition to the grave fiscal
environment that we are currently in as well, it really makes
sense for us to focus in on our critical business needs and
those systems that need to be modernized.
So I think as we lay out our overall strategy, we will
consider how we will include those components that already have
modernized systems. But really it is focusing on those critical
business needs now and being able to implement this in small,
manageable segments.
Mr. Platts. And because of where the Coast Guard is, that
is going to heavily focus on the Coast Guard.
Ms. Sherry. Yes, sir. The Coast Guard clearly needs to have
changes to their system. It needs to modernize their system.
That probably is the main component that really I will struggle
with in order to be able to get a full-scope audit done. So I
am going to be able to get my qualified opinion on the balance
sheet without the system, without us modernizing their current
system. I would not be able to do that for the full-scope audit
with the Coast Guard.
In addition, you have FEMA that also has functionality as
well as system security issues that must be addressed. This is
also a critical business need.
And then ICE, which is the accounting service provider for
five other DHS components, also is identified as having system
security and functionality issues. So we will focus in on those
critical business needs first.
Mr. Platts. And maybe that addresses my question that I was
going to ask specifics, because in your testimony you talk
about the Department's Fifth Annual Internal Controls Playbook,
and identifying some plans and milestones, areas of focus. And
you reference in there the Department's most significant
internal control challenges. Is that coming back to really what
you just walked through with FEMA, with Coast Guard?
Ms. Sherry. Absolutely. The being not compliant with the
FFMIA and with A-127, basically the good tenets to be able to
say how you should be able to have good data quality. You
should be able to have complete data. You should be able to
have timely data to be able to provide to all your
stakeholders, as well as to the key decisionmakers of the
Department. A $57 billion agency, you know, we have some
serious internal control issues. And especially modernizing our
systems would really be able to move us forward in that area.
Mr. Platts. That is what this committee, Mr. Towns and I
working together in the past and again now, is really getting
the systems in place, where it is day-in and day-out access to
that information, as opposed to that manual--you know, edits
that are being done to rectify problems. But that it is a, you
know, tomorrow if you need information, you know, you can go to
the system, pull it up, and then make informed decisions.
Ms. Sherry. Absolutely.
Mr. Platts. That commitment that you have made to that
effort is one that we strongly support. You have talked about
the component CFOs, and you are working with them, and your
quarterly meetings, and how you try to kind of keep everyone on
the same page. How is, I will say, the chain of command or the
line of authority from you to the component CFOs? Do they
answer directly to you or to their agency head and then to you?
Ms. Sherry. They answer directly to their agency head. But
there is the dotted line to the Department CFO. So as I said, I
have the ability to be able to reach into their performance
plans. In order to be able to hire into those positions, the
Department will weigh in. We also weigh in on very critical
other hires such as your budget director or potentially a PA&E
director.
Mr. Platts. That was my specific followup, that hiring
aspect. So you don't have final say, but you can express an
opinion on who is in these positions?
Ms. Sherry. We absolutely can. And I will tell you, I don't
know that we have ever gone to the limit, to be able to say if
I had the final say or not. We have always been able to--they
have always been able to work very cooperatively. And they do
look to us to be able to provide that input as well.
Mr. Platts. I asked that--another agency that we work with
in detail is NASA. And one of the challenges we found there was
you are the one that is responsible for the Department-wide
audit and your financial statement; yet in NASA, the center
CFOs were not very responsive to the agency CFO. It doesn't
sound like that is an issue here.
Ms. Sherry. We are very fortunate. What we also do is I
meet with them more regularly than just quarterly. I also meet
with them monthly. We have CFO council meetings, where it is
the entire world that we work with, you know, budget as well as
program analysis, as well as internal controls. And what we
also do is we meet with them much more regularly as it relates
to the critical internal control issues.
So for instance, I will meet with them as well as their
senior staff on a monthly basis during the time--once we come
out with our ICOFR Playbook, once they have signed on to coming
up with the corrective action plan and what the ultimate
outcome that they are trying to achieve is, they actually have
to come in and work with me on a monthly basis and report to me
on the progress.
That has gone very well. And we have very little difficulty
getting the component CFOs and the senior management staff
really wanting to be able to improve financial management in
DHS.
Mr. Platts. It sounds like a pretty across-the-board team
effort, everyone on the same page.
Ms. Sherry. Yes, sir.
Mr. Platts. That is great. I am going to squeeze in one
other before yielding to my colleagues, who may have other
questions.
In talking about the internal controls audit, performance
audit, is it a fair statement to say that based on your
experience at DHS, this approach that was legislated in the
Accountability Act is one that we should at least be
considering for other departments and agencies, helping them to
get to that bedrock of good financial management?
Ms. Sherry. It has worked very well in the Department. It
really has. And I think many of the other agencies are probably
more fortunate than I am as far as the number of material
weaknesses that they have. So hopefully they are able to do
this through FMFIA, hopefully that they have gotten that in
there.
I do think that for the Department, though, it has not only
been helping us with the internal controls over financial
reporting, but it has really become the way we do life at DHS.
The improvements that we have made in complying with the
Improper Payments Act, it is about internal controls is really
all it is. It is about identifying what your risk areas are, to
really identifying the root causes for making improper
payments, establishing strong corrective action plans,
monitoring them, and then ultimately doing the right thing such
as recovering the money that you may have improperly paid. If
you didn't actually improperly pay something, but it was
something else, such as lack of supporting documentation, or
people didn't sign off that made it an improper payment, you
correct that. You correct that issue. And so for DHS the entire
framework of the Accountability Act has really worked very well
for us.
Mr. Platts. You touched on a specific issue I want to
followup on, the improper payments. But let me see if, Mr.
Lankford, did you have any questions?
Mr. Lankford. You can go to Mr. Towns.
Mr. Platts. We will go to Mr. Towns and then come back. OK.
Yield to the gentleman from New York.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We talked
about the material weaknesses at the Coast Guard. What are the
weaknesses?
Ms. Sherry. They contribute to six of the Department's
overall material weaknesses. The first talks about financial
management and reporting. They have a material weakness in
internal controls and system functionality. They have one,
actually the only one contributing to our fund balance with
Treasury material weakness. They have weaknesses in property,
plant and equipment; actuarial and other liabilities; and then
in budgetary accounting. Those are the six remaining material
weaknesses at the Department. And because of the pervasive
nature of the Coast Guard, they contribute to each of those.
Mr. Towns. Right. You know, does any of this have anything
to do with turnover of staff, in terms of not staying?
Ms. Sherry. At the Coast Guard specifically?
Mr. Towns. Yeah, Coast Guard and then in general.
Ms. Sherry. I think you touch on a fantastic point that we
have really been trying to fix at the Department in the last
couple of years, and that is really developing core
competencies. I do know that the Commandant is very interested
in doing that, developing--making sure that you have those
right core competencies, and that the rotation, the amount of
time that you have with people rotating in the Coast Guard is
the right amount of time so that you can actually develop those
core competencies.
So I think it is less overall a problem at the overall
Department. And frankly, at the Coast Guard it is no longer
really a problem because what they are doing is they are
building those core competencies. And what they are doing is
they are identifying where their skill gaps are, and then what
you are doing is you are bringing in the right people at the
right time and putting them in the right job. So we saw that
both at the Coast Guard just recently, you know, and then we
also saw that at the TSA just this past year. What they did is
they really looked at overall skill gaps, and then they brought
in the right people to be able to address the magnitude of the
issues that we had.
Mr. Towns. I was thinking in terms of whether the
Department has recorded all of its property and plants and
equipment. How are you doing with that? Because that has been a
problem.
Ms. Sherry. And clearly, it is one of our largest assets.
And the remaining material weaknesses that we have outside of
the Coast Guard on property, plant and equipment, is at the
TSA. And the TSA in 2009 actually had what is called a
disclaimer condition. And really all the disclaimer condition
means is when the auditors come in and take a look at the
account balances, they just simply don't have enough evidence
there. So what they end up saying basically is, I can't tell if
this balance is any good. The work that the TSA did during
2008, 2009, allowed them to actually remove that disclaimer
condition in 2010, which basically meant that the auditors were
able to satisfy them at the amount that we have recorded on the
books for TSA property, they were OK with it. They said that it
was what is called materially correct.
Having said that, TSA still had some remaining internal
control weaknesses, and we do expect to remediate that material
weakness this year at the TSA. And it really starts to become
very segmented, because through that strong root cause analysis
that they have done, it starts to become segmented to just a
couple issues that they are able--such as they may do their
inventories and they do their reconciliations, and they make
sure things are recorded correctly.
But in TSA's case, there were things such as accounting
issues, such as recording what we call other direct costs. And
it just becomes a real narrow slice of what they actually
needed to fix.
So from a Department-wide perspective, we are fixing what
we can. Even the Coast Guard has done an awful lot of work at
property, plant and equipment. And they have done inventories
throughout the entire Coast Guard of their small boats and
ships and the different pieces of personal property. And what
they are doing is building what they call assertion packages
over property, plant and equipment. The reason why we don't
have that on our fix-this-year list is because there is still
real property, which is part of that overall line item, that
they are still working on.
So Coast Guard is developing the internal processes in
order to be able to build those assurances so I will be able to
get that. Ultimately, I will be able to take that off as
disclaimer condition as well.
Mr. Towns. I don't want to put you on the spot, but are
there any impediments we should deal with from a congressional
standpoint?
Ms. Sherry. Can I get back to you on that? At this point I
can't think of any.
Mr. Towns. OK. All right. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Sherry. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Platts. Thank the gentleman. I yield to the gentleman
from Oklahoma, Mr. Lankford.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here.
Let me just bounce a couple things off. You had on your
list earlier a statement about system security and
functionality issues, and listed specifically Coast Guard,
FEMA, and ICE on that one. Can we talk a little bit about--we
talked a little bit about Coast Guard. Can we talk a little bit
about the ICE side of that? What does that mean, to say that we
are dealing with functionality issues and system security?
Ms. Sherry. System security means that they have typically
access controls--the three controls that we talk about when it
comes to system would be access controls, change management
controls, and then just in general security controls. So what
we do is, as the auditors do an audit, they will look through
whether or not they have strong internal controls around those
particular areas. When it comes to functionality, it is really
how well is the system working. So you go beyond just is it a
secure system.
And the main reason the auditors will do that is it allows
them to be able to rely on the transactions that are recorded
in an accounting system without having to do so much detail
work, without having to pull really large samples and to test
them and to do all that. So it is an efficiency thing. But it
is also clearly internal controls. IT security is clearly a
very critical thing. You need to be able to make sure that you
don't have people that have improper access and stuff into your
system.
Mr. Lankford. Just clarifying that, so is there a hardware
issue based on old equipment, software issue based on just not
up to speed on it, or management, personnel, and process, where
it is a people issue not handling that?
Ms. Sherry. I think it is going to be all of it. It
typically is a combination of those.
Mr. Lankford. OK.
Ms. Sherry. And what the Department has is overall guidance
that each of the components need to follow as it relates to
systems security. And what they need to do is we set--I don't
do it, the CIO's office and the chief security officer does
that. They set those standards, and then the components need to
meet those. All right. And what it does is, it tells you kind
of what the best practices are around access controls, you
know, systems security, and change management.
In some instances, it is because of legacy systems, and
they are just old, and it is hard to be able to do it. So as a
for instance, you know, the length of a password. You know, in
order to be able to have a good password it should be X number
of digits in length, and you should be able to have special
characters, etc. Some of the legacy systems--and so what the
Department will do is we will come out and we will say that is
the standard. You need to meet the standard. In some instances,
if it is a legacy system you are not going to potentially--
maybe you don't have enough digits in order to be able do that.
So there will be instances like that.
Other times it is a people thing. For instance, in the
security manual or internal controls best practices, you should
have background investigations, for instance, of the people
that have access to a particular level of data, or have the
ability to be able to change code, they ought to have a certain
level of background investigation. So it is the ability of the
component that they have the ability to be able to do that.
But typically, there are some impediments there. So what we
do as part of the audit is we actually work with them on the IT
piece in particular, where it is a joint meeting with my
office, it is the IG, and our independent auditor are there.
The CIO and the chief security officer is there of not just the
headquarters, but also the components. And what we do is we
walk through each one of those and make sure that we have
strong corrective action plans to be able to address them.
The functionality piece of it is just really outside of
just the security, even though typically impacted by security,
would be things such as does the system allow duplicate
payments? Do you know what I mean? So clearly, it is a
functional issue. You should be able to build in controls into
your system such that you can prevent a duplicate payment
unless you have some sort of a person override, which you know
you can detect and correct. But if the system is in such--has a
functionality weakness, it may make a double payment and you
don't know about it until after the fact. That is the
distinction between the two.
Mr. Lankford. Right. So ultimately, at this point we have
hardware, software, and management issues. We may or may not
have money that is flowing out of the door that is consistent
with what we would hope it would be accomplished. And we are
not able to get a good audit yet. That is coming. Am I picking
up a trend here?
Ms. Sherry. No, we have what are called compensating
controls. All right? And that is the part where it becomes
inefficient. You know, what the Accountability Act allows you
to be able do is to identify your root cause. In addition to
that, the Department has strong risk assessments. So we try to
be more forward leaning, not waiting until a problem happens.
But if you identify a particular weakness that you can't
necessarily build into your system because maybe it is--and I
will use the Coast Guard as a for instance--because maybe the
way that their system was modified due to change management
weaknesses, you are not actually able to, in certain instances,
actually to get down to an actual transaction level. And
clearly you can't audit unless can you get to a transaction.
But we have identified that as the root cause, but instead what
we put in place are compensating controls, which basically we
have to do something other than the most effective and
efficient thing we should do in order to be able to correct for
that. So we have compensating controls.
In the case of the duplicate payments, we caught that. Do
you know what I mean? Because we have--ideally, you want to
prevent this type of a problem versus detecting the type of a
problem. And oftentimes that will be what your compensating
controls end up being.
So no, I think--we just don't do business as efficiently as
we could because of integration. You know, we have reliance on
manual processes and reliance on compensating controls. Just
the other thing--I am sorry, I get on a roll here--is basically
the internal controls. The more of those that you have that are
actually part of the system, the much more efficient the
overall agency is going to be.
Mr. Lankford. Right. So it makes it seamless.
Ms. Sherry. Yes, sir, that is exactly right.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Platts. I thank the gentleman. Just a final issue I
want to touch on on improper payments. And it is recent
coverage of FEMA and the payment of relief to flood victims and
other natural disasters. And then the letter in the mail
saying, Hey, 3 years ago we paid you $20,000, you know, our
mistake, and you have 30 days to pay it back.
I guess if you can give me an update. Because I mean this
is clearly a failure of good internal controls is that money
was being paid out inappropriately, and according to some of
the statements in the news coverage of this, where FEMA
personnel were kind of encouraging the individuals to apply,
saying, Hey, this is something you are entitled to. You need to
go after. They get it. They spend it on home repairs, whatever
it may be, and now 3 years later or more.
Can you give us an update? Because I know in the article it
does reference FEMA, you know, in December the Inspector
General being critical of FEMA for not going after hundreds of
millions of dollars of improper payments related to Katrina and
several other disasters, and that FEMA believes it has moved
from about 14 percent of error rate down to about a 3 percent
error rate. That is good news.
I guess my two main points, if you can try to address this:
One, is that accurate? Have we put in place better controls
that we are getting down to a smaller and smaller error rate?
And if so, what were the main changes that resulted in that
significant change from 14 to 3 percent error rate? And then
how are we dealing with the real-life impact on these
individuals who went through pretty trying circumstances,
through no wrongfulness on their part got compensated, have
spent that money, and now are being asked to--you know, what
are we doing to go out of our way to work with these
individuals, if we are, to recoup anything from them?
Ms. Sherry. I probably can't address the second part of
your question, sir, but we could get back to you with a
response if you would like on it, just because that is not
necessarily within my actual area.
Mr. Platts. Please. Yeah.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Note.--The information referred to was not provided to the
committee.]
Ms. Sherry. But the first part of your question is directly
in my area. And you are exactly right. We worked very closely
with FEMA in particular as it relates to--that is improper
payments right there; that is what we are talking about.
Mr. Platts. A perfect example.
Ms. Sherry. What we have done in particular as it relates
to the individual household payments is worked with them really
on the front-end process. I mean the idea here is to prevent--
you should be preventing your improper payments. Even though we
are in compliance with the Improper Payment Act, that is really
not--I mean, that is exactly what we need to do.
But what we really want to do is to prevent the improper
payments in the first place. So what we have done is we have
worked--we work with all the components, but in particular FEMA
worked on what we call the front-end processing errors that
they would have. So what they did is instead of--what they did
is, they tightened up their controls around, you know, doing--
you know, checking for duplicate people who were applying, you
know, for two benefits or whatever, making sure that you had
valid Social Security numbers. You know, things of that nature.
And for them to have been able to have gone from that 7 percent
down to the roughly 3 percent error rate, they did that really
by focusing on some of the those front-end internal controls.
They are still testing. What they do as part of their
annual improper payments testing, they test individual
household payments. In fact, we actually do it quarterly now
with them. We make sure that we actually do the testing more
realtime, so that we can make sure that we stay really
responsive. And what they are finding is just even better
results. All right?
So this type of preventive-type controls, you know, rather
than having to go after people to get money back, you know,
really trying to prevent that up front. So that is what we are
doing, working with them, as well as working with them and
their other high-risk programs working through those same kind
of things.
Mr. Platts. I kind of equate it to Mr. Connolly's about
acquisition personnel and the training up front. They are doing
it right, rather than trying to correct it after the fact. Same
here.
And you may not be able to address this. This really goes
to the HR side of the training of the personnel. I guess I
assume that if there is a flood in Mississippi or wherever,
Iowa, that there is a cadre of FEMA personnel who are well
trained, and this isn't the first time they are doing it. They
go out and they know. Is it just in that training was not up to
snuff that they were having such a higher error rate? Or was it
because of just the timing of a lot of disasters? And so it
wasn't a breakdown in training, but a lot of new personnel? You
may not be able to address that today.
Ms. Sherry. I can't address that directly. And I can get
back to you on that. I was not in the Department at that
particular time.
Mr. Platts. Right.
Ms. Sherry. But I did have the opportunity, when I did join
the Department, to work closely with FEMA to examine what those
internal control failures were. And what we did is we worked
with them for several years. In fact, when we had the
hurricanes for Ike and Gustav, what we did is we actually
tested those internal controls. And I think it was the IG who
tested behind them and came back with saying yeah, what you are
doing as far as tightening these preventive-type controls here
are working. But I suspect it was probably a combination of
many of the things, sir, that you talked about. But if you
would like, we could get back to you on that.
Mr. Platts. Yeah. If you could followup with the committee.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Note.--The information referred to was not provided to the
committee.]
Ms. Sherry. Happy to do that.
Mr. Platts. You know, what is the main thing they did to
get from perhaps double-digit to now low single-digit error
rate?
And then also the other issue, I understand outside of your
domain, is how they are working where an innocent citizen got a
payment and--because I understand that there is, you know, the
citizen can petition for it to be forgiven, or a payment plan.
I guess what I would like to know is how customer-oriented are
we? Because if it is a citizen who has done nothing wrong, to
get a letter saying--even the initial letter saying, Hey, you
owe this money and we would like it in 30 days. If it was our
fault, I hope that letter is also laying out we would like 30
days, we understand this might create a financial hardship, so
please contact us and we will work with you for repayment. I
hope we are doing that up front, versus kind of a, you know, a
letter saying, Hey, pay up, and then after the fact we come
back.
Ms. Sherry. We will look at that, sir. Absolutely.
Mr. Platts. If you could followup with the committee, that
would be great.
[The information referred to follows:]
[Note.--The information referred to was not provided to the
committee.]
Mr. Platts. If no other questions, I just want to thank you
for your testimony here today, but most importantly for your
work, day in and day out. And, really, you get your arms around
a very important assignment. Because the more efficient and
well managed the Department is, the more effective it is going
to be in serving our Nation in a lot of critically important
missions.
Also thank your staff there with you as well, who work day
in and day out with you at the Department. We certainly want to
be a partner for you.
And it kind of goes to Mr. Towns, I think his last
question, if you do have something to put on our list that we
can do to better assist, because that is what we want to do, we
want to partner with you, assist in any way we can, if there is
something legislatively that you need, we stand ready to work
with you and your colleagues to try to make that happen, to
allow you to be as effective as possible.
Ms. Sherry. Thank you, sir. I appreciate the opportunity to
be here today. Thank you.
Mr. Platts. You are welcome. And we will keep the record
open for 2 weeks for any additional information. Otherwise,
this hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:43 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[The prepared statement of Hon. Elijah E. Cummings
follows:]


