- JOBS FOR WOUNDED WARRIORS: INCREASING ACCESS TO CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE DISABLED VETERANS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

JOBS FOR WOUNDED WARRIORS: INCREASING ACCESS TO CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE
DISABLED VETERANS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY, INFORMATION
POLICY, INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS AND
PROCUREMENT REFORM

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 7, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-143

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-458 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Technology, Information Policy, Intergovernmental
Relations and Procurement Reform

JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma, Chairman
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania, Vice       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia,
Chairman                             Ranking Minority Member
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              JACKIE SPEIER, California
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on February 7, 2012.................................     1

WITNESSES

The Honorable Bill Johnson, A Representative in Congress from the
State of Ohio
Oral statement...............................................     4
Written statement............................................     6
The Honorable Max Cleland, Former Representative in Congress from
the State of Georgia
Oral statement...............................................     8
Ms. Belinda Finn, Asst. IG, Veterans Admin, OIG
Oral statement...............................................    11
Written statement............................................    13
Mr. Rick Hillman, Managing Director, Forensic Audits and
Investigative Service, GAO
Oral statement...............................................    22
Written statement............................................    24
Mr. Rick Weidman, Exec. Dir., Vietnam Veterans Association
Oral statement...............................................    47
Written statement............................................    50
Mr. Andre Gudger, Director, Office of Small Business Programs,
Dept. of Defense
Oral statement...............................................    61
Written statement............................................    63
Mr. Thomas Leney, Exec. Dir., Small and Veteran Owned Business
Programs, Dept. of Veterans Affairs
Oral statement...............................................    71
Written statement............................................    73
Mr. William Puopolo, President, Verissimo Global Inc.
Oral statement...............................................    79
Written statement............................................    81

JOBS FOR WOUNDED WARRIORS: INCREASING ACCESS TO CONTRACTS FOR SERVICE
DISABLED VETERANS

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Technology, Information Policy,
Intergovernmental Relations and Procurement Reform,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:06 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. James Lankford
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lankford, Kelly, Chaffetz,
Walberg, Meehan, Farenthold, Issa, and Connolly.
Staff Present: Ali Ahmad, Majority Deputy Press Secretary;
Michael R. Bebeau, Majority Assistant Clerk; Richard A. Beutel,
Majority Senior Counsel; Robert Borden, Majority General
Counsel; Molly Boyl, Majority Parliamentarian; John Cuaderes,
Majority Deputy Staff Director; Adam P. Fromm, Majority
Director of Member Liaison and Floor Operations; Linda Good,
Majority Chief Clerk; Jaron Bourke, Minority Director of
Administration; Krista Boyd, Minority Counsel; Adam Koshkin,
Minority Staff Assistant; Lucinda Lessley, Minority Policy
Director; Suzanne Owen, Minority Health Policy Advisor; Rory
Sheehan, Minority New Media Press Secretary; and Cecelia
Thomas, Minority Counsel.
Mr. Lankford. The hearing on Jobs for Wounded Warriors:
Increasing Access to Contracts for Service Disabled Veterans
will come to order.
Let me read a quick mission statement from the Oversight
and Government Reform Committee.
We exist to secure two fundamental principles: first,
Americans have a right to know that the money Washington takes
from them is well spent; second, Americans deserve an
efficient, effective government that works for them. Our duty
on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee is to protect
these rights.
Our solemn responsibility is to hold government accountable
to taxpayers because taxpayers have a right to know what they
get from their government. We will work tirelessly in
partnership with citizen watchdogs to deliver the facts to the
American people and bring genuine reform to the Federal
bureaucracy. This is the mission of the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee.
Let me make a brief opening statement, set the context for
the day.
The men and women of our armed forces understand that
serving their Nation in the armed forces as a soldier, sailor,
airmen, Marine, is part of what citizenship is all about. The
men and women of the armed forces take an oath that begins with
``I do solemnly swear'' and ends with ``if necessary, with my
life, so help me God.''
More than 40 million Americans have responded to that call
and served their Country in wartime. More than 1 million
Americans who heard that call did not come home. Millions of
others have been gravely injured in defense of our basic
freedoms. As the long conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan begin
to wind down, thousands of service-disabled veterans are coming
home. Today we have one of those veterans, Bill Puopolo, who
has served tours of duty in both Iraq and Afghanistan.
As if their personal challenges are not enough, these
soldiers, airmen, and Marines return home to hard economic
times and an extremely tight economy. The least we can do to
support our wounded veterans is to ensure they have access to
jobs and economic opportunities. Service-disabled veterans
should have a level playing field in obtaining economic
opportunity. This is the least we can do to provide for them.
This basic obligation to honor their service and support
them upon their return from foreign fields has been recognized
since at least 1999. At that time, Congress passed legislation
directing Federal agencies to place at least 3 percent of their
contract spending with service-disabled veterans small
businesses. Unfortunately, almost no agency has come close to
meeting this goal.
The Department of Defense has a special responsibility to
service-disabled veterans, but their percentage is also not
close to 3 percent. President Bush directed Executive Branch
agencies to do better by an Executive Order in 2004. President
Obama, in 2009, established an interagency task force to
improve capital access, business development opportunities, and
goals for service-disabled veterans.
As a quick side note, as a part of our request for
information and testimony, this Committee requested from OMB a
person to testify about the progress of the President's
interagency task force. Mr. Jordan has testified on these
issues in 2009 before the Veterans Committee, but the
Administration was unwilling to allow him to appear today to
give an update on the interagency task force progress and the
progress of this Committee.
This hearing is not a partisan issue or a single
administration issue. We understand very well that the failure
to strengthen and monitor the service-disabled veterans program
is not unique to the current Administration, but it is well
passed time to fix it.
Agencies across the Federal Government are woefully behind
in meeting their obligations to our wounded warriors. Several
reports have documented an unacceptable level of waste, fraud,
and abuse in the service-disabled veterans program. In too many
instances disabled veterans are cynically engaged to serve as
fronts so that companies and individuals can get access to
contracts and business opportunities that are supposed to be
going to wounded warriors. In other instances charlatans pose
as wounded warriors and steel valor, thereby syphoning off
precious program resources.
No honest American should stomach fraud in a program
designed to help our wounded warriors. This waste and fraud
hurts the entrepreneurship of our veterans by taking away the
business opportunities available to eligible service-disabled
veterans when the Federal Government purchases goods and
services.
The award of service-disabled veterans contracts to
ineligible businesses reduce the funding available to eligible
businesses and the accuracy of VA's reported socioeconomic goal
accomplishment data. Examples of fraud in this program are
legion, but let me just give you one. A business received one
sole-source and two set-aside veterans' contracts for duct
cleaning and maintenance work valued at $343,500.
Although the owner had self-certified his business as being
service-disabled, the military system did not have record of
him and he had no disability rating. When the contracts were
investigated, the disabled veteran stated he was in the Marine
Corps for five weeks when he attended boot camp, but had
injured his leg during a pickup football game, resulting in his
discharge from the military.
These frauds take precious program dollars away from
service-disabled veterans. The VA inspector general projects
that VA awards ineligible businesses a minimum of 1,400 veteran
sole-source and set-aside contracts valued at $500 million
annually, and could award a minimum of $2.5 billion to
ineligible businesses over the next five years. Given VA's
unique and special responsibility to veterans, these numbers
are staggering.
Today we have three distinguished panels to address these
issues. First we will hear from the honorable former senator
from Georgia, Max Cleland. Senator Cleland is a distinguished
Vietnam veterans. Senator Cleland served in the United States
Army during the Vietnam War, attaining the rank of captain. He
was awarded the silver star and bronze star for acts of valor
in combat. Senator Cleland has been a tireless advocate for the
veteran community and we welcome him here today.
Next we have Congressman Bill Johnson from the 6th District
of Ohio. Congressman Johnson is himself a distinguished veteran
and is currently the chairman of the Subcommittee of Oversight
and Investigations Committee on Veterans Affairs. Congressman
Johnson has been a forceful advocate on behalf of service-
disabled veterans.
Both these gentleman will have a brief statement from them
in a moment. We won't field questions, necessarily, from them,
to allow them to make a statement from the record, and we are
very honored that you are here.
Our second panel consists of the overseers. We have
Assistant Inspector General Belinda Finn and Assistant
Inspector General James O'Neill from the Veterans
Administration Office of the Inspector General to discuss the
recent report and audit on service-disabled veterans program.
We have Rick Hillman from the Government Accountability Office
to discuss the recent findings on the scope of waste and fraud
and abuse in these program.
Our final panel consists of veterans representatives and
agency officials. We have Mr. Andre Gudger, Director of the
Office of Small Business Programs in the Office of the
Undersecretary of Defense. We also have Mr. Thomas Leney, who
is the Executive Director for Small and Veteran Owned Business
Programs at the Department of Veterans Affairs; we have Mr.
Rick Weidman, the Executive Director of the Vietnam Veterans of
America, representing a coalition of veterans groups called
VET-Force; and we have Mr. Bill Puopolo, who is President of
Verissimo Global Incorporated, a service-disabled veteran,
owner of a small business.
Thank you all for being here today.
The second and third panel we will swear in at that time.
It is our habit to not swear in members of Congress or former
members of Congress, former Senators.
Any other members will have seven days to submit opening
statements and extraneous material for the record.
I would now like to welcome our first panel. Mr. Bill
Johnson represents Ohio's 6th District, as I mentioned before.
I would be honored to be able to receive your testimony today,
Mr. Johnson.

STATEMENT OF WITNESSES

STATEMENT OF BILL JOHNSON

Mr. Johnson. Good morning Chairman Lankford, Ranking Member
Connolly, distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. I
appreciate the opportunity to testify today in support of our
nation's veterans and Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small
Businesses, or SDVOSBs.
I strongly believe that veterans are the segment of society
that most deserves our sincere gratitude and assistance, and I
am grateful to the brave men and women who have and continue to
serve our Country. As a 26-year Air Force veteran who also
serves on the House Veterans' Affairs Committee, I am aware of
the sacrifice and commitment that these brave men and women, in
addition to their families at home, endure everyday to protect
the freedoms we enjoy as Americans.
Due to advances in medical technology, more of our veterans
than ever before are returning home, including many who may not
have survived in the past. Now that is good news. But some of
these veterans are coming home severely injured, with PTSD,
TBIs, and sometimes with multiple limbs missing. However, you
wouldn't believe the positive attitudes of these veterans I
have met who have come home with such severe injuries. These
veterans want to use their talents to lead meaningful lives
despite their condition, and we owe it to them to provide the
rehabilitation programs and support they need to be successful.
Speaker Boehner couldn't be more clear when he stated last
November, ``the men and women who wear the uniform of our Armed
Forces deserve our full support when they serve and after they
come home, especially now in the middle of a tough economy.''
With 815,000 veterans unemployed, a number, by the way, that is
far too high, our Government needs to act immediately. I am
deeply troubled that nearly one in twelve of our Nation's
heroes are unable to find a job after sacrificing so much for
our Nation.
Contracting with Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small
Businesses is just one way in which our Government can act now
to support these brave warriors. Compared to other Government
agencies, the Department of Veterans Affairs is considered to
have the best SDVOSB program. According to the Small Business
Goaling Report for Fiscal Year 2010, approximately 20 percent
of the VA's contracts are going to these worthy veteran-owned
businesses. However, VA contracts only account for 30 percent
of Government contracting, meaning the vast majority of
Government contracts are not affected by the VA or their SDVOSB
program.
Currently, a mere 1.8 percent of Department of Defense
contracts are with SDVOSBs. This is unacceptable. The
Department of Defense trained these former warriors. They are
tremendous assets to our Nation because of the experience
gained in our armed forces. It is time the DOD and other
Government agencies considered contracting at higher
percentages with the SDVOSBs.
The VA's SDVOSB program is by no means perfect. As Chairman
of the House Veterans' Affairs Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, I chaired two hearings last year on this issue.
However, I can say with certainty that the VA is attempting to
produce positive results in their SDVOSB program. And be
assured, I will be keeping track of the VA's progress to reform
the SDVOSB program and streamline the certification process to
better serve our veterans.
Furthermore, I would argue that instances of fraud within
the VA's SDVOSB program warrant a need for other Government
agencies to also take a look at their SDVOSB contracts. The
fact that there are fraudulent companies claiming to be
veteran-owned underscores the need to build stronger SDVOSB
programs across our Government to ensure that our Nation's
heroes, our veterans, are the ones receiving these contracts.
I believe America would greatly benefit from contracting
with more veteran-owned small businesses. Our service members
and veterans are highly trained, skilled professionals with a
solid work ethic. They have already demonstrated their
abilities and dedication to our Country. Why wouldn't our
Government strive to work with an increased number of these
upstanding men and women?
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Connolly, thank you again for
the opportunity to speak on behalf of our Nation's veterans and
the need to assist Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small
Businesses. I am pleased to answer any questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
Senator Cleland.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MAX CLELAND

Mr. Cleland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May I say that it is
nice to be back in the people's house. Forty-seven years ago I
was an intern across the street, in the Longworth House Office
Building, in the summer of 1965. I am making progress; I am not
across the street here. So we are delighted to be with all of
you and my friend, Bill Johnson from Ohio. Thank you for
focusing on this.
I have had some time to think a little bit about what
really is important to a disabled veteran. There are a lot of
things that go on in your mind after the turbulence of getting
wounded in war and then surviving it, and maybe spending the
rest of your life trying to figure out why you survived. After
the rehabilitation, after the VA services, after the voc rehab,
after all that, we are dealing with young people who still have
their lives ahead of them.
Therefore, nothing solidifies the life of a disabled
veteran like a job. It provides focus, it provides meaning, it
provides purpose in living. And when one is so confused in many
ways about why they survived, how did they survive, how did
they get wounded, what was the war all about, then that job
seems to provide the glue with which all of this seems to come
together and make some sense and give some sense of direction.
That is why I think a job for a disabled veteran is really the
key to that successful reentry into this Country again.
Now, we can't put the toothpaste back into the tube. We
can't reverse the stream of history. We can't rewind the war
backwards. We have to live in the present. But our disabled
veterans have to live in the present and the future, and
dealing with the present and preparing for that future is what
they are all about. Nothing does that better than a job.
I have thought a lot about what is most important, and that
is the glue that holds it all together. So thank you for your
focus on this issue. Thank you, Congressman Johnson, and all of
you for focusing on this. And the incredible thing that Mr.
Johnson pointed out was that these young men and women, what I
like to borrow the phrase from my friend, General Hal Moore,
who said, ``you may not be a member of the greatest generation,
but you are the greatest of this generation.''
So for the greatest of this generation, we owe all of our
efforts toward providing them the opportunity to make sense of
their lives, and nothing does that better than a job. And the
amazing thing about it is that these young people, blown apart
as they are, wounded as they are, sometimes mentally,
physically, and emotionally, provide, believe it or not,
tremendous leadership skills on the job, tremendous examples of
courage and faith to other people around them. It just works
that way. They seem to be strong at the broken places, to use a
phrase that Ernest Hemingway, who was wounded in World War I,
used in his great war novel.
So I would like to conclude my remarks by just saying that
in the words of a World War II chaplain about disabled
veterans, here is the way I see it: out cruelty they learned
compassion; from living in hate they have learned love; from
the loss of freedom they have learned the love of freedom. They
shall return not only eager to create a better world, what is
far more important, they shall come back prepared to create
that world.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Senator. You are always welcome to
be here in the House as well. Glad to be able to have both your
testimonies. I know we weren't fielding any questions on that.
Let me just make a statement to both of you. Thank for your
service. As one of the people that has stood next to the parade
clapping, very much appreciate what you have done and what you
have given for our Nation's service on this. In my own city of
Oklahoma City and the surrounding areas, there are many
employers that pursue veterans when they come back because they
do not know how to quit and they don't know how to stop until
it is done.
So many of these veterans that are coming home in Oklahoma
are coming home to find employers eager to be able to hire them
because of their leadership and their great work ethic, and
thank you for reminding Americans that that extends also to
service-disabled veterans.
The Ranking Member, would you like to make any quick
comment before I dismiss this first panel?
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I do have an
opening statement. I will hold off, with your permission, until
the next panel.
But I did want to thank particularly Senator Cleland and
Representative Johnson for being here. Max Cleland represents
the finest tradition of service to his Country and left an
awful lot of himself physically back in Vietnam, but in terms
of spirit he is very much present here and I think represents,
as I said, the finest tradition of public service, both in the
military and here in the Congress, to his community. We are
honored with his presence. Thank you.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. Let's take a short recess and
allow the clerks to be able to reset the panel for our second
panel.
Thank you, Representative Johnson.
[Recess.]
Mr. Lankford. I am going to yield for just a moment to the
Ranking Member, Mr. Connolly, for a quick opening statement,
and then we will go directly to our second panel.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
convening this very important hearing to review contracting
policy for service-disabled veterans. I appreciate your
attention to this issue, which is of critical importance to our
Nation's veterans.
We have, in my view, a sacred obligation to support those
who chose to wear the uniform. That support, however, does not
end when veterans leave the service; we must do everything in
our power to help veterans and their families transition back
to civilian life.
As the war in Iraq comes to a close and we begin to
transition, we will see even more veterans transfer out of the
service, come back home into our respective congressional
districts. After years of personal and family sacrifice,
combined with unique training and a willingness to serve, it is
important to remember the desire of many veterans to continue
to serve their Country.
In 2011, 27 percent of post-9/11 veterans worked for
Federal, State, and local governments, compared to 14 percent
of the civilian population. In 2011, I hired a veteran of the
Iraq war through the Wounded Warrior Fellowship Program, to
work in my office, and I would like Joe Wearing to stand and be
recognized for his service to his Country.
[Applause.]
Mr. Connolly. Joe is a Purple Heart recipient. His tireless
work ethic and desire to elevate the voices of a new generation
of veterans has proven an enormous asset in our community.
Programs like the Post-9/11 GI Bill, passed by Congress in 2008
and used by over half a million veterans, are essential in
providing veterans the opportunity to contribute as civilians.
I have seen firsthand the benefits of veterans who utilize
the Post-9/11 GI Bill at local colleges, universities,
community colleges, and trade schools, and I know how important
this benefit is, especially for younger veterans, in order to
have access to educational opportunities and to compete in this
troubled economy.
After 10 years of war and with incredible advances in
lifesaving technology, we are seeing many of our veterans
return with wounds, both physical and emotional. These life-
altering experiences, however, are not all created equal and
should not be seen as a detriment to an ability to contribute
in the civilian workforce. There is hope, however, and we know
programs aimed at supporting our veterans in making an impact.
The Administration's efforts to lower veteran unemployment
by providing hiring tax credits and securing private sector
commitments to hire service members separating from the
military are not only good for veterans, but actually good for
our economy and for our respective communities. As service-
disabled veterans begin to build their own small businesses, we
must understand and improve their opportunity to become
certified and to compete for governmental contracts.
President Obama signed the Veterans Benefits Act of 2010 in
October last year. Section 104 of that law expands the VA's
requirement to verify business status as owned and operated by
veterans, service-disabled veterans, or eligible surviving
spouses. This important piece of legislation helped ensure that
no small business applicant may appear in the VA's vendor
information pages, also known as VetBiz, and their website
database unless it has been verified as owned and controlled by
a veteran or a service-disabled veteran. Furthermore, the
Department of Veterans Affairs has met and exceeded goals for
VA government contracts since the law was implemented in 2010.
Although we have seen vast improvements after the VA
implemented its review in 2010, some businesses found to be
ineligible by the VA are still registering with the Federal
Government in the Central Contractor Registration database. We
must improve verification programs throughout the Government in
order to prevent businesses from obtaining contracts after
being found ineligible by the Department of Veterans Affairs,
because when they do that they take away opportunities from
those who are eligible.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing for
veterans who have sacrificed so much for their Country.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
We will now welcome our second panel. Ms. Belinda Finn is
the Assistant Inspector General of the Department of Veterans
Affairs; Mr. James O'Neill is Assistant Inspector General for
Investigations at the Department of Veterans Affairs; and Mr.
Rick Hillman is Managing Director of Forensic Audits and
Investigative Service Team at the Government Accountability
Office.
Ms. Finn and Mr. O'Neill, I understand that you all are
sharing, you both have a written testimony that has been
submitted and one of you will do oral testimony, but may both
testify or answer questions, so I would ask you both to be
sworn in.
If you would all rise, as you already are. Would you raise
your right hands?
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give this Committee to be the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth, so help you God?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Mr. Lankford. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
You may be seated.
In order to allow time for discussion, please limit your
testimony to five minutes. Your entire written statement, of
course, will be made part of the record. You have a timer in
front of you, which I am sure you will recognize the green,
yellow, red on it, and will be honorable with your time, and
thank you for being here.
Ms. Finn, I recognize you first.

STATEMENT OF BELINDA FINN

Ms. Finn. Thank you, Chairman. Chairman Lankford, Ranking
Member Connolly, members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on our audits and investigations of
Veteran-Owned and Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business
programs. Although our work focuses on the implementation of
these programs in the Department of Veterans Affairs, our
findings and results have significance for other Federal
agencies.
As you stated, with me today is Mr. Jim O'Neill, the
Assistant IG for Investigations in VA.
At the end of fiscal year 2010, the Department of Veterans
Affairs reported that they had awarded about $3.5 billion
through its Veteran-Owned Business contracting programs. Our
audit of these programs found that 76 percent of 42 randomly
selected businesses were ineligible for the programs and/or the
specific contract awards. We projected these ineligible
businesses received $46.5 million in contract awards. We
projected that VA annually awards a minimum of 1400 contracts,
valued at $500 million, to ineligible businesses. This equates
to $2.5 billion over 5 years that is awarded to ineligible
businesses.
Our results also throw VA's reported procurement dollars
awarded to veteran-owned and small disadvantaged veteran-owned
businesses into question. VA reported awarding 23 and 20
percent of its procurement dollars to these businesses. We
believe this could be overstated anywhere from 3 to 17 percent.
These awards occurred because of several reasons. First, VA
did not always review veterans' ownership and control of
businesses thoroughly. Second, the VA contracting officers did
not check the businesses' eligibility at the time of award and
properly assess the subcontracting and partnering agreements to
ensure that the veteran-owned businesses met program
requirements for substantial participation in the work.
We recommended VA improve management and program controls,
enhance verification processes, and coordinate contract
monitoring to reduce the number of ineligible businesses that
received awards. VA has taken steps to improve its verification
programs, both during and since our audit.
The VA OIG Office of Investigations is aggressively
pursuing allegations that ineligible businesses are
misrepresenting themselves as veteran-owned and service-
disabled veteran-owned businesses to win contracts. We
currently have 88 open investigations and, to date, have issued
369 subpoenas and executed 26 search warrants. We recently won
a conviction against the CEO of a non-veteran-owned business on
charges of fraud against the United States, mail fraud, witness
tampering, and making false statements. This business had
received more than $16 million in VOSB and SDVOSB set-aside
construction contracts from the Department of Veterans Affairs
and the Department of Army.
Three other investigations have resulted in the arrest of
six individuals and we anticipate additional prosecutions in
other investigations in the near future.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to be here
today. As I said earlier, we believe our findings have
significance across the Government, especially since the
Department of Veterans Affairs is the only Federal agency that
validates the veteran and service-disabled status of a business
owner, as well as attempting to verify the veteran ownership
and control of a business.
Mr. O'Neill and I are here to answer your questions. We
would be pleased to respond.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Finn follows:]

Mr. Lankford. And we look forward to those questions.
Mr. Hillman.

STATEMENT OF RICK HILLMAN

Mr. Hillman. Chairman Lankford, Ranking Member Connolly,
and members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to be here today
to discuss the fraud prevention controls within the Service-
Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business program, or the SDVOSB
program.
This program, established by the Veterans Benefit Act of
2003, is designed to honor disabled veterans' service by
providing them with exclusive contracting opportunities. This
program permits contracting officers to award set-aside and
sole-source contracts to small business concerns owned and
controlled by one or more service-disabled veterans.
In fiscal year 2010, Federal agencies awarded $10.8 billion
to SDVOSBs, according to the Small Business Administration. Of
this amount, the Department of Veterans Affairs awarded $3.2
billion, or approximately 30 percent of the government-wide
awards.
In prior work we reported on weaknesses and the fraud
prevention controls in both the government-wide program and
VA's program. My testimony today summarizes the status of
government-wide fraud prevention controls over this program and
discusses our recent assessment of fraud prevention control
improvements instituted by VA as part of its verification
program.
Regarding our first objective, our prior work has shown
that the government-wide fraud prevention control weaknesses
over the Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Small Business program
leave it vulnerable to fraud and abuse. In October 2009, we
reported on 10 selected firms that misrepresented their status
as SDVOSBs which allowed them to win approximately $100 million
in SDVOSB set-aside and sole-source contracts. Cases like this
happen because the government-wide program relies on firms to
self-certify annually in the Federal Government's contractor
registry that they are owned and controlled by service-disabled
veterans, and most agencies do not validate this information.
The firms have exploited the lack of effective government-
wide fraud prevention programs using a variety of schemes,
including setting up front companies to pass contracts on to
larger, sometimes multinational, firms ineligible for the
program. Other firms receive contracts even though no service-
disabled veteran was associated with the firm. Or, if one was
employed, he or she did not manage or control the business.
The primary government-wide fraud prevention control in
place is SBA's bid protest process, in which interested parties
can contest contract awards. In prior work we found that the
process lacked effective controls because firms could complete
contracts even after SBA found them ineligible, rendering the
process ineffective.
In contrast, through the limited fraud prevention controls
for the government-wide program, the Veterans Benefits,
Healthcare and Information Technology Act of 2006 required VA
to institute controls over its SDVOSB contracts. Specifically,
the Act required VA to verify firms' eligibility and maintain a
database, now called VetBiz, of the SDVOSBs it verified
starting in June of 2007.
Over time, VA has made progress implementing a verification
program for firms seeking SDVOSB contracts from VA. GAO
testified, in November 2011, that VA's program includes an
initial verification process involving document reviews, site
visits to contractor offices, and risk assessments for each
applicant firm.
In addition, VA has instituted a status protest process and
a debarment committee designed to help ensure only eligible
firms receive contracts and that ineligible firms face
consequences for misrepresenting their status. Those
improvements may help VA reduce the risk that ineligible firms
will gain access through VA's SDVOSB contract dollars.
Nonetheless, GAO also made 13 recommendations to VA for
improving its verification program and further reducing the
risk of fraud and abuse. In particular, we noted in a November
2011 testimony that there was room for improvement in the area
of debarments since, as of the date of that statement, only one
firm and related individuals had been debarred by VA, but at
the same time VA had rejected 1800 firms from further
consideration as part of this verification process and had
referred to VA's IG's office 70 firms for potentially
fraudulent actions. VA generally concurred with our
recommendations and stated that they have taken numerous
actions to address the identified issues.
To improve government-wide fraud prevention controls, we
recommended SBA and VA coordinate with the Office of Federal
Procurement Policy in order to explore the feasibility of
expanding VA's verification process government-wide. However,
agency officials stated that legislative changes would be
necessary in order for Federal agencies to change the
government-wide program from a self-certification process into
using VA's VetBiz verification program.
We also suggested that Congress consider expanding the VA
verification program government-wide to employ more effective
fraud prevention controls over the billions of dollars awarded
to SDVOSBs outside of VA's fraud prevention control process.
While a bill calling for this passed the Senate last fall,
no legislation to address this issue has become law.
Chairman Lankford, Ranking Member Connolly, and members of
the Subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would
be pleased to address any questions at the appropriate time.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Hillman follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you all for your testimony. I would
like to yield to myself for five minutes for some questions and
conversation. How about that?
Seventy-six percent was the number I think that was floated
of potential fraud basically that is out there of service-
disabled veterans that they are not complete. Talk us through
the elements of that. I know you mention it in your testimony
as well.
Ms. Finn. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lankford. If we are dealing with a number of 76
percent, that is a rather high percentage of potential failure
in it.
Ms. Finn. Yes, sir, it is, and we were very surprised by
the results. I personally was, anyway. Some of my auditors were
a little more skeptical going in.
We looked at 42 businesses in clusters across the Country
that we had selected randomly. We found 24 of those businesses
weren't meeting the subcontracting requirements. Some of those
were legitimate veteran-owned businesses, but the veteran
business wasn't doing the work.
Mr. Lankford. Because the requirement is if you are a
service-disabled veteran company, you have to have 51 percent
ownership management, be in a CEO or president type position.
You have to lead the company; you can't just employ a service-
disabled veteran. The service-disabled veteran is the leader of
the company, is that correct?
Ms. Finn. Right.
Mr. Lankford. Okay.
Ms. Finn. And any particular contract, the veteran-owned
business, the business, not necessarily the veteran, has to
complete over 50 percent of the work on that contract. In a
construction contract, the veteran-owned business percentage
requirement is only 15 percent, since those businesses tend to
rely a lot on subcontracting, anyway.
Sixteen businesses in our 42 didn't meet the eligibility
requirements. Of course, in VA it is pretty unique to find the
owner not be a veteran, except for those two you mentioned in
the beginning, and I can speak to those. But the veteran-owner
didn't meet the ownership or didn't meet the control
requirements.
Mr. Lankford. Is the majority, then, that you are finding,
they don't meet the ownership or control requirements more than
they are a veteran but they are not service-disabled or they
are not a veteran at all?
Ms. Finn. We only had two in our sample that did not have
service-disabled status. VA had correctly identified that those
businesses were not service-disabled veterans; however, they
didn't take them out of their database because, at that time,
there wasn't a firm requirement to take them out. So the
businesses were still in the database, still bid for a
contract, and were awarded a contract.
Mr. Lankford. Has that been corrected now?
Ms. Finn. I believe that has been corrected. I know the
requirement is now that they should be removed from the
database.
Mr. Lankford. Let me shift real quick because the VetBiz is
a big part of this, and that database. If everyone government-
wide is dependent on VetBiz, is that where we are at this
point, that everyone kind of looks towards that, or where are
we in the transition here? Because if I am in a HHS situation
and I have a service-disabled veteran that is applying, how can
they verify, when VA is the only one that is verifying all
this? What is the process?
Mr. Hillman, do you want to address that?
Mr. Hillman. Yes. Right now the Veterans Affairs Department
is the only department that is able to rely on a verified list
of eligible veterans for the program. The rest of the Federal
agencies rely on a process that does not verify eligibility of
firms and they do not have a process in place currently to use
VA's verified database.
Mr. Lankford. So this is the self-certify. So if I go to
HHS and say I am a service-disabled veteran and I own this
company and I want to bid for this contract, they just check I
am a service-disabled veteran, but there is no one checking
with the VA that they are actually a veteran, that they are
service-disabled, and then there is also no certification that
they are actually the owner or main part of this contracting,
is that correct?
Mr. Hillman. Yes. In the contractor registry, the firm
itself designates whether or not it qualifies for certain types
of set-aside or sole-source contractors. This is a difference
to other programs that have set-aside programs. Within SBA's
8(a) program for disadvantaged businesses, as well as the
HUBZone program for historically underutilized business areas,
SBA controls the eligibility of those programs showing up on
the contractor registry. That type of control does not exist on
a government-wide basis.
Mr. Lankford. So if SBA is verifying for everyone
nationwide, all the different agencies, that this is like a
female-owned business or a minority-owned business or an
economically disadvantaged business ownership, is that correct?
And then who else comes back and does that, rather than a self-
certification?
Mr. Hillman. That is correct.
Mr. Lankford. Except for service-disabled. How do we
connect the dots between these two, then, so that, if someone
is self-certifying, there is some way to, to use a Reagan quote
here, to trust and verify, to be able to go back and say thank
you for putting that down, let me verify you are actually in
the system somewhere? How can we connect that and why is it
taking this long to connect the two?
Mr. Hillman. In our earlier report we made a recommendation
that VA, SBA, and the Office of Federal Procurement Policy get
together to look at the feasibility of extending the
verification program that VA has instituted on a government-
wide basis. In accordance with our recommendations, agency
officials did collaborate. One of the important factors that
they determined was that they did not have sufficient authority
to require verification on a government-wide basis and to
eliminate firms that weren't verified from consideration for
these contracts without further congressional authority. We
made a recommendation to Congress to consider implementation of
VA's verification program on a government-wide basis. There has
been a bill in the Senate to make that law; it currently rests
within the House Small Business Committee for their
consideration.
Mr. Lankford. And that is part of this conversation today.
Let's see what we can do to be able to resolve those issues.
Mr. Chaffetz, I recognize you for five minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we are
hitting on something that is troubling to me as well. Another
subcommittee within the oversight jurisdiction is also looking
into this verification problems and challenges, so I want to
continue to explore that.
It would strike me that even an individual company, should
they want to go hire somebody, if they were to recommend or put
on their employment application that they had served their
Country, they had earned certain metals, maybe they were Purple
Heart recipient, you would think there would be a way that they
could go and verify that through the process, and I am unaware
of something that would be crystal clear, simple to use,
accurate, and swift in its processing.
If you were going to apply for a job and you were saying
that you had achieved certain metals or you had served in the
military, maybe you were disabled, maybe you had a Purple
Heart, that you could get that verified. Just like if you said
I earned a B.A. at a certain university, you could call the
university and get verification for that. I think it is
inexcusable that we don't have a system in place thus far.
You mentioned some of the companies that they had pursued,
very few of them. What is the penalty for those that have
actually gone through the process, the adjudication process,
been found to be wrong? What is the penalty for
misrepresentation?
Mr. O'Neill. Sir, if we are lucky enough to conduct an
investigation and get convictions, the criminal penalties can
be years in prison for fraud, so it is depending on the charge
that they are indicted on. Now, in terms of suspension and
debarment, VA can, under virtue of 38 U.S.C., I think it is
8127, can debar these companies from doing business with VA.
Under the FAR Part 9, that debarment could be spread across
government. And that is actually in play now with a number of
them.
Mr. Chaffetz. And that is just not for the companies, but
that would be for the individuals as well associated with that,
or is that not the case?
Mr. O'Neill. The individuals are individually debarred, as
well as the companies.
Mr. Chaffetz. And how many debarments have we had so far? I
think we said the number earlier.
Mr. O'Neill. I don't know. In every instance where we got a
complaint and arrest warrant, we have referred that individual
and the company for suspension and then, upon conviction, for
debarment. We have initiated two recently fact-based
debarments, where there was no interest in prosecution, but we
believe we made a compelling case for debarment.
Mr. Chaffetz. But there are so few debarments that are
actually happening, I think, as the Chairman pointed out, the
discrepancy. Why is that? Mr. Hillman?
Mr. Hillman. VA does have a debarment committee that they
established in September 2010, and, to date, there have been
three debarment actions involving 11 associated firms or
individuals. There are also several proposed debarments that
are pending.
That is in stark contrast to the nearly 1800 firms that the
VA has rejected from their verification program and some 70
firms that are associated with potential fraudulent activity
that have been referred to the VA's IG's office.
Mr. Chaffetz. So why the discrepancy in the number? What is
slowing them down? Do they meet once a quarter and they only
have a half hour, or what is the problem?
Mr. Hillman. They do meet on a regular basis. They are not
full-time staff, they are part-time staff. The historical
information suggests that much more could be done from an
enforcement standpoint both by VA and the Small Business
Administration to better ensure that there are consequences
associated with fraudulent activity.
Mr. Chaffetz. You have looked at this a lot closer than
most. Why are they so slow and so inept in actually following
through on this? Statistically, I don't think inept is a strong
enough word. What is slowing them down? When you say they meet
regularly, is that every week, every month, every quarter?
Mr. Hillman. On a periodic basis, I believe at last
monthly.
Mr. Chaffetz. Monthly? What is slowing them down? Why
aren't we creating this database? We are having the same
problem overseas. This continues to be a problematic theme for
the Department of Defense. We go through the same process with
contractors overseas and we see billions of dollars leave our
shores to go to people who didn't provide services that they
were supposed to. And now we are having it happen right here.
What else needs to be done, other than trying to do the job
that they are already set up to do?
Mr. O'Neill. We have 88 cases open right now on SDVOSB
fraud. Our template is to seek prosecution first, criminal
prosecution. If that is declined, then to seek civil
prosecution. And then, if that is declined, to refer for
suspension and debarment. We believe that the penalties of
imprisonment are going to deter this behavior very effectively
as we get more and more prosecutions, which are increasing and
gaining traction within DOJ.
Mr. Chaffetz. My time has expired, but, Mr. Chairman, I
would hope and encourage them to not only pursue, there should
be concurrent pursuit of not only criminal, but also debarment.
We should err on the side of making sure that we are giving
these contracts to those who truly deserve and should be
awarded those, and I find the statistically their follow-
through on this is inadequate, at best.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chaffetz.
I would like to recognize the Chairman of the full
Committee, Mr. Issa, for his time of questioning.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am sorry I missed our
first panel. Certainly, Senator Cleland would be a good example
of somebody who has paid the price and had a hard time getting
here and a hard time staying here. It is not easy for veterans
anywhere, including in Congress.
I am concerned, as Mr. Chaffetz was, that your order is
wrong. And let me ask a series of questions, since we are one
of the committees that could change that order.
First of all, Mr. Hillman, this part-time debarment sort of
question and so on, should this Committee look at reorganizing
Government and how it does business to professionalize the
whole question of contractors across DOD, SBA, you know, you
name the ABCs, including veterans? Would that help if in fact
we turned it into an efficient, effective, well staffed
organization that in fact, like a corporate headquarters, was
your go-to for I have a problem, their job is to quickly get
the bad guys out?
Mr. Hillman. I believe it is definitely a resource issue,
and something to consolidate those resources and provide for
the expertise to look on a government-wide basis, the
credibility of these kinds of actions to ensure that there are
real consequences, would be beneficial.
Mr. Issa. Mr. O'Neill, I appreciate the order that you gave
us. Honest testimony is always critical to a starting point of
sometimes disagreeing. When a police officer witnesses a crime,
he doesn't view conviction as the first step, does he? He views
arrest as the first. Isn't suspension and debarment, and
particularly suspension, isn't that in fact an essential first
step when you have enough to administratively know that someone
is a bad actor, whether or not you have the criminal?
I mean, obviously, if you convict somebody of a felony, it
ain't no big thing that you managed to debar them. If anything,
when you convict somebody of a crime, the question I have for
you is when you convict them of a crime, shame on you if you
only get the guy that did the crime.
What is your procedure to debar one, ten, hundreds of
people who were not convicted, but were conspirators,
unindicted coconspirators in the effort? In other words, the
executive secretary, is she or he being debarred because they
clearly had knowledge and aided and abetted it, even though
they are not convicted?
That would be my question to you. If you are putting
debarment, suspension and debarment at the end, then shouldn't
it include a broad group of people that wouldn't have been
picked up in the first round?
Mr. O'Neill. I think the reason for the order, sir, is
frequently the prosecutors don't want to have to disclose
information gained in the investigation, and some of these
investigations are conducted under grand jury secrecy. So the
movement towards immediate suspension and debarment of the
individuals to be indicted presents a problem in that area. In
terms of----
Mr. Issa. But this Committee, just a few years ago, saw a
fraud being perpetrated in Florida, where an individual was
selling 30 year old, 35 year old 762 rounds to the American
people to be put in the hands of, I think, the Afghan
government, and thus we were giving them rounds that probably
didn't fire. Would you have suggested that you wait until you
finished the indictment before you stopped the shipment or the
purchase of those?
Mr. O'Neill. No, sir, of course not.
Mr. Issa. So how do you stop the bad if not for suspension?
Mr. O'Neill. Well, as----
Mr. Issa. Do you have the tools to stop before, in fact,
this other part, which may have significant delay? Certainly,
Mr. Chaffetz made it pretty clear that 3 versus 1,800 sounds
like debarment is almost an irrelevant part of your tool chest,
based on how often you use it.
Mr. O'Neill. Well, I believe the Department pursues
debarment independent of us when we are not conducting the
investigation that could lead to an indictment. So the numbers
are in that arena, not in our 88 investigations, per se.
Mr. Issa. Well, back to Mr. Hillman, then. Do we have the
order right? Do we have the tools? And how do we explain so few
suspensions and debarments?
Mr. Hillman. On a government-wide basis----
Mr. Issa. Well, we are sort of looking at wounded warriors
access. You know, this is a little bit narrow in this, but go
ahead and answer government-wide.
Mr. Hillman. Well, on a government-wide basis for a
service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses, the fraud
prevention framework to help deter and detect fraud and abuse
is woefully inadequate. We looked at prevention controls to
help to ensure that only eligible firms for this program are
provided with these contracting opportunities, we looked at
monitoring and detection controls to help to ensure the
continued eligibility of firms to be within this program, and
we looked at the enforcement and investigative powers to help
to ensure that there were real consequences associated with
individuals who claimed to be eligible but were not. In each of
these three broad areas of the fraud prevention framework, the
government-wide service-disabled veteran-owned contracting
program needs serious improvement.
Mr. Issa. Well, my time has expired, but, Ms. Finn, if you
could answer just one question or two questions. Well, I will
answer it for you. You do not have subpoena authority.
Ms. Finn. The IG does have subpoena authority. I would have
to go to our general counsel, but we have subpoenaed documents
in other audits.
Mr. Issa. Is that an effective tool for you when you are
able to get it?
Ms. Finn. Yes, it is an effective tool to obtain documents.
The threat of it is also effective, that we can use a subpoena.
Mr. Issa. Mr. Chairman, could I ask for an additional 30
seconds?
Mr. Lankford. Without objection.
Mr. Issa. Could you elaborate on how effective the tool of
threatening, in other words, the fact that you can get a
subpoena, how often does that cause voluntary compliance at a
sufficient level to your satisfaction?
Ms. Finn. To be honest, sir, I don't have to use that very
often in my work. As auditors, we are looking at internal
controls and we identified fraud indicators and then we turn
them over to Mr. O'Neill for investigations. But the IG has
statutory authority to obtain information and, at the end of
that, the IG can report, of course, to you, as Congress, that
we can't get information. Within the Department, that generally
is enough authority. The subpoena comes into question when we
are dealing with people outside of the Department of Veterans
Affairs.
Mr. Issa. Is that the findings of all of you, that the
power to get one is an effective tool to get compliance, in
most cases?
Mr. O'Neill. We find it an effective tool. Whether I would
venture towards getting compliance, it is hard to say. It is
very effective to use a subpoena. Of course, we don't have
subpoenas for testimony, but for documents and so forth, it is
very useful. And, of course, we get search warrants from the
court to gain even more information.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lankford. Recognize Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hillman, in your exchange with my colleague from Utah,
you cited inadequate resources as one of the problems we face
here. Could you elaborate on that? What would it mean if you
had more resources, I assume in the form of personnel, in terms
of either preventing ineligibility in the first place and/or
recovering assets given to ineligible firms in the second
place?
Mr. Hillman. The SBA bid protest process is one good
example where the program itself sees itself as one of its
primary responsibilities providing concrete information on the
eligibility status of individuals. That is what they see as a
material outcome from their efforts. What we are hoping to see
is that when entities are determined to be ineligible, that
there will be real consequences associated with those actions.
In the SBA bid protest world there have been very limited
to no suspensions or debarments associated with the decisions
that they have made, and sometimes contractors are continued to
be allowed to maintain those contracts through their
completion. That does not sound like a system, to me, that
affords real consequences when entities are determined to be
ineligible.
Mr. Connolly. Wouldn't it be fair to say that an investment
in additional resources in this particular area actually might
save taxpayers money?
Mr. Hillman. Absolutely. If there is a sense that there is
an aggressive posture within the program to ferret out the
potential fraud, waste, and abuse, you are going to eliminate
the interest of a lot of bad actors from entering the program.
That is not only going to help to ensure that the honored
service-disabled veterans are receiving the benefits that they
are entitled to, but it will also help to ensure the overall
control structures are operating effectively.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Ms. Finn and Mr. O'Neill, and, Mr. O'Neill, I need you to
speak closer to that mic, please. You are a very quiet
Irishman. But I thank you.
What percentage of the ineligible firms you have identified
could fall in the error rate column versus the fraud, willful
fraud column?
Mr. O'Neill. We only pursue an investigation when fraud is
indicated; errors we don't launch an investigation.
Mr. Connolly. Okay, so 100 percent of what is on your plate
are already in that fraud column.
Mr. O'Neill. Yes. Then when we discover that it is an
error, then we end the investigation.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. And what percentage of your
investigation ends in that kind of conclusion?
Mr. O'Neill. Well, we have closed 25 cases to date. Twenty
were unsubstantiated, three there was no prosecutor interested
in pursuing it and then there were administrative remedies in
two. So 25, and we have 88 open investigations at this time. So
20 percent, perhaps, if the math is correct?
But to the question earlier most of this fraud that we
encounter because of VA's controls now focus on pass-throughs
or rent-a-vet schemes, where the work and the money goes to a
non-service-disabled veteran, but there is a service-disabled
veteran fronted as having ownership and control of the company.
Mr. Connolly. And that is willful fraud.
Mr. O'Neill. And that is willful fraud.
Mr. Connolly. But I guess I am trying to get at, as the
Oversight and Government Reform subcommittee here, what is the
extent of our problem. How much of this is error; I thought I
qualified, VA thought we qualified, we didn't have our
paperwork in on time, you got it wrong, versus, no, I
deliberately set out on a scam to qualify for something I most
certainly am not qualified for, and you caught me.
Mr. O'Neill. I believe that Mr. Leney will testify that, if
I am not mistaken, 1800 firms have been denied certification
and that almost all of them are a result of perceived errors
because they have reported the conflict----
Mr. Connolly. But not fraud.
Mr. O'Neill. Yes, not a fraud.
Mr. Connolly. Right.
Ms. Finn, Mr. O'Neill's plate is already predetermined.
Would the Chairman indulge me one extra minute?
Mr. Lankford. Without objection. Go ahead.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the Chair, thank you for his
courtesy.
Ms. Finn, you do the presorting. What is the balance we
ought to be thinking about in our heads about suspected willful
fraud versus everything else at work?
Ms. Finn. We had found 32 of our 42 businesses had issues.
Within that 32, another 9 had circumstances that seemed
suspicious enough for us to refer those to Mr. O'Neill's
organization, and I believe those investigations are still
ongoing, I am not certain.
Mr. Connolly. But it sounds like, as the Chairman was
pointing out in terms of suspension and debarment, and,
frankly, what the statistics you just gave, Mr. O'Neill, in
terms of the prosecution, it doesn't sound like a very vigorous
effort, which one of two things is true if that is an accurate
impression: the case was so weak as to be a judgment call or we
are not all that aggressive in making sure that compliance is
strictly adhered to, and when we uncover somebody who is
deliberately gaming the system illegally, we prosecute them
with the full extent of the law.
Mr. O'Neill. Well, I can assure you that actually
considerable effort is devoted to investigating these cases.
Mr. Connolly. I know, but--Mr. Chairman, forgive me--I am
interested in the next step, Mr. O'Neill. What happens then?
You read off a string of statistics that was not very
encouraging in terms of what are the penalties. You said that a
number of people, I assume the Department of Justice, declined
to prosecute. That suggests a weak case.
Mr. O'Neill. I think I only said that about three cases out
of a total of approximately 115. So the numbers of declinations
hasn't been that high at this point, and, frankly, there is
much more interest in Department of Justice in pursuing these
investigations now because of three appellate decisions that
say that the loss is the full value of the contract, which
impacts sentencing and fines and so forth. So we actually are
seeing it and I believe you are going to see an increasing
number of prosecutions as early as this month.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your indulgence,
and I want to underscore what Mr. Hillman pointed out, though.
As we are having a political talk about let's shrink the
Federal Government by 5 percent or 10 percent in terms of
workforce, strategic investments in certain parts of the
Federal Government in terms of personnel can have huge return
on those investments for the taxpayer. This is one example.
I thank the Chair.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
I now recognize Mr. Meehan.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for the work of the panel not only preparing
here today, but the very important work you do on this issue,
which I think is important to many.
Mr. O'Neill, I am interested in following up a little bit
on the practice that we currently see with regard to your
investigations and the numbers of declinations. As a former
Federal prosecutor, I appreciate the reality that there are
many cases out there that oftentimes merit some measure of
prosecution, but the reality is limited resources and so often
the declination guidelines are quite high, and it is very
frustrating for organizations like your own.
Can you explain to me where you see those declination
guidelines right now, what the shortcomings are in having
prosecutors evaluate these cases and actually find some way to
consolidate, perhaps, a group of them and make some kind of
inroad in this area?
Mr. O'Neill. Well, in each case we find that we are
educating a prosecutor who is maybe new to this particular type
of set-aside fraud, but we are getting a lot of traction
because in October of last year DOJ sent guidance to the
supervisory AUSAs and the U.S. attorneys themselves about the
issue of the full losses, the contract itself, and that helped
gain a lot of interest.
If we had a separate group of prosecutors, say, like
antitrust, that would be certainly, perhaps, easier in some
way, because we wouldn't have to go through the education
process that we do when a prosecutor first encounters one of
these types of investigations.
Mr. Meehan. May I make a suggestion? There may be something
that ought to be done. I think, as with anything, communication
on this, in the Winston Churchill mode, to make a point and
then make it again and make it again, and to pound it in an
institution. There is an organization called the Attorney
Generals Advisory Committee. It is comprised of about 16
sitting United States attorneys. They meet at least on a
monthly basis and they go back and they consider policy of the
Department of Justice and then they take a role in implementing
it.
Now, you have 16 of the top United States attorneys sitting
at a table, along with the leadership, the Department of
Justice. They will generally meet for about two days, maybe
even longer, and there is a window of time to request to get on
their agenda. I think something that would be helpful,
notwithstanding the guidance they send out to the field
because, as a recipient of that guidance, we would get tons of
materials each day from main justice, and somebody would take
it and press it down. Making your case to this group about the
importance of looking at these cases, and then the opportunity
to do something else. The Department will consolidate cases
from around the Country and then try to make a statement by
doing a number that are coordinated and effectively done at the
same time.
It is not my place to tell DOJ what to do, but I, having
been there, believe that you could be effective at making this
internally appreciated and then also effective at perhaps
advocating for one of those in which you have already done the
investigations. You have the materials sitting on the desks of
these prosecutors. It is not a big reach to go back and look
for the best of those cases.
Can I ask one other question of the panel? Why is the
Department of Veterans Affairs doing a fairly decent job of at
last meeting their goal, 3 percent, and some of the other
critical agencies, HHS and others, sort of so woefully behind?
What do they do well that the other agencies don't do to meet
their 3 percent requirement?
Ms. Finn. I think the issue is focus. When we were looking
at the Department's Implementation of Recovery Act's contracts,
the Department had about a billion dollars to spend. They
really, really focused on completing those contracts, which was
a departure, but that is another hearing, and also making
awards to service-disabled veteran-owned businesses. So it was
a big focus and I think that is the key difference.
Mr. Hillman. I would also add that the focus on the part of
the Department has been tremendous in helping to ensure that
the goal is being met or exceeded. I would also say, though,
that congressional support to help to ensure that the agencies
are making progress in this area is essential. The Veterans
Affairs Committee required the VA Department to establish goals
that were higher than the government-wide goal and to exceed
that goal, and with the congressional attention in that area VA
has stepped up to the plate, continued aggressive oversight of
agencies' actions in this area will also hopefully help the
rest of the Federal agencies to increase their focus.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you.
Mr. Farenthold.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to ask our panel, first, we have talked a lot
about the U.S. attorney and the Federal Government
investigating and processing. Is there a way we can streamline
this to where the private sector can do more or the veterans
themselves can do more? It is my understanding that in most
cases outside the VA, at least, violation of these provisions,
basically, your only option is a bid challenge.
Is there any way we can take this off of a plate of the
Federal Government and effectively enforce these provisions?
And I will open that up to anybody who wants to answer it.
Mr. Hillman. Well, from a government-wide service-disabled
veteran-owned small business program standpoint, you are
absolutely right, the only major control is SBA's bid protest
process, where eligible individuals can protest a decision that
has been made. We found, though, that that process is woefully
inadequate and ineffective in having real consequences
associated with individuals who are found to be ineligible.
One of the critical areas that I believe could help to
ensure that the SDVOSB program has reduced amounts of
vulnerability to fraud and abuse would be, in addition to
looking at the opportunities in the investigations and
prosecution areas, to look more at the preventative controls to
help to ensure that ineligible firms do not enter the program
in the first place. And the best preventative control that
exists today are the processes underway and under development
and being implemented within VA to verify the eligibility of
firms' participation in this program.
Mr. Farenthold. I am a little bit concerned about the speed
at which the VA operates within any of their programs. In South
Texas we are really facing a situation where veterans are
having problems just getting the basic medical benefits with
payment delays to providers of up to a year now, millions of
dollars owed to providers. And we hear overall how the VA is
trying to streamline this and streamline that, and I know, Mr.
Hillman, you have looked at some of this from a past basis and
our other witnesses are directly involved.
I ask again the big broad question, What is missing there?
The people who work for the VA ought to get up every morning
proud that they are serving the people who served us and be
just working their tails off to get this taken care of, but all
we hear out of the VA is tale of delay after delay in problems
getting these programs implemented. Would anybody like to
comment on that? I didn't mean to editorialize here, but I just
get frustrated sometimes with this.
Mr. Hillman. Well, you are absolutely right that the
program, Congressman Johnson just testified in the first panel
that it is far from perfect. There is a lot that the VA has
been doing to help to improve its processes and there are a lot
more that needs to be done. One of the major areas that we have
seen is in human capital, the extent to which the Department
has the resources, both full-time VA employees as well as the
expertise through contractor resources, to deliver on the
promises that they are making in establishing a verification
program.
We also see a need for more emphasis to help to ensure that
once firms are verified, that they remain eligible for the
program, and that additional steps need to be taken there on
the part of VA to help to ensure the reverification of firms
that were previously----
Mr. Farenthold. Is it just personnel? Are we not
implementing technology effectively or rapidly enough to help
with some of these tasks?
Mr. Hillman. Technology is a big area as well. We
currently, within GAO, have an engagement underway to look into
the technological capabilities of the VA. They have improved a
lot of the manual entry activities in the past, but more needs
to be done.
Mr. Farenthold. Does anybody else wish to comment?
Ms. Finn. The VA has used some technology to obtain
documentation from veterans as part of the verification
process. Unfortunately, what we found as we visited these
businesses is it is very easy to make your documentation appear
that the veteran owns the business. That is not a problem. But
you have to be in the business there to really figure out that
the veteran's name is on the paperwork and his name is on the
door, but he hasn't been in that office since the business
started.
Mr. Farenthold. Shame on businesses that do that. Thank you
very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you.
I recognize Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would be delighted
to yield time to you, Mr. Chairman, for further questions.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. Let me just do some follow-up and
some closing questions for us as well. And thank you, Mr.
Walberg, for yielding in that.
This is one of those things that is an idea that is a great
idea, how do we come alongside companies run by service-
disabled veterans. I think it is a great thing for our Nation
to do and I am proud that we are doing it. It is the
implementation where we are having the struggle.
If we have a company that puts a service-disabled veteran
on the list, provides documents and says this is where they are
in leadership, this is where their name should be on the door,
but you actually get to the company and find out that is not
true. That is intentional, willful fraud that is putting a
person's name out there and then trying to deceive to be able
to get a contract.
If you have a person that is not a veteran that is stealing
the valor and going through some other agency and they're self-
certifying, but it is not being checked and verified, once the
word gets out you can get these contracts and the self-
certification is not checked, it just starts ramping up with
the bad actors in the process. So we have to figure out how to
go from idea to implementation.
This doesn't seem to be as much of a manpower issue as it
is a connect the dots issue, if you will allow me to make that
illustration on it, in trying to figure out how do we connect
the dots. So my calling on this would be for our CIO of the
Federal Government, for OMB to start working on some
coordination to how do we start coordinating these different
agencies in technology and to find out how we can take the
information that VA uniquely has and get that certification
out.
But the challenge comes to VA to say how do we certify
people without making it such a high standard that the good
folks can't get in, or they wouldn't bother to say I would love
to apply for all those, but the red tape is so long I am not
going to mess with it, it is not worth it. So then it is only
the bad actors that jump in, that have the processes to be able
to jump in and get it.
I know that is a unique balance that you all are going to
have to be able to work through the process on so that we do
have legitimate service-disabled veteran-owned companies to be
able to get involved in this, but we do keep the bad actors
out. As we are already finding out, there are folks that are
getting through the cracks at this point.
Debarment and suspension I think is a good first step. I
think that is something that we should engage as fast as
possible. That begins to exclude people quickly because that
gets out to all agencies. While an investigation may take quite
a while to happen, they are still continuing to pick up
contracts in other agencies to get the word out.
So we have to have some way to be able to get that message
out to all agencies. That has been suspension and debarment
through our system. So we have to figure out a way to be able
to flip this system. I know as they are investigating they
don't want to leak out all the investigations that are going on
before they are done, but there has to be some intermediate
step so that we can get the information out and start slowing
the movement of all these individuals to it.
So this is going to take some coordination that we are
going to count on OMB, we are going to count on other
individuals from GAO and others that will come together and say
let's start taking some of these recommendations that have been
made, and the good work that you all are doing at VA, and thank
you for your service for all of you in this process and to
figure out how to be able to move it from here.
One quick statement, though. And this is just for anyone to
be able to make a comment on. There have been several steps
that have been made and you had mentioned earlier, Ms. Finn,
about VA is taking steps to improve the verification process on
that. I look forward to reading through some of those steps and
seeing where that ends.
What is your perception of how we start coordinating multi-
agency on this, taking the certifications happening with VA and
the steps that you are doing to improve that, and then to be
able to move it? Because as we mentioned with suspension and
debarment, it is not a high standard. You don't have to prove
criminal intent to even get to a suspension and debarment; you
can do that quickly and start getting the word out and work on
the criminal side of it.
But it is not just the certification, but it is all of
this, getting the suspension and debarments out there, getting
the investigations, getting the certifications. What is the
best way that you see to start coordinating these things?
Ms. Finn. I think the best first step is to do whatever
needs to be done, whether it is legislation or coordination
through OMB, to be able to share VA's VIP database and
information on verified businesses with the rest of the Federal
Government. Right now, as we have all said, the rest of the
Federal Government is trusting on the business to self-certify
their status, and that doesn't work.
Mr. Lankford. Right. We need to verify with our trust.
Ms. Finn. Yes.
Mr. Lankford. Other comments there?
Mr. Hillman. It is clear that the government-wide program
lacks preventative controls, lacks detection controls, lacks
enforcement and investigative controls. These three combine to
make the program a real candidate for bad actors. The VA, SBA,
and OFPP have gotten together to look at the possibility of
expanding the VetBiz program on a government-wide basis. They
say they need legislative authority to do so. Moving the VetBiz
program on a government-wide basis is likely the best solution
available today to ensure that eligible firms are included in
the program.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you for that. We will continue to
progress with that. And, again, thank you for the work that you
are doing and not only for this hearing, but the work you are
doing all the time, when the cameras are off as well. So we
very much appreciate your dedication to service for our Nation.
With that, I would like to take a short break as we reset
for our third panel.
[Recess.]
Mr. Lankford. We will now welcome our third panel.
Gentlemen, are you ready? Terrific.
Mr. Weidman is Executive Director of the Vietnam Veterans
Association representing VET-Force, a coalition representing
service-disabled veterans.
Mr. Andre Gudger is Director of the Office of Small
Business Programs in the Office of the Undersecretary of
Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics
Mr. Thomas Leney is the Executive Director of Small and
Veteran Owned Business Programs at the Department of Veterans
Affairs.
Mr. William Puopolo is the President of Verissimo Global
Incorporated, a service-disabled veteran-owned small business.
Pursuant to Committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn in
before they testify. If you would please rise and raise your
right hands. Thank you, gentlemen.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm the testimony you are about
to give this Committee is the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, so help you God?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Mr. Lankford. Thank you. Let the record reflect that all
witnesses answered in the affirmative.
You may be seated.
In order to allow time for discussion, please limit your
testimony to five minutes. Of course, your entire written
statement will be made part of the record.
Mr. Weidman, we would be honored to be able to receive your
testimony at this time.

STATEMENT OF RICK WEIDMAN

Mr. Weidman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
your leadership in holding this hearing. Senator Cleland put it
right on the money, that the nexus, the central watershed event
of the readjustment process for veterans, particularly combat
veterans, is helping people get to the point where they can
obtain and sustain meaningful work at a living wage. For many,
and the greater the disability the more likely it is that it is
the only opportunity, is to become self-employed or start a
micro business, for a variety of reasons. So the need for small
business is apparent.
It is also true that there is a direct inverse relationship
between percentage of disability and unemployment, if in fact
people are participating in the labor market at all. And beyond
60 percent the majority of veterans are out of the labor force.
That is not because they choose by choice to live on $10,000 a
year; it is because they can't find work and they become a
whole new thing of discouraged workers.
We believe strongly at Vietnam Veterans of American, and
have for a long time, in small business and small business
development, and that led, in 1999, to work with former member
of Congress and Chair of the Small Business Committee in this
distinguished body, Jim Talent of Missouri, to work with him on
developing the bill that became 10650, and it was virtually all
the military service organizations and veteran service
organizations and private business owners that came together
and to push that.
Almost everything that has happened since that time,
including two Executive Orders and several additional laws,
have all been directed to try and properly implement that
original law, and that is the problem. What we need is
consistent political will at every level.
Roughly 2006, several of us in VET-Force and VVA went to
talk to then-Deputy Secretary Gordon Mansfield, and we
explained to him that we had tried over and over and over again
to reach the vision directors. The entire medical system of VA
is 85 percent plus of all of their procurement, and there are
21 individuals and all the hospitals are controlled by those 21
individuals, effectively. And we asked that it be put in their
performance evaluation.
We were stuck at 1.8 percent contracts going to service-
disabled veterans at that point at VA. It got put into the
evaluations and I can assure you that some of them were not
necessarily pleased, but Gordon is a great American and has
stuck to his guns. We went, in six months, from 1.8 percent to
well over 4 percent, and it is my understanding that DOD is
considering and, in fact, has already partially implemented the
same strategy, and I would suggest that that needs to be done
in every agency and department across the Government.
There is renewed interest in the OMB and in cabinet
meetings, apparently. One of the last things that Mr. Daley did
before he stepped down as Cabinet Secretary was to go around
the room in a cabinet meeting and ask the head of each agency
who sits on the Cabinet where are you at in regard to reaching
the minimum of 3 percent for service-disabled veteran-owned
businesses.
That leads us to the concern that we have. We need an
accountability/quality control mechanism to make sure that
people are who they say they are. But I will say that that
sword has cut both ways and it has cut many legitimate
businesses, some of whom have literally been put of business
for reasons that we consider specious and arbitrary.
For someone, as an example, from Nebraska who is a service-
disabled Marine officer who is medically discharged, who has
been successfully running their business for 12 years, for them
to find that she doesn't have the managerial experience to run
this business, this is nuts. These are people who have never
even worked in the private sector, and certainly never tried to
run a business.
So the friendly fire, when you know you have friendly fire
raining in, yes, you need to do something about the frauds that
are encroaching, but when you know that your folks are getting
wiped out by that friendly artillery, so-called friendly
artillery, stop firing for effect and readjust to make sure you
have the right coordinators. And that is the stage we are at
now. We don't see any adjustment, no matter how much we try and
deal with the leadership of VA at every level.
That process needs retooling, it needs better quality
assurance, it needs clear rules that are published so veterans
know what the rules are. They have changed dramatically over
the course of the past year and a half. And what we need is
assistance in getting to that point.
It should be VA's responsibility, probably in the Veterans
Benefits Administration under the Deputy Undersecretary for
Economic Opportunity, to have a unit that assists veterans in
bringing their business up to speed to be able to do business
with the Federal Government.
Lastly, I have noted in my written statement some
additional tools that we would find extremely useful, and I
look forward to answering questions about that.
And once again I want to thank you for this hearing.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Weidman follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you.
Mr. Gudger.

STATEMENT OF ANDRE GUDGER

Mr. Gudger. Chairman Lankford, thank you for allowing me
the opportunity to speak today and introduce Department of
Defense service-disabled veteran subcontracting that we have.
My role at the Department of Defense is the Director of
Office of Small Business Programs and to advise the Secretary
of Defense on all matters small business. That includes policy,
oversight, and regulation.
When I think about the Department of Defense posture on
contracting with service-disabled veterans, it is a very
encouraging one. In 2003, when we first started this program,
and look at where we are now, we started with about $300
million in contracts for service-disabled veteran-owned
businesses, and last year we ended almost $6 billion. Since I
took office, we increased our fiscal year 2010 number over into
fiscal year 2011 about $600 million in one year. So when I look
at that, although it is very encouraging, the trend, we haven't
relaxed our efforts.
Secretary Panetta, when he joined the Department as the
Secretary of Defense, he issued a memo as one of his first
courses of action and, to show his commitment to the
Department. He did that while he was on vacation. He took it
that serious. And other members of the Department of Defense
also issued similar memos encouraging the acquisition workforce
to continue to look for opportunities for small business and
reinforce the Department's commitment for service-disabled
veteran-owned contracting. So that was very encouraging.
But it didn't start with Secretary Panetta; it did start
with Secretary Gates. So it is one good example of going from
great to great and it is a pleasure of mine to talk about a lot
of the initiatives that we started in fiscal year 2011 and
built upon from in prior years.
When I think about the Department of Defense, most people
say, well, the Department of Defense hasn't met its 3 percent
goal, but we have had some major success stories. In fiscal
year 2011, although the number hasn't quite settled, we had 7
of our 24 agencies meet the 3 percent and we had, out of our
major commands under those services and agencies, we have had
almost half, about 22 out of the 47, meet the 3 percent goal.
So there is a strong commitment. And when I look at the
trend it is constantly going up. It is the only socioeconomic
category where we have never seen a decline. So that shows a
commitment to the Department.
And I think further on, looking at our partnerships and
looking at our collaboration that we have with industry, we
have reinforced and we have taken the extra step, quantum leap
in the right direction in working with groups like VET-Force
and National Veteran Small Business Coalition and gaining some
of the best practices and ideas from industry, not just within,
and, as a result of that, those groups have relayed messages to
their folks behind them to help them strengthen their
capabilities because we know that vets are very talented and we
know that talented group of people have a unique ability to
continue to create capabilities to align with the Department's
buying and its future urgent needs. So those are very
encouraging trends for us.
But one of the things that we have done that I think is
probably the most beneficial thing we have done in a very long
time was to accelerate payments to all small businesses, which
we call accelerated payments, which is where service-disabled
veteran-owned businesses were a huge beneficiary. So we pay
businesses one-third faster than they would normally get paid,
and we know, as a result now, that they have put that back into
creating jobs, creating additional capability, allow them to
respond to request for proposals quicker and faster and put
more resources towards that. So these things are very
encouraging trends.
So although we have no data to say that the numbers will
definitely go up, it is a good trend and is a good behavior,
and we are sharing this throughout my monthly meetings with all
of the directors and members of the acquisition community in
Department of Defense, but we are sharing best practices with
each other and how to do more with veteran business and
service-disabled businesses. So it is very encouraging to me.
I would like to wrap up by pointing out a few success
stories based on talking to VET-Force and talking to National
Veterans Small Business Coalition, attending the National
Veterans Conference that the VA put on, attending the
conference in Reno for the National Veterans Coalition. These
things are very beneficial to me and allow me to go back and
meet with the directors of DLA and the acquisition executives
For example, DLA, as a result, in fiscal year 2011, they
looked for their national stock numbers, which were about
3,500, of things that they buy, products, and a set-aside for
service-disabled and veteran-owned businesses, and in fiscal
year 2012 they are going to 1,400 more. These are quantum leaps
in the right direction.
Our Defense Security Cooperation Agency had a 26 percent
service-disabled veteran-owned business contracting, a goal
that they met, and also the Department of Army awarded over $3
billion, which allowed them to meet the 3 percent.
So there is positive. And they are sharing that with each
other, with the other 21.
So, in conclusion, I would like to thank you and the panel
for allowing me to testify today. We know that the veterans
hold a special place in all of our hearts and it is true for
me, too, and I would like to welcome any questions you may
have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Gudger follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Gudger.
Mr. Leney.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS LENEY

Mr. Leney. Chairman Lankford, thank you for inviting me to
testify on the implementation of the VA's Veteran Owned Small
Business Program. The goal of the VA's Small and Veteran Owned
Business Program is to help small businesses, in particular
veteran-owned and service-disabled veteran-owned small
businesses, to add value to the important mission of the VA in
support of all veterans.
As a veteran who came directly out of the small business
community, I am particularly sensitive to the challenges faced
by veteran-owned small businesses, and at the direction of the
Secretary have focused my attention over the past eight months
on improving opportunities for small businesses to add value to
the VA, while improving the integrity of our preference
policies.
The VA has demonstrated its commitment to veterans by far
exceeding the government-wide goal of 3 percent procurement to
service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses. To promote
strong support to veteran businesses, Secretary Shinseki
established additional procurement goals within the VA of 12
percent for veteran businesses. In fiscal year 2011, with a
contracting base of about $17 billion, $3.5 billion went to
veteran businesses. Overall, in 2011, VA provided more than 28
percent of the total Federal procurement to service-disabled
veteran-owned small businesses.
The VA succeeded largely due to the Secretary's strong
commitment to promoting veteran businesses. Performance on
small business goals is reviewed personally by the Secretary
and the Deputy Secretary as an integral part of the
Department's monthly performance review.
In addition to strong leadership, VA has instituted a
number of programs that contribute to our success. We have
increased direct access of veteran small businesses to the
Department's procurement decision makers. That program began in
2011 with the National Veterans Small Business Conference
hosted by the VA in New Orleans. This was the largest veterans
business event in the Country, with more than 4,300
participants. The 2011 conference was groundbreaking in that
the VA alone brought more than 250 program and acquisition
managers to meet with small businesses.
The VA is building on the success of this direct connection
model piloted in New Orleans by expanding that small business
conference to be held this year in Detroit in June. We will be
bringing more decision makers from the VA, as well as
encouraging other departments and agencies to bring procurement
decision makers in order to expand veteran business
opportunities and to help our sister agencies meet their SDVOSB
goals.
In addition to the National Veterans Small Business
Conference, VA will sponsor focused opportunity showcases
throughout the Country in order to enhance access for vendors
who have difficulty participating in the large events.
To improve veteran business capacity, we have established a
mentor protege program to provide developmental assistance to
veteran businesses. The program began in 2010 with 25 firms. We
added 26 in 2011 and will be adding another 50 this year.
We have joined with other agencies to address the challenge
that small businesses have of finding and understanding all of
the programs that are out there in the Federal Government to
support them, so we have joined with other agencies on the
Business USA platform that was established by the
Administration to consolidate information and services from
across the Government into a single integrated network for
American business owners and entrepreneurs.
Subcontracting opportunities provide a valuable option for
many veteran small businesses. The VA has established a
subcontracting compliance review program that conducts audits
and assesses prime contractors for compliance with their
subcontracting commitments.
An important part of the small business mission is to
verify the eligibility of veteran-owned small businesses to
participate in the VA's VetsFirst program that provides
procurement preferences to those businesses. The verification
program ensures that these preferences go only to legitimate
small businesses. Over the past six months, CVE has made major
strides to address the issues raised by the Office of Inspector
General and the General Accounting Office, who spoke before we
did, as well as to make the process easier to navigate. We
moved aggressively against the relatively small number of firms
who would misrepresent their status in order to obtain benefit
from our program for which they are not eligible.
In summary, we have made major strides in improving access
by veteran businesses to opportunities to add value to the work
of the VA. Our journey is not complete, but progress is clear
and significant. Much has been done, but there is much left to
do, and we are committed to getting it done.
As a result of the efforts of program and acquisition
managers, and with the strong support of senior leadership, we
far exceeded our procurement goals and will continue to do so.
At the same time, we will ensure that only those who are
eligible under Public Law 109-461 get the benefits of
participating in these preference programs.
Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to answer questions you may
have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Leney follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you.
Mr. Puopolo.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM PUOPOLO

Mr. Puopolo. Sir, I want to thank the Committee for taking
the time to address the service-disabled veteran-owned business
programs. We, as a community, are encouraged that we are having
this discussion to improve opportunities for service-disabled
veterans in Federal contracting.
The service-disabled vet community is made up of men and
women from all races, religions, and creeds. We view ourselves
as we did in uniform: one is judged by rank but, more
importantly, character. Our GWOT veterans are returning home
with a sense of empowerment brought on by the many successful
missions they have accomplished in some of the harshest
environments in the world.
We want to deliver the message that service-disabled
veteran-owned small businesses are capable, ethical, faster,
and cheaper; that we want to hire our fellow brothers and
sisters in arms who have sacrificed so much from Vietnam to the
global war on terrorism. We have banded together to say this
program was not designed for 20 SDVOSBs to succeed and
thousands to fail.
The approximate .45 to 1 percent of our population that has
taken on the burden of the global war on terrorism over the
last decade are by no means victims. We still see many
returning service-disabled veterans maintaining the
entrepreneurial spirit and starting up companies. They want to
identify themselves as soldiers and vetrepreneurs.
The Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned Business program is
facing immense hurdles. Our disabled veterans have returned
home with a drive to improve the economic and moral situation
of the Country they love and defend. Many disabled veterans
must overcome their disabilities first, and then overcome the
challenges of entrepreneurship. They have the fortitude to
enter an unfamiliar business world, learn quickly, and embrace
the vision that they will be successful.
I served at Abu Ghraib Prison, and in April of 2005 there
was a coordinated attack launched on the base. I thought that
would be the hardest thing I ever did in my life. I had no idea
that becoming a vetrepreneur would be an even tougher fight.
Unfortunately, I believe that the current SDVOSB program
designed to help disabled veterans is hurting them due to
hurdles, lack of accountability, and unnecessary bureaucracy
within the Federal Government contracting system. There has
been a disconnect between the program's intentions and
execution. Our service-disabled vets have heard thousands of
reasons why they can't do business with the Government or
corporate America, and now simply want to hear one way they
can.
A few of the major hurdles we are facing are contract
bundling, no level playing field between SDVOSBs and 8(a)s,
double counting of contract awards, credit for SDVOSB awards
that were actually granted through 8(a) or HUBZone vehicles,
and a CVE certification process that has set the bar too high
or too low and is not certifying legitimate SDVOSBs.
The SDVOSB program is complex, and no one action will
overcome the hurdles and issues we face. The SDVOSB community
is prepared not only to identify the problems, but provide
solutions. The two overarching measures that we need to take
are close legislative loopholes that allow the SDVOSB program
to not be on a level playing field with other small businesses
and, more importantly, we must gain the will of the Federal
departments and agencies in word and deed to take down the
hurdles, work with SDVOSBs, and to find innovative and concrete
solutions and make their SDVOSB programs inclusive, not
exclusive.
Today I have addressed only a fraction of the hurdles that
we face in the SDVOSB community, but I have met so many great
people in this movement that I feel honored just to stand next
to them. The SDVOSB community will work to ensure that those
service-disabled veterans who have the will to continue to
contribute to our national defense and infrastructure will have
ample assistance and opportunity. We hope the Federal
departments and agencies and large prime contractors will do
the same.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your time, and I can answer any
questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Puopolo follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you. I yield to myself as much time as
I desire, apparently.
Let's talk for a moment about some of this and let's try to
clear up all that we can. Gentlemen, thank you for being here
and thanks for your service to the Nation and what you are
doing. And being here, I know that it is an intimidating thing
to come and prepare a statement and be able to do this. Let's
just have a conversation about this, shall we?
Let's see what we can do to be able to solve, because I
want to identify as much as we can what is stopping this, what
is in the way. I appreciate some of the success stories, I
really do. But let's find the things that are in the way and
let's try to figure out how do we start resolving this.
Otherwise, ten years from now, someone else is going to do a
hearing and we will still be talking about this same issue.
Mr. Puopolo, you mentioned there were some hurdles there.
In your statement, thousands of reasons why we can't do
business. You just want to know a few ways that we can on it.
And you identified some of those hurdles. If I got your top two
there, you listed several: closing the legislative loopholes,
which that is being pursued right now and we will continue to
work on that, looking at the Senate legislation that is coming
over and other options that are here; and the second one, the
will of the agencies to do it.
I found that very interesting. Can you illuminate that more
for me?
Mr. Puopolo. Yes, sir. I think the message we got from the
last hearing in December from the VA was that we are fighting
for the crumbs off the table and that is where we are going to
be because it seems like there is an unwillingness to really
embrace the VetsFirst law and implement that.
Mr. Lankford. Are the service-disabled veterans doing
lesser work, and so they are, down the table, saying, well, if
we have to use them, we will? Or are you saying they are both
great companies, these are two people, we have a higher
platform because we have that 3 percent on it? Which one would
you say it is? Are you doing lesser work or doing equal or
better work?
Mr. Puopolo. Well, sir, I think the disconnect is we have
thousands of service-disabled veterans marketing to the VA and
going to the VA and saying we are here. Unfortunately, the
message you hear back from the VA is that we can't find these
capable service-disabled vets. And myself and others in the
community have approached these agencies and said, well, why
don't you come to us and we will work with you? And that kind
of falls on deaf ears. I don't know if it is because of
bureaucracy or just lack of will that they don't want to work
with us. I wish I could get a candid answer of why, when we
come to them and say we will help you meet your goals or we
will help you find capable SDVOSBs, that they are unwilling to
work with us.
Mr. Lankford. Okay. That is interesting.
Mr. Leney, I have a question. Thank you, as well, for
connecting the small business side and for doing the training
and the coordination and the reach-out on it. I find a couple
things very interesting in this. One is the goals that we were
talking about before.
In the previous testimony, it sounds like you disagree on
some of the testimony that was given earlier, and let me give
you a highlight on that. You talk about the progress of small--
we have had progress in these areas and the small numbers of
firms that don't qualify. They are giving numbers as high as 76
percent.
You are saying, no, there is a smaller number that don't
qualify; the majority do. Can you give me a feeling of where
you land on that? Because it sounds like you are saying, no, I
think you disagree with the IG's report on that.
Mr. Leney. It is not so much that I disagree, but I think
we have to distinguish eligibility for a particular government
program, in this case the Veterans First program, and the
commitment of fraud. I have personally reviewed hundreds of
applications for verification.
In 2011, we denied 60 percent of all applicants, and in
reviewing those denials over the last eight months, it is my
judgment that the vast majority of the firms that we are unable
to declare eligible are not committing fraud; they are not
willfully misrepresenting their status.
Nobody goes to the police station and tells the cop, hi, I
am here and I want to show you the documentation that shows you
I am committing a felony. Ninety-eight percent of the people
that we identify to be ineligible self-report. To me, that is a
very powerful statement. And I think one of the disservices
that we have done to the thousands of veteran business owners
that are out there operating with integrity is to imply that
lack of eligibility for a VA program equates to fraud.
When we find someone we think is willfully misrepresenting
or has consciously misrepresented, we refer them to the IG, as
you heard from the previous panel. If we think they are
conducting themselves in a way that is worthy of debarment, we
have referred them to the debarment committee.
I will tell you, in respect to the previous panel, we have
focused more on identifying those where we believe there is
fraud, pushing them over to the IG for further investigation,
because my organization is not in the business of criminal
investigation.
Mr. Lankford. Right.
Mr. Leney. But I think it is--yes, we deny a lot of firms,
but they are not fraudulent; they just have a business model
that does not fit the requirements of Veterans First.
Mr. Lankford. Then I guess I will ask the question how do
we resolve that, then? Because either the word is not getting
out to them, they are applying and going through a process
without the clear stipulations, because it is fairly clear to
me you have to have 51 percent, you have to be in the executive
office here, you have to lead that company; you have to have 51
percent ownership; you have to have the majority of how you are
putting out your subs. That is pretty clear. You have to be a
service-disabled veteran.
So the standards seem to be pretty clear. Why are we
getting so many people that are applying for something that the
standards seem to be not clear? Or is it the hurdles of going
through the process that you don't have the right paperwork?
Which is it?
Mr. Leney. I think there is a degree of ignorance regarding
what the standards mean and translating the standards of the
regulation to their individual company. You have heard
anecdotal evidence where a person says I have been running this
business for 12 years, but they don't meet the requirements of
the regulation to demonstrate that they have 100 percent
control of the business. And that is the kind of thing we
encounter.
The good news is we have spent some time and energy over
the last few months publishing what we call a verification
assistance brief, identifying those things that have precluded
firms from becoming verified, trying to explain them in plain
language to help firms that are going through the process or
getting ready to go through the process to understand does my
business model fit. So what we have seen is a reduction. In
2011, as I said, we denied 61 percent of the firms that we
evaluated. So far, this year, we are at about 48 percent
denials or more than half now we are verifying.
Mr. Lankford. All right, you are talking about a simple
two-step process? It sounds like you are putting the
information out, but are you suggesting something is a two-
stage process from VA that, when they are going through
certification, if they express an interest, instead of getting
this big, fat packet saying, fill out all of this, they get a
simple sheet that says here are the standard criteria, check
off if you apply to all of this, if all of these apply to you,
a simple page, then we will send you the big, fat packet? Is
that what you are recommending there?
Mr. Leney. Well, we don't send them a big, fat packet, we
ask them to send us a big, fat packet.
Mr. Lankford. Right. But they have a big set of
instructions saying if you are going to qualify, here is all
the stuff; you have to prove you are a manager, you have to
prove you are qualified, you have to prove your ownership, send
us your SEC reports, send us everything. There is an enormous
amount of information that has to be sent back.
Mr. Leney. What we have determined is because of, as we
evaluated failures to be verified, we have tried to go out with
these simple little briefs, and I think currently our
verification assistance brief probably covers 95 percent of the
reasons for denial. I think we have to be clear. Very seldom do
we have a situation where the person is not a vet. All of those
people have gone away, at least from our program.
Mr. Lankford. Now, that is VA only, that is not necessarily
saying other agencies?
Mr. Leney. I can only speak to VA, sir.
Mr. Lankford. Right.
Mr. Leney. I am only speaking to the VA, the VetsFirst
program, our responsibilities. There was that issue before; now
people have gotten the message you are not going to be
verified, you are going to be investigated if you come in and
say you are a vet when you are not.
Secondly, ownership. A very small number of firms are
denied because of ownership. Most people can add up to 51
percent.
The major issue comes as an issue of control, and the
requirements of the regulation are for 100 percent control by
the veteran-owner or the veteran-owners. And that is a high
standard.
Mr. Lankford. So you are saying currently the standard is
51 percent ownership, but 100 percent control.
Mr. Leney. Owner. One hundred percent control.
Mr. Lankford. So you have to have somebody that is 49
percent fairly compliant with your company with you. They don't
care if you control everything, but they actually own 49
percent.
Mr. Leney. That means somebody who is 49 percent doesn't
care how you control the company. That means if someone has an
equity stake in your company, they have given you their money
with no influence over what you do with it. That is a very high
standard. And I don't know very many people in this room that
would invest a million dollars in a company and have no control
over, but that is the standard of the regulation.
Mr. Lankford. Okay. How are we trying to verify that? How
are we verifying currently? What documents are we using to show
that you have 51 percent ownership and 100 percent control? How
are we making them prove that?
Mr. Leney. One of the tremendous improvements that has
occurred in the verification program was as a result of what
the Congress did in the passage of Public Law 111-275, which
gave the Secretary the authority to call in the documents that
were necessary to determine if a firm was actually owned and
controlled, and that has made a huge difference.
Mr. Lankford. That has become the hurdle, as well, as we
discussed before, the big, fat packet of information coming
back in. Now it is such an enormous amount of information that
you have to be able to bring to bear on it. I am trying to weed
through this on this.
Are you saying that is a benefit or that is a detriment?
Because all that documentation now makes it prove that then you
are also disqualified because you can't prove 100 percent
control of a company you only own 51 percent of.
Mr. Leney. Well, to the 7,900 firms that are currently
verified, it is a huge benefit. To the contracting officials
who are expected to ensure that, when they are setting business
aside for veteran-owned firms, that those firms are in fact
owned and controlled by veterans, it is a huge benefit.
You heard the GAO, you heard the IG. I am pleased to report
that the kind of issues that they laid out in their reports we
have dealt with, and I am very comfortable that they will not
find firms that are ineligible for the Veterans First program,
not if, but when they come back, because we have made great
strides in ensuring that that doesn't happen.
The price of that is diligence. We have gone from 147 site
visits in 2010 to over 1,000 in 2011. Is that a hurdle? It
certainly is a hurdle for those firms that we determine are not
in fact eligible. And sometimes that is what it takes, is a
site visit.
Mr. Lankford. Give me a quick statement; I know we have to
move on. But just give me a ballpark. To fill out the forms to
go through all that, to gather the data to be able to send it
back in for certification, how many man-hours do you think it
takes to complete that, the process? Take it for a small
business. A medium to large business, where everything is in a
filing cabinet, it is easy to pull. For a small business.
Mr. Leney. Actually, the difference, Mr. Chairman, is a
function of the complexity of the business. For a two-person
business it is relatively straightforward and, as a result,
those businesses get verified pretty quickly. For more complex
businesses, where an owner is an owner of more than one
business, he is living in one State, he is doing operations in
another State, that becomes increasingly complex. But it is
substantial; you don't do it in 20 minutes, absolutely.
Mr. Lankford. So give me a ballpark, how much time?
Mr. Leney. Well, when I sat down and did it myself, it took
me about 9 hours.
Mr. Lankford. I would assume veterans get a tremendous
amount of mail in their box related to just about everything.
Is there anything going to a recent veteran, as they are
leaving out from Iraq or Afghanistan, wherever it may be, as
they are stepping away, are they getting mail saying if you
want to start a business, we will help you do that? Here are
the standards that you need to do.
We are doing preferences in every single agency. If you
have an interest in any of these items and would like to start
your own business, call us, and we will go through the process.
Who is sending that piece of mail to them? Mr. Puopolo?
Mr. Puopolo. Sir, I guess during the demobilization
process, the guys coming back, they get briefings and they hear
this, but I think the main marketing tool they are getting is
from either the VA in their benefits package or sometimes an
SBA rep will reach out during a mobilization process.
The unfortunate part, and this is why I say this program is
hurting people right now, is because they are being told that
the Government has a 3 percent goal and they are not meeting
that. So in the mind of the veteran is if I can work hard and
really start a capable company, I have more than ample
opportunity to build a business, hire veterans, become
financially stable.
The problem is the Federal Government doesn't care to meet
that goal, and that is why we are having the problem, so that
is why it is hurting people. And to start a small business it
takes a lot of time and financing, and you are away from your
family and it is a sacrifice that is supposedly going to pay
off later, but because of the system there is really no payoff
the way we have it set up now.
So my fear, and I am sure other people at the table would
disagree with me, is unless we are going to fix it, then stop
it for our younger vets coming back, because some of them are
in bad places looking to improve their life, and if we throw
them into a program that is broken and bureaucratic and just
going to get them broke and depressed, then we shouldn't be
doing that.
Mr. Lankford. No, let's fix it.
Anyone else want to make a comment about that? Mr. Weidman?
Mr. Weidman. The SBA is supposed to be part, and is part,
of the Transition Assistance Program, or TAP, but there isn't
anything from VA because, frankly, there is no place where it
is veteran friendly. CVE, now known as the Center for
Verification and Evaluation, three years ago was the Center for
Veterans Enterprise under Secretary Principe. It was known as a
place where you went for help.
Nobody goes to CVE now for help. And with all due respect,
the directions that are on the website and with the
application, I printed them all out, it was 40-some-odd pages.
It was not clear even to me, and I participated in the process
for the last 15 years. So there isn't what we would call in the
military a simple, straightforward, by the numbers direction.
If you put that in, you wouldn't have the high failure rate.
If I am a teacher, and I have taught in my life when I
first came back from Vietnam, and 60 percent of my kids fail,
am I a bad teacher or are they bad kids? I would suggest that I
am a lousy teacher. And it is not that I need to make the test
easier; I need to make the directions more clear. I need to
help them find the next rung on the ladder in order to climb up
that ladder, and that doesn't exist right now.
Mr. Lankford. Any other comments on that?
Mr. Leney. I would like to mention, as part of the
Transition Assistance Program currently there is very little
emphasis on entrepreneurship. However, Mr. Gudger and I sit on
the Interagency Task Force on Veteran Employment that was
directed by the President back in September and we have
proposed the addition of a two-day program as part of the
Transition Assistance Program that will introduce all departing
service members to veteran entrepreneurship, and we will be
piloting that program in June in Detroit with recent veterans
who are reaching out to participate.
Mr. Lankford. Mr. Gudger?
Mr. Gudger. Yes, I would like to build on Mr. Leney's
comment. I personally sit on the SBA-led Interagency Task
Force, as well as the DOD-VA Joint Task Force for Veteran
employment; I co-lead the entrepreneurship track of what we are
going to introduce. In addition to that, I also am on the
Business USA Task Force. And I mention all that to talk about
the Department's commitment to connecting the dots. We have
been very aggressive. I met with VET-Force, Rick, Bob, Joe,
Scott, and got information from them about the things that they
would recommend that we should do, and we are implementing a
lot of those things as part of our recommendation.
So I think that, again, we are taking a quantum leap in the
right direction. Time will show that. But when we look at what
do the veterans get when they return, it is more important now
than ever, with the young men and women coming back from
Afghanistan and Iraq, to put even more emphasis on it, and we
have taken our efforts that we did in fiscal year 2011 and now
we are even making them even greater, and it is so visible that
the front office of the Department is looking at this biweekly,
saying what are we doing and what are we doing to make it
easier for veterans not only to transition back into good jobs
because they are very talented, but to transition into being
successful entrepreneurs.
Mr. Lankford. I am sure you all know very well the fastest
growing segment of the job market is going to be brand new
start-up businesses.
Mr. Gudger. Correct.
Mr. Lankford. Brand new start-up businesses, they hire new
people, they expend capital, they take off much more than a
large business does. So both economically and also just doing
the right thing for our veterans, it is a great thing to be
able to encourage veterans coming back to say start a company.
You saved us as a Nation, you saved freedom for what is
happening; come home and save our economy. As you start a new
business and you hire a couple of your brothers there, you are
reestablishing a stable economy back in the United States as
well as you do that.
Now, we should do everything that we can to clear the path
in front of them, rather than to add hurdles into the middle of
it, and obviously we have been talking about already what do we
do with agencies that slow-walk this process. So we have to
find where we are missing here. I see a couple elements on it,
but as each agency looks up and says what are we going to do,
but I think one of the elements is we need to sit in front of
veterans, as they are coming home, start a company; you have
great skills.
I mentioned earlier in my opening statement that companies
in Oklahoma love hiring veterans because they don't know when
to quit. They don't know how to work a 40-hour week. That is
not an issue for them. In fact, if you come to Oklahoma, I will
show you companies that do energy drilling that they want to
hire former tank drivers to run their drill rigs because they
know how to run things blind. They know how to look at the
scope and be able to operate it, and they have the patience to
be able to do it well.
And they will go hire as many former tank drivers as they
can find to be able to do their drilling equipment because they
are good at it. Well, those are skills that are transferrable
both in that job market, but also in every single aspect of
what they have done.
So if we can do anything as a Nation, as well, to be able
to tell returning vets start a company and we will help you,
and it actually, as Mr. Puopolo mentioned before, they actually
get to do it, rather than just start a company and it becomes a
false hope, if they get to start a company and know here are
all the places of engagement and they can do it both in the
public sector and the private sector, I think it is a great
asset to be able to come back.
Mr. Gudger.
Mr. Gudger. I agree with you. As a matter of fact, myself
and Tom and Farouk, who is behind me, we believe that
encouraging the young men and women to become entrepreneurs
start prior to them coming back, it starts when they almost
first go in, we are looking at things that we can do to get
them information in the hand earlier to make that assessment
and have them aspire to be more so.
One of the studies I commissioned when I first became the
Director in this job was a study on service-disabled veteran-
owned business barrier reduction, to figure out how we can
reduce the barriers. I came from industry. I am the first
director in DOD to come from industry, so I was very familiar
with a lot of the barriers. I reached out in my second week to
all of our directors, small business directors and specialists,
many of them are here before me today to show their support and
their commitment to veterans as well. I took all of that
feedback, said here is what we need to do to start reducing the
red tape and barriers, and we moved out on that pretty quick.
By June of last year I signed a joint memo for the first
time, myself and the head of the Defense Procurement and
Acquisition Policy, to encourage market research. Market
research, we believe, is the cornerstone of creating
competition. Competition opens the doors for service-disabled
veteran-owned businesses to compete on future opportunities.
Then, in addition to that, we had a peer review process
where all of the directors, out of my office we do a billion or
more, and then the rest of the directors do the services and
component agencies at 500 million or more. They sit on every
single peer review before any plan acquisition to look for
opportunities for small business, whether we require set-asides
and subcontracting agreements or we look at pieces that can be
broken out for them as prime contractors. And that is an
aggressive move we are doing as a Department and we are fully
committed to that.
Mr. Lankford. Great. You realize if you can do this well
you will be a good example for a lot of other agencies. So we
hope for your success on that one, so continue pressing
forward. Yes, sir.
Mr. Weidman. Mr. Chairman, we need a mechanism that works
for verification of SDVOSBs, but we also need a verification
and evaluation process of large primes. Most of the large
primes do not do the things that are contained in their
boilerplate. They do not list a Vets 100 report; they do not
make any effort to go out and hire any of the protected groups,
principally disabled veterans and wartime veterans. If they do,
it is quite separate and apart from that requirement in the law
of all Federal contractors; and they do not do the
subcontracting aggressively that they say they are going to do.
The situation now is it is a let's not and say we did of here
is our subcontracting plan, but nobody comes back and checks
it.
Mr. Lankford. Whose responsibility is that to check that?
Mr. Weidman. The agency.
Mr. Lankford. So it is left to the contracting officer; it
is somebody else after that. Correct or not correct on that?
Mr. Weidman. I don't know.
Mr. Leney. I can speak for the VA. The VA established, in
late 2011, a subcontracting compliance review program where the
chief acquisition officer is taking on the responsibility to
look at prime contractors who have subcontracting plans, and we
have begun doing audits, site visits of those prime contracts
to determine whether or not they are in fact delivering on
their promises, because, yes, historically that has been a
challenge.
And for contracting officers it has been a particular
challenge to unravel that at a time when what they are focused
on is completing the contract, it is a standard, getting the
medical center built on time, on budget. So we have, at the VA,
just initiated a program that just started this year, where we
are going out and assisting them by auditing these prime
contractors.
Mr. Gudger. Yes, I would like to speak. So in the
Department of Defense, this is a good example, Chairman
Lankford, of reducing barriers. We decided not to solve this
problem with people, but with technology. In our past
performance or our source selection criteria, we are no longer,
on many of our acquisitions, putting out a goal in
subcontracting; it has become a requirement as a part of our
response.
We track that through our performance database, and large
companies who do not meet what they say they are going to
deliver to us, as we are tracking it going forward, if all
things remain equal in a future competition, we do take that in
consideration, have they met their small business goals.
Mr. Lankford. So in the previous contracts, if they meet
the small business goals; if they didn't, then they are marked
down for the next contract.
Mr. Gudger. Correct. That is a way of accountability and
adding more visibility into, one, do we get what we are buying
and, two, are the companies doing the right things for our
economy and spending taxpayer dollars correctly. So I think
those are steps we have taken in the Department in fiscal year
2011, and we are going to continue those in fiscal year 2012.
Mr. Lankford. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Puopolo, do you want to make a final statement?
Mr. Puopolo. Yes, sir. Thank you. To that point, we hear a
lot of this talk and hopefully it will become a reality, but we
still see that a lot of the contracts are coming out bundled, a
lot of them are not going to small business. And it is a small
business problem.
Mr. Lankford. You are saying the contractor is giving it to
one company that handles a lot of the other subs, rather than
going through a company that would be a service-disabled
veteran that would take it at that point?
Mr. Puopolo. Yes, sir. And the Air Force has NETCENTS
contracts that are billions of dollars that lock everybody out,
and this is the message that the veterans get when they do talk
to the SBA or they do talk to the VA, is the Government buys
everything, which is pretty much true, they buy everything from
pencils to airplanes. What they don't tell you is how they buy
it. And when you look at how the Government buys it, it buys it
through bundled contracts, national acquisition contracts.
I sat down with a VA contracting officer that told me he
was forced to buy off a national acquisition contract and he
bought trash bags that cost more and didn't fit his trash cans.
So that just was apparent to me that this system is not
working.
So from the veteran community, we would like to see that
broken down more small businesses----
Mr. Lankford. So are you getting instructions that all of
that, okay, if you are not getting the prime contract, how to
get the sub? And is there any follow-up on that?
Mr. Puopolo. Yes, sir, but we face the same hurdles. We
approach large businesses and they go to these conventions and
they say, oh, we want to increase spending with veterans, we
want to do more. When you approach them, you go through their
small business people, it is a gatekeeper; you don't hear back
from them, they tell you to follow up, you send emails and
calls and calls and calls upon calls, and you never hear back.
Mr. Lankford. Right. But that means some agency is not
following up on them. We are back to that.
Mr. Gudger?
Mr. Gudger. Yes. In the example of NETCENTS, not only do we
have a large business component, it is a multiple work contract
for multiple winners, one portion of it is a small business
set-aside multiple work contract and the other is large. In
addition to the large business side, they have a requirement in
their portion of it of over 30 percent, roughly, small business
subcontracting they must do, and it will be a highly weighted
factor for that particular opportunity.
So we are doing things in the Department. In 2011,
together, our prime and subcontracting dollars was the highest
it has ever been in small business on both sides. It didn't
increase, it was the highest number in our history. So I think
we are making a quantum leap in the right direction.
Mr. Lankford. Well, gentlemen, thank you.
Mr. Weidman, did you have another comment?
Mr. Weidman. Yes, a last point, if I may. We have talked a
lot about enforcement of the law today and about the sanctions
in one way or another, either on individuals or on the agency.
But one of the most effective things at DOD prior, and,
incidentally, Andre has been a breath of fresh air over there
since he got there.
But there were folks in the previous administration, Dr.
James Findley in particular, who was terrific on SDVOSB, and
under his guidance they started an awards program.
Unfortunately, 2008 was the last year that was done, and it
focused attention within DOD on the positive aspects and
recognizing both the Federal workers who had gone above and
beyond, companies, private and large contractors that had gone
above and beyond, and outstanding small service-disabled
veteran businesses who had materially contributed to innovation
and products that will better serve our men and women in the
field. That is something that can be done in virtually every
agency.
Last is a concern, and I was glad to see Chairman Johnson
here this morning, but we have been talking with the Veterans
Affairs Committee and with Chairman Graves' people, and one of
the things that we need to look at very hard is standardization
of definitions between what SBA defines as control, what SBA
defines as a small business, and what VA does.
Frankly, it is on this control issue where we have had all
the problems and there has been discussion, and I think
Chairman Graves thinks that the control issue ought to be moved
back to SBA because it is settled law, including case law, over
at SBA and it is not anywhere near settled over at the VA yet.
So it is an area where a good deal of cooperation between the
three jurisdictions and in-house can really lead to a
productive solution.
Mr. Lankford. Terrific. I am only slightly past my five
minutes of questioning time, but I do appreciate very much the
conversation on it. This allows us to have a dialogue to be
able to work through and try to get this stuff in the record.
As you know well, we will have staff that will go through
this and start trying to determine, okay, which direction can
we go with this and which agency do we do the follow-up
questions on. So getting these things in the record and getting
this kind of colloquy is very helpful to us in the days to come
as we do the follow-up on it.
I appreciate, again, your service and your work, and for
staying here even a little bit longer to be able to go through
this.
With that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:26 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


