- CYBERSECURITY: ASSESSING THE NATION'S ABILITY TO ADDRESS THE GROWING CYBER THREAT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CYBERSECURITY: ASSESSING THE NATION'S ABILITY TO ADDRESS THE GROWING
CYBER THREAT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 7, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-73

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-615                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on July 7, 2011.....................................     1
Statement of:
Schafer, Greg, Acting Deputy Under Secretary, National
Protection and Programs Directorate, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security; James A. Baker, Associate Deputy
Attorney General, U.S. Department of Justice; Robert J.
Butler, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Cyber Policy, U.S.
Department of Defense; and Ari Schwartz, Senior Internet
Policy Advisor, National Institute of Standards and
Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce....................    11
Baker, James A...........................................    20
Butler, Robert J.........................................    21
Schafer, Greg............................................    11
Schwartz, Ari............................................    22
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Connolly, Hon. Gerald E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, prepared statement of...............    40
Cummings, Hon. Elijah E., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Maryland......................................     6
Schafer, Greg, Acting Deputy Under Secretary, National
Protection and Programs Directorate, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security, prepared statement of...................    14

CYBERSECURITY: ASSESSING THE NATION'S ABILITY TO ADDRESS THE GROWING
CYBER THREAT

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 7, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:33 a.m. in room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Darrell E. Issa
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, Burton, Platts, Jordan,
Chaffetz, Amash, Buerkle, Gosar, Labrador, Meehan, DesJarlais,
Gowdy, Farenthold, Kelly, Cummings, Norton, Kucinich, Tierney,
Connolly, Quigley, and Langevin.
Staff present: Ali Ahmad, deputy press secretary; Thomas A.
Alexander, senior counsel; Michael R. Bebeau, assistant clerk;
Robert Borden, general counsel; Lawrence J. Brady, staff
director; Adam P. Fromm, director of Member services and
committee operations; Linda Good, chief clerk; Christopher
Hixon, deputy chief counsel, oversight; Mitchell S. Kominsky,
counsel; Jim Lewis, senior policy advisor; Laura L. Rush,
deputy chief clerk; Sang H. Yi, professional staff member;
Jennifer Hoffman, minority press secretary; Carla Hultberg,
minority chief clerk; Amy Miller, minority professional staff
member; Dave Rapallo, minority senior counsel; and Carlos
Uriarte, minority counsel.
Chairman Issa. The committee will come to order.
The Oversight Committee exists to secure two fundamental
principles: first, Americans have a right to know that the
money Washington takes from them is well spent; and second,
Americans deserve an efficient, effective government that works
for them.
Our duty on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee
is to protect these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to
hold government accountable to taxpayers because taxpayers have
a right to know what they get from their government. We will
work tirelessly in partnership with citizen watchdogs to
deliver the facts to the American people and bring genuine
reform to the Federal bureaucracy.
Today's hearing is the first in what will likely be a long
series of committee hearings related to the nature, extent and
threat to America's digital infrastructure. On May 25th, the
Subcommittee on National Security and Homeland Defense and
Foreign Operations held a hearing on the issue that focused on
the importance of strategic public-private partnership to
effectively combat the threat we face.
The important work that our colleague Mr. Chaffetz began
will continue both at the subcommittee and the full committee.
His groundwork and this committee's continued focus on what
spans all of government, all of the private sector and, as we
know every day, more of all of the world, is critical.
Today, we have representatives from each of the major areas
of government that are often not seen together but are critical
to implementing a plan which includes initiative by the
President, a task force by the Republicans, a similar effort by
Democrats and this committee, on a bipartisan basis, to ensure
that both the House and the Senate act on the President's
proposal in a timely fashion and recognize that the
vulnerabilities, both public and private, which are well known,
are, in fact, growing every day.
Our vulnerability is not just because of enemies well know,
but can often be because of enemies unknown, enemies who simply
have a grudge against society. It is today possible to be a
great warrior with nothing but your slippers and your bedroom
and the desire to bring down some aspect of public or private
infrastructure related to the Internet.
A recent Office of Management and Budget report revealed
that the number of cyber incidents affecting U.S. Federal
agencies shot up 39 percent in 2010. The committee has even
heard reports that potential U.S. losses of intellectual
property last year could exceed $240 billion. Unfortunately,
there is no reliable data and it is unlikely that this
committee can see that that type of data is produced. It is
clear we will continue to have losses. Some of those losses are
unavoidable. If you leave your door open, you can lose the
contents of your house.
Today, we are going hear about efforts to make sure that at
least in the public sector, in cooperation with private
enterprise, we are attempting to provide the locks and the
master key system to ensure that you have the ability to close
that door if you do all that can be done.
Cyber security is not simply for the large reports. Often
the people hacked the most are small companies, companies who
are not particularly targeted but ultimately might have great
losses. One of the areas of concern in the President's proposal
is in fact the vast reporting requirements. We want to ensure
that information is a two-way street and that this not simply
be about a way to empower the trial lawyers to ensure that
someone who doesn't report in a timely fashion, particularly a
smaller company that may be somewhat unaware as to the loss,
doesn't find themselves simply being victimized by a lawsuit
having been victimized by a hacker.
It is important to note that cyber threats are forever
changing and that cyber attacks are always adapting to get
around our defenses. This committee is ideally suited to
evaluate the Federal Government's strategy and ability to
counter these threats by both defensive and most importantly
potentially, offensive innovations.
Recently, the Secretary of Defense, Robert Gates, stated
that cyber attacks were an act of war. War is not a defensive
only measure. War is something that, at times, needs to have a
counterattack. Practically every committee of Congress can
claim jurisdiction over cybersecurity because of the uniquely
expansive nature of the threat, the strength of our Nation's
commerce, utilities, transportation, banking,
telecommunications and national defense all depend on nimble
response and aggressive cybersecurity infrastructure.
We claim no special jurisdiction here today, just the
opposite. The Committee on Government Reform claims to be a
conduit for all committees. We will be joined by one or more
individuals from other committees and this committee will
welcome other individuals to be allowed to sit on the dais and
to participate in future hearings because we view our committee
as a conduit for all committees, recognizing that any proposal,
although it may well originate from this committee or pass
through this committee, will also likely pass through virtually
every committee of the Congress.
In closing, not since the end of World War II has America
seen a threat so great looming for so long. As we led up to
World War II, we had plenty of warning that the Fascists were a
threat. We watched them arm, we saw them attack others, and we
did little to prepare. Today, we have bolstered many defenses,
but let us understand there is a difference between World War
II and today.
We as a Nation, have already been attacked during my
opening statement thousands of times. Attacks go on every day.
Because one doesn't appear to be as large as Pearl Harbor
doesn't change the fact that sooner or later, America will have
to respond in a more aggressive fashion to some and be better
prepared defensively for others.
With that, I would recognize the ranking member for his
opening statement.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I thank you very much for holding this hearing today.
In testimony before the House Intelligence Committee
earlier this year, then CIA Director Leon Panetta called
cybersecurity the battleground for the future. Our Nation's
critical infrastructure, including power distribution, water
supply, telecommunications and emergency services, has become
increasingly dependent on computerized information systems to
manage their operations and to process, maintain and report
essential information.
Our government's national defense and critical information
systems are also becoming increasingly reliant on information
technology systems and Web-based transactions and services.
Successful attacks on these systems threaten our troops, impair
vital Federal programs and jeopardize the privacy of citizens
whose personal information is maintained in government computer
systems.
Mr. Chairman, I have served on the Naval Academy Board of
Visitors of the last 10 years and we have recently made it a
priority to change our curriculum so that every midshipman and
woman is required now to take defensive courses with regard to
cybersecurity.
In the last Congress, Members of the House and Senate
introduced at least 50 cybersecurity related bills to address
these issues. Given that urgency and the complexity of these
challenges, congressional leadership called on the
administration to help develop comprehensive cybersecurity
legislation.
On May 12th, the Obama administration issued a legislative
proposal that would significantly strengthen our ability to
guard against cyber attacks. I applaud the President for his
leadership on this issue and for creating a strong legislative
framework to help Congress complete this important work.
For example, the administration's proposal would make key
changes to the Federal Information Security Management Act
including shifting to continuous monitoring and streamlined
reporting for all Federal systems. I supported similar
legislation last year and the committee successfully reported
bipartisan legislation that would have achieved these goals. I
am glad to see the administration's proposal has incorporated
many of the improvements included in that legislation.
There are several provisions in the administration's
proposal that I would like to see strengthened. First, I hope
we will consider the creation of a Senate confirmable official
with authority to set administration-wide cybersecurity policy.
It is important that the official responsible for implementing
FISMA have the authority to task all civilian departments and
agencies with implementation of the Federal security standards.
The administration's proposal also creates a framework to
ensure that the Federal Government and private industry are
working together to protect our critical infrastructure.
Private industry owns approximately 85 percent of the Nation's
critical infrastructure and the administration's proposal
allows critical infrastructure operators to develop their own
frameworks for addressing cyber threats.
However, while there is room for healthy debate, even
industry agrees that some level of government oversight is
necessary to protect the American public from the potentially
devastating consequences of a cyber attack.
At a recent hearing before the National Security
Subcommittee, Tech America President, Phil Bond, testified that
education and information sharing alone are inadequate to
protect critical infrastructure and that the government rules,
regulations and requirements are necessary to secure the
Nation's critical infrastructure.
Other parts of the administration's proposal attempt to
help consumers and companies by creating uniform reporting
standards to address cyber attacks that result in breaches of
personally identifiable consumer information. However, the
proposal also would allow any entity to share with DHS
personally identifiable information that otherwise could not be
shared under existing law.
I agree that we should encourage information sharing
between industry and government, but we also have to be careful
that personally identifiable information is appropriately
protected and shared with the government only when necessary.
Finally, I agree that law enforcement should have every
tool necessary to go after hackers. I am concerned that the
imposition of mandatory minimum sentencing unduly interferes
with judges' discretion to set appropriate penalties. I hope
that future drafts of the legislation will not include this
specific provision.
I would like to thank Chairman Issa for agreeing to include
our distinguished colleague, Congressman Jim Langevin, in our
hearing today. Jim has been a leader on cybersecurity for many,
many years. As he has recently highlighted, the issue of
cybersecurity is not a partisan one and I am glad that the
chairman agrees with that, but is an issue on which Democrats
and Republicans should be able to work together to come up with
common sense solutions to help protect the American people.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to working with you and the
staff in a bipartisan way to update FISMA and pass
comprehensive cybersecurity legislation in this Congress and I
would ask unanimous consent that Mr. Langevin be a part of this
hearing today.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Elijah E. Cummings
follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1615.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1615.002

Chairman Issa. I would join with you in that unanimous
consent. I have served with Mr. Langevin on the Select
Intelligence Committee and he has always been bipartisan.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
Chairman Issa. I would now recognize the chairman of the
Subcommittee on National Security, Mr. Chaffetz, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for your
leadership on this issue. It is certainly one of the most
important topics.
The growing cyber threat is one of the greatest national
security challenges facing the United States of America. It
affects nearly every facet of the private and public sector and
reaches deep into our personal lives.
On May 25, 2011, the Subcommittee on National Security,
Homeland Defense and Foreign Operations conducted a hearing to
examine the threat. Government officials testified alongside
their private sector counterparts about the challenges that we
face. Each gave us sobering overview of the threat and each
communicated that the threat is real, is extremely dangerous
and is persistent.
While digital connectivity has made life more convenient,
it has exposed new vulnerabilities. Our personal computers are
at risk, as well as cell phones, financial institutions, water
and power infrastructure, State, local and Federal Government
institutions. Bad actors continually scour the Web for our most
sensitive information, social security numbers, credit card
information, bank accounts, proprietary business information,
defense and intelligence secrets, plans and intentions for our
political and business leaders. They gain this information
through advanced, persistent threats, social engineering and
spear fishing.
Some hacks are carried out by individual actors and small-
time crooks and other breaches are coordinated efforts by
foreign governments. The most devastating attacks such as the
Wiki leaks incident come from within. Each has the ability to
inflict significant and irreparable harm.
Statistics indicate that corporations lose roughly $6
million per day when sites are down because of cyber attacks.
The global economy loses approximately $86 billion per year.
There is every indication that these costs will continue to
increase. The President and members of the administration have
publicly stated that the Federal Government is ill prepared to
mitigate the threat.
The Department of Homeland Security testified ``We cannot
be certain that our information infrastructure will remain
accessible and reliable during a time of crisis.'' Phillip
Bond, the President of Tech America, testified ``Cyber crime
represents today's most prolific threat.'' It is no secret that
the Federal Government's IT infrastructure has significant
weaknesses. Across the executive branch, systems are outdated
and technology is behind. Legal and regulatory frameworks are
equally behind. The authorities, roles and responsibilities of
Federal, State, local and private entities are unclear and
insufficient to meet the threat.
The administration has submitted a proposal to remedy these
shortfalls and this is a good first step. However, it will
continue to need examination by this committee. It will also
need extensive input from the private sector which owns roughly
85 percent of the digital infrastructure. The solutions must be
effective, efficient and allow all parties to be as nimble as
the enemy.
I am confident the solutions put forth by this Congress,
the administration and the private sector will yield exactly
the results we need to protect our critical infrastructure. As
a member of the House Cybersecurity Task Force and as the
chairman of the National Security, Homeland Defense and Foreign
Operations Subcommittee, I look forward to working toward an
effective and efficient solution to the cyber threat.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses, appreciate
their expertise and your willingness to be here today.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee for
his opening statement.
Mr. Tierney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, as well as Mr. Chaffetz,
for putting this matter on the agenda and for taking it as
seriously as we have in a bipartisan fashion. We are all
familiar with the various incidents that have happened,
including earlier this month when CitiGroup revealed that
hackers had stolen personal information from more than 200,000
credit card holders. This was one of the larger direct attacks
on a major bank ever reported, but it is not singular in its
occurrence. Thieves obtained customer names, card numbers,
addresses and email information. The unfortunate part is it
took the company, as it does too many companies, over a month
to notify all the customers of the breach, so that sheds some
light on the need for stringent reporting requirements for
breaches of personal information.
It highlights the fact that banks and some other companies
are focused on fraud and reducing fraud but they also have to
be concerned about the prevention of data theft itself and the
impact it can have on the consumer. In fact, the data theft
arguably is of less cost to the entities than is the fact of
consumer information getting out. The question is where the
incentives really lie in terms of making people do what they
need to do to meet the standards to prevent this from happening
in the first place.
I join others in applauding the administration for creating
a national data breach regulation system that will ensure that
consumers learn about the data breaches as soon as possible. I
applaud their efforts to encourage companies to share data
about cyber attacks and the Federal Government to improve
defenses against these types of attacks.
When we hear about all of the incidents that occur, I think
it becomes clear that we need some standards. Of course the
issue then becomes if everyone doesn't adhere to those
standards, how well protected are those that actually do. That
is where we get into at what point does it become too costly to
adhere to the standards, and if some play and others don't, do
we just leave everyone exposed. I think that is the critical
thing I would ask our witnesses to hone in on today and help us
with because it is going to take an effort from everyone, the
companies, the government, and the consumers.
We have to be careful when we start talking about
immunization. I know there may be a place for it but I am
concerned it is going to put the incentives in the wrong place
and take away from some incentive to really focus on the need
to go after stopping these data attacks from happening in the
first place and from having people comply. I would like to hear
a lot of discussion on that.
I don't want to see us take the wrong approach and sort of
immunize people, then get lax and think, I don't have to play,
I don't want to spend that money, and I don't want to be
responsible for it. I think we have to talk about people being
accountable, particularly those that will profit from it, but
we have to reasonable and understand that in some places there
may be a need for incentives that draws in everyone because of
the expense involved.
I thank our witnesses for being here today, and the
chairman for raising this issue.
I would like to yield the balance of my time to the
gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. I would like to thank the gentleman for
yielding. I would also like to thank Chairman Issa and Ranking
Member Cummings for allowing me to sit in on today's hearing.
Mr. Chairman, I deeply appreciate the time and attention
you and this committee have paid to this issue. As a member of
both the House Armed Services Committee and the House
Intelligence Committee, as co-creator of the Bipartisan
Cybersecurity Caucus, and as someone who has spent many years
on this issue, I have a deep appreciation for the challenges we
face in the field of cybersecurity. I echo the comments and
concerns that you, Mr. Chairman, the ranking member and others
have raised today.
Earlier this year, I introduced legislation to strengthen
the outdated Federal Information Security Management Act. This
language was developed last year by my friend and former
colleague, Representative Diane Watson, as well as this
committee and that legislation was passed by this committee.
Unfortunately, due to concerns over cost estimates, we were
unable to pass these provisions as an amendment to the Fiscal
Year 2012 Defense Authorization bill. However, I know that
members of this committee are committed to working on this
problem and I am heartened to see the administration coming
forward in this area as well.
With that, again I deeply appreciate the opportunity to
join you today and look forward to the testimony of our
witnesses.
I yield back.
Chairman Issa. I thank the gentleman.
Members may have 7 days to submit opening statements and
extraneous materials for the record.
We now recognize our panel of witnesses. Mr. Greg Schaffer
is the Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of the National
Protection and Programs Directorate of the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security. Mr. James A. Baker is Associate Deputy
Attorney General at the Department of Justice. Mr. Robert J.
Butler is the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Cyber Policy at
the U.S. Department of Defense. Mr. Ari Schwartz is the Senior
Internet Policy Advisor at the National Institute of Standards
and Technology at the Department of Commerce.
Welcome to all of you.
Pursuant to committee rules, would you please rise to take
the oath. Please raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Issa. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Some of you are returning heroes, so you know this drill.
In order to allow enough time, your entire statements as
presented will be placed in the record. We would ask you to
summarize in any way you choose but keep it within 5 minutes.
When you see the yellow light go on, it is not shameful to stop
sooner than when the red comes on, but in all cases, please
wrap up by the time the red comes on.
With that, Mr. Schaffer.

STATEMENTS OF GREG SCHAFER, ACTING DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY,
NATIONAL PROTECTION AND PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF HOMELAND SECURITY; JAMES A. BAKER, ASSOCIATE DEPUTY ATTORNEY
GENERAL, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE; ROBERT J. BUTLER, DEPUTY
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR CYBER POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE; AND ARI SCHWARTZ, SENIOR INTERNET POLICY ADVISOR,
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF COMMERCE

STATEMENT OF GREG SCHAFFER

Mr. Schaffer. Thank you, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member
Cummings and members of the committee. It is an honor to appear
before you today.
I know that the committee has already had a number of
hearings and briefings on this topic, so I will briefly
summarize the current state of affairs and the impetus for the
legislative proposal that you have from the administration
today.
There is no security issue facing our Nation that is more
pressing than cybersecurity. The vulnerability of our networks
is an issue of national security, of homeland security and of
economic security. The reality is that the United States is
increasingly confronted by a dangerous cyber environment where
threats are more targeted, are more sophisticated and more
serious than they have ever been before.
Our adversaries are stealing sensitive information and
intellectual property from both government and private sector
networks, comprising our competitive economic advantage and
jeopardizing individual privacy.
More disturbing, we also know that our adversaries are also
capable of targeting elements of our critical infrastructure to
disrupt, dismantle or destroy the systems upon which we depend
every day. As the electric grid, major financial institutions
and mass transportation and other critical infrastructure
elements attach to the networks, they can become vulnerable to
cyber attack.
This is not conjecture, it is reality. Hackers probe
critical infrastructure companies on a daily basis. The status
quo is simply unacceptable and we believe a solution can be
found if we work together. Today's threats require engagement
of our entire society from government to the private sector to
the individual citizen. For that reason, the administration has
recently sent a legislative proposal to Congress that focuses
on clarifying cybersecurity authorities and collaborating with
the private sector.
I will briefly talk about portions of the proposal and the
rest of the panel will address some of the other portions.
With respect to protecting the Federal Government, the
proposal clarifies DHS' leadership role in civilian
cybersecurity consistent with the last administration's CNCI,
Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative proposals.
First, the proposal solidifies that the Department of Homeland
Security's responsibility for leading and protecting Federal
civilian networks and ensure that our authorities are
commensurate with our responsibilities.
DHS provides a number of services to departments and
agencies today and sometimes the lack of clear legal authority
slows us down in doing that and this proposal will clarify our
legal authority. It will also modernize, as noted, the Federal
Information Security Management Act [FISMA], to focus on
continuous monitoring and operational risk reduction rather
than a paper-based compliance reporting regime.
We believe that the transfer of the FISMA oversight
responsibilities from OMB to DHS, which started under an OMB
memorandum last year, would just be solidified by the proposal
and it would enhance by consolidating the policy development,
oversight and operational expertise within one agency.
Under personnel authority, the proposal would give DHS the
ability to attract and retain cybersecurity professionals in an
environment that is extraordinarily competitive by extending to
DHS, DOD's current cybersecurity personnel authorities and
create an exchange program for cybersecurity experts to move
between government and the private sector.
To protect critical infrastructure, we have a combination
of voluntary and mandatory programs to focus on public/private
partnerships. The administration proposal clarifies DHS'
authority provide a range of voluntary assistance to a
requesting private sector company, State or local government.
It clarifies the type of assistance that DHS will be able to
provide, including alerts, warnings, risk assessments, onsite
technical support and incident response.
Organizations that suffer attacks often ask the Federal
Government to assist, but the lack of clear statutory authority
and a framework sometimes slows down that process and we think
this will accelerate it.
From an information sharing perspective, we will remove the
barriers to sharing cybersecurity between industry and
government. It will allow industry partners to share with us
that which they learn from their networks without having to go
through a series of legal conversations in order to ensure
themselves that they are allowed to share. That will eliminate
delays sometimes of days, sometimes of weeks, before we can get
data that can be leveraged to help the entire community.
Under the mandatory provisions of the proposal, we would
leverage our existing and consistent partnership with the
private sector to develop a set of frameworks that would be
used to reduce risk. We would work with the private sector to
identify the risk, we would work with the private sector to
identify the frameworks and then the private sector would
develop plans to actually implement and reduce the risk within
their organizations. It is a proposal that really works with
industry and leverages industry's expertise more than thinking
that the government has all the answers.
We look forward to working with you. This is a proposal. It
is not the end of the discussion but the beginning of the
discussion. We look forward to working with the committee on a
going forward basis.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schaffer follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1615.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1615.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1615.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1615.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1615.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1615.008

Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Baker.

STATEMENT OF JAMES A. BAKER

Mr. Baker. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Cummings and members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify on behalf of the Department of Justice
today regarding the administration's cyber legislation
proposal.
Because of the short time I have this morning, rather than
commenting further on the cyber threat, which as the committee
is well aware, is very serious, I will focus my remarks on two
portions of the administration's proposal intended to enhance
our ability to protect the American people from cyber crime.
First is data breach notification. Data breaches frequently
involve the compromise of sensitive, personal information and
expose consumers to identity theft and other crimes. Right now,
there are 47 different State laws requiring companies to report
data breaches in different situations and through different
mechanisms.
The administration's data breach proposal would replace
those 47 State laws with a single national standard, applicable
to all entities that meet the minimum threshold as set forth in
the proposal. If enacted into law, this proposal would better
ensure that companies notify customers promptly when sensitive,
personally identifiable information is compromised and that
they inform consumers about what they can do to protect
themselves.
The proposal would empower the Federal Trade Commission to
enforce the reporting requirements. It would also establish
rules about what must be reported to law enforcement agencies
when there is a significant intrusion so that, for example, the
FBI and the U.S. Secret Service can work quickly to identify
the culprit and protect others from being victimized.
The national standard would also make compliance easier for
industry, we believe, which currently has the burden of
operating under the patchwork of different State laws that I
mentioned a moment ago.
Second, the administration's proposal includes a handful of
changes to criminal laws aimed at ensuring that computer crimes
and cyber intrusions can be investigated and punished to the
same extent as other similar criminal activity. Of particular
note, the administration's proposal will make it clearly
unlawful to damage or shut down a computer system that manages
or controls a critical infrastructure and would establish
minimum sentence requirements for such activities. This narrow
focused proposal is intended to provide strong deterrence to
this class of very serious, potentially life threatening
crimes.
Moreover, because cyber crime has become big business for
organized crime groups, the administration's proposal would
make it clear that the Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations Act applies to computer crimes. Also, the
proposal would harmonize the sentences and penalties in the
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act with other similar laws.
For example, acts of wire fraud in the United States carry
a maximum penalty of 20 years in prison but violations of the
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act involving very similar behavior
carry a maximum of only 5 years.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee. I
look forward to your questions on this important topic.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Butler.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT J. BUTLER

Mr. Butler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Cummings and distinguished members of the committee. It truly
is a pleasure to appear before you today.
On behalf of the Department of Defense, we are aware, of
course, and are working against the persistent threat. The DOD
is reliant on a large portion of the Nation's critical
infrastructure such as power generation, transportation,
telecommunications and of course, the defense industrial base
to defend the Nation and perform those missions assigned to and
expected of DOD.
The most important aspect of the Nation's critical
infrastructure protection, from our standpoint, is the
recognition that no one person or agency can protect the Nation
from this advanced, persistent threat that we have been
discussing. Rather, it will require a whole of government
approach, necessitating many different Federal agencies, State
governments and the private sector to work together. This
legislation is an important step in that direction.
It criminalizes the damage to critical infrastructure
systems, breaks down barriers to information sharing so that
stakeholders can communicate effectively. It engages the
private sector as valuable stakeholders and strengthens the
ability of the Department of Homeland Security to lead the
executive branch in defending the Nation against the very real
cyber threat.
Importantly, this legislation accomplishes all of the above
while respecting the values of freedom and ensuring the
protection of privacy and civil liberties that we cherish in
this country.
The Department of Defense has an important role in this
Nation's cybersecurity such as protecting our military networks
and national security systems while providing support and
technical assistance to the Department of Homeland Security in
carrying out other protection issues regarding critical
infrastructure.
DOD has and will continue to work hand in hand with
Homeland Security, Commerce, Justice and the other departments,
along with the private sector in countering cyber threats and
protecting our Nation's critical infrastructure. Further, the
administration's legislative proposal allows DHS to leverage
DOD's practices in hiring and personnel exchange programs as
well as reinforcing the complementary and continuing defense
role in providing information systems controls of defense and
national security systems under the Federal Information
Security and Management Act.
We do look forward to working with Congress to ensure the
executive branch has the appropriate authorities for
cybersecurity and improving the overall security and safety of
our Nation.
I would like to close by noting by that while the work of
defending the Nation is never done, this legislation will
greatly help the U.S. Government close the gap between us and
those who would want to do us harm. As I noted before, the
threat is constantly evolving and we must evolve to meet it.
The Department of Defense is ready to play its role in
meeting this challenge and to work with the rest of government
to protect the citizens and resources of the United States.
Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Schwartz.

STATEMENT OF ARI SCHWARTZ

Mr. Schwartz. Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Cummings and
members of the committee, thank you having me today to testify
on behalf of the Department of Commerce on the administration's
cybersecurity legislative proposal.
The main goal of this proposal is to maximize the country's
effectiveness in protecting the security of key critical
infrastructure networks and the systems that rely on the
Internet, while also minimizing regulatory burdens on the
entities that it covers and protecting the privacy and civil
liberties of the public. To accomplish this balance, we focused
on building transparency throughout the process that rely
heavily on public/private partnerships.
I will be addressing four important pieces of the proposal:
creating security plans for covered critical infrastructure;
protecting Federal systems; protecting data breach reporting,
and privacy protection.
One important theme of the proposal is accountability
through disclosure. In requiring creating of security plans,
the administration is promoting use of private sector expertise
and innovation over top down government regulation.
Importantly, the proposal only covers the core critical
infrastructure as it relates to cybersecurity.
DHS would define these sectors through an open, public
rulemaking process. The critical infrastructure entities will
take the lead in developing frameworks of performance standards
for mitigating identified cybersecurity risks and could ask
NIST to work with them to help create security frameworks.
There would be strong incentive for both industry to build
effective frameworks and for DHS to improve those created by
industry. The entities involved would want the certainty of
knowing their approach has been approved and the Federal
Government will benefit from knowing it will not need to invest
in the resource intensive approach or development of
government-mandated frameworks unless industry fails to act.
Covered critical infrastructure firms and their executives
will then have to sign off on their cybersecurity plans,
subject them to performance evaluations and disclose them in
their annual reports.
Rather than substituting the government's judgment for
private firms, the plan holds covered entities accountable to
consumers and the market. This encourages innovation and
mitigation strategies as well as improving adherence to best
practices by facilitating greater transparency in public/
private partnerships. The main goal is to create an
institutional culture in which cybersecurity is part of every
day practice without creating a slow moving regulatory
structure.
The proposal also clarifies the roles and responsibilities
for setting Federal information security standards.
Importantly, the Secretary of Commerce will maintain the
responsibility for promulgating standards and guidelines which
will continue to be developed by NIST. DHS will then use these
standards as a basis for binding directives and memoranda it
issues to the Federal agencies.
A working partnership between Commerce, NIST and DHS will
be important to ensure that agencies received information
security requirements that are developed with appropriate
technical operational and policy expertise.
On data breach reporting, the administration has learned a
great deal from the States selecting and augmenting the
strategies and practices we feel most effective to protect
security and privacy. The legislation will help build certainty
and trust in the marketplace by making it easy for consumers to
understand the data breach notices they receive, why they are
receiving them and as a result, they will better be able to
take appropriate action.
As Secretary Locke and others at the Commerce Department
have heard from many companies and different industries,
including responses to our Notice of Inquiry last year, a
nationwide standard for data breach notification will make
compliance much easier for the wide range of businesses that
must follow 47 different legal standards today.
Finally, I would like to point out that many of the new and
augmented authorities in this package are governed by a new
privacy framework for government that we believe would enhance
privacy protection for information collected by and shared with
the government for cybersecurity purposes.
This framework would be created in consultation with
privacy and civil liberties experts and the Attorney General,
subject to regular reports to Congress and overseen by the
Independent Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board.
Governmental violations of this framework will be subject to
criminal and financial penalties.
Thank you again for holding this important hearing and I
look forward to your questions.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
I will now recognize myself for a first round of questions.
Just a comment, Mr. Schwartz. One of the challenges I face,
as I am a Californian, I know that when we harmonize a 50-State
solution, it is 50 States plus California's add-on, so I look
forward to working on this legislation so that it not be 49
States plus California as it has been in so many other areas. I
agree that we have to get to an interstate commerce, genuine
compact with all States. Hopefully, we can find a
constitutional way to bind all States so that there is a one
for all and all for one law.
I have a couple of questions. Mr. Baker, I looked through
your background and you worked here for the fights on FISMA but
Mr. Tierney referred to it and Mr. Schaffer, with his
background, very much knows its history.
When we asked communications companies to give us
information after 9/11, they found themselves embroiled in
lawsuits because of it. One of the challenges in the proposal
is that it presumes there will be this free flow of information
one way and only one way which is from the private sector to
government, but it doesn't specify the actual protections for
those who give what is otherwise not the requirement to give,
at least federally.
Have you worked out how you are going to propose keeping
the plaintiffs' trial bar out of the businesses each and every
time something goes wrong for these companies that have been
reporting or if there is, effectively, a leak of private
information from the government that is then traced back to a
private company who delivered? I understand there is a
mandatory part and there is implied immunity but on the
voluntary part?
Mr. Baker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think on the voluntary part there is an immunity
provision in the proposal and that would apply to the voluntary
sharing so that if they shared the information and then somehow
found themselves embroiled in a lawsuit, they could rely on
that provision. We think that is how it would come out. At the
end of the day, a judge would have to rule on whether it
applied or not and if it was proper.
Chairman Issa. With AT&T and the others, that was exactly
the problem. The Federal Government had a need to make sure
that information not be made public. As a result, the companies
were unable to properly defend themselves. We have been down
the road of an implied immunity versus and explicit one and
also one of the concerns, and Mr. Tierney isn't here but I will
share perhaps what is one of this concerns, we don't want
somebody to voluntarily deliver information in order to gain
immunity they otherwise wouldn't have.
Have you looked at that side of the equation? Not from the
standpoint of a judge will decide, but that our two bodies will
write it in a way in which it is predictable, what the outcome
would be?
Mr. Baker. Yes, we are very aware of that concern and we
have tried to factor that into our thinking very much. That is
why I think you see the immunity provision has sort of two
parts to it. One is appropriate sharing pursuant to the
subtitle that would be this provision. The other is where you
have a good faith belief that your sharing is lawful.
If you have a bad faith belief that you are sharing, you
are sharing for some ulterior purpose, that would not be
covered, but if you are sharing within the confines of the
subtitle or sharing in good faith, then you would be protected.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Langevin and I both worked on this
sometime ago. Having been there, if the government asks, one
might say that if you answer that is a good faith belief. That
is exactly where George W. Bush and his Attorney General found
themselves sideways. They had clearly asked, industry had
answered and then there was a debate about whether or not that
was covered.
You may want to look at that as we go through the drafting
process to make sure that effectively if government, whatever
government, thinks it is legal and they ask the question, that
should be, in my opinion, at least, an explicit immunity
because even though it is voluntary, I think all of us on both
sides of the dais know that a voluntary question asked by a
governing body has a certain amount of you will answer
gravitas.
Mr. Schaffer, only a few weeks ago, we thought this was
going to come out as recommendations and it came out as a
proposal. Is that because you felt you were closer to, if you
will, final legislative language or was it simply easier to put
it into this format? We were a little surprised when it came
out in legislative format.
Mr. Schaffer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I can't speak to exactly the decision process to bring it
out in this way. I can say that in the development of the
various pieces of the proposal, there was legislative language
prepared as we transmitted it and the decision was made that
would be the easiest way to bring those ideas forward.
Chairman Issa. As I recognize the ranking member, the
reason I asked that was that our intention is to bring a series
of private sector individuals both in a formal fashion and in a
less formal fashion, so that we can glean their input. Our
understanding is this has been government formatted and there
has been no formal outreach to the private sector.
That is one of our concerns. All the opening statements
talked about the 85/15. Our goal is, now that this in a
proposed language, to begin communicating with the stakeholders
and the private sector, and quite frankly, also some of the
State representatives. Hopefully we can share in that.
I recognize the ranking member for his round of questions.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
In the wake of 9/11, new attention been focused on the
significance of information sharing as a matter of national
security. The 9/11 Commission report says the biggest
impediment to all source analysis to a great likelihood of
connecting the dots is the human or systemic resistance to
sharing information. They said something. There is widespread
consensus on the need for more robust information sharing from
the private sector to the government and vice versa to better
protect our cyber networks and critical infrastructure.
To all the panelists, how do we overcome this systemic
resistance to achieving this goal? Mr. Schaffer.
Mr. Schaffer. Thank you, sir.
I think the proposal is designed to eliminate some of the
barriers that we see to information sharing. One of the
challenges we have consistently when an entity has information
they believe the government should know and would help the
broader community to protect both government and the private
sector, is there they are not sure what they are allowed to
share and what they are not allowed to share. They are not sure
whether there is some legal provision somewhere that is going
to get them into hot water if they provide the information on
an expedited basis to the government.
This mention of it being one way sharing, our goal when we
receive the information at DHS is to use that information and
distribute the pieces that can be used to defend networks as
quickly as possible to the broadest audience.
The provision in the proposal that provides,
notwithstanding any other law, you can provide that information
and there is immunity for the sharing of that information if it
is for a legitimate cybersecurity purpose, we think will
enhance the ability of private sector entities to give
information to the government.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Baker.
Mr. Baker. Thank you, sir.
I think that the key, as Mr. Schaffer touched on, is
clarity in the law. I think we need language that clearly would
authorize the sharing. We need clear limitations on that, in
other words privacy protections in particular. You need a clear
immunity provision, as I was just discussing with the chairman
a few minutes, and then you also need, what we have heard,
clear exemptions from FOIA as well because when folks share
information with the government, they become concerned it is
going to be discoverable, if you will, under FOIA.
I think the key is clarity so that they don't have to
search through the Federal Code to determine what provisions
they may or not be violating if they were to share this
information. I think clear language that is straight forward is
the main objective.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Butler or Mr. Schwartz, do you have
anything in addition to what they just said? I don't want us
repeating each other.
Mr. Butler. I support what they described. Beyond the
legislation, I was going back to the intent of the post-9/11
Commission. I think we have been working on is building
relationships. You saw that within the Department of Defense,
the Department of Homeland Security building MOAs, building
collaboration and second, planning together, the National Cyber
Incidence Response Plan. That developmental activity is really
enabling information sharing in new and different ways and
exercising together, cyberwatch and those kinds of exercises
really help us to build the connective tissue to enable an
information sharing approach.
Mr. Schwartz. I will just briefly say that we have made
large strides in terms of getting greater information sharing.
I think you gave an excellent overview of all the difficulties.
We tried to address some of those in sharing with government in
the proposal. We are certainly open to broader discussions of
other kinds of sharing and other ways of addressing these
issues without unduly affecting privacy and other issues.
Mr. Cummings. One of the things, Mr. Butler, and some of
the others may be able to answer this, in the Naval Academy, we
made this a top priority. In our last meeting, we were
discussing how while the Naval Academy is moving forward with
phenomenal speed now that we need to get this kind of teaching
to private colleges. We were trying to figure out how we could
take the Naval Academy's curriculum and then spread it.
We were very concerned that we are not preparing enough of
our young people to deal with this threat. I am just wondering
what we are doing with regard to that because we can create all
the rules we want, but if we don't have folks who are equipped
to address this, we have major problems. We have become
basically a defenseless nation. You are all pointing out how
urgent the situation is, what are we doing in that regard?
Mr. Butler. From the DOD perspective, Secretary Gates made
it a top priority in terms of next gen work force education for
defense and the national security base so it is the Academy at
Annapolis and certainly the other academies. We have a fairly
large program through the Department of Defense on information
assurance which reaches colleges around the United States,
working with them on curriculum development as well as
internships and scholarships for students.
We build on that with the Cyber Patriot Program where we
are involved with high school and junior high students. We
support the National Cyber Collegiate Defense competitions.
More than competitions, they are actually coaching and
mentoring programs. There are continuous education outreach
programs to allow us to help young people understand what we
are faced with and to actually cast a dream for them to get
involved.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chaffetz [presiding]. I will now recognize myself for 5
minutes.
One of the emergency national security concerns is that you
have software infrastructure, hardware, other things that are
built overseas that comes to the United States with items that
are already embedded in them by the time they get here. This
obviously poses security and intellectual property risks. Is
any of this happening, Mr. Schaffer, and what are we going to
do to fight this?
Mr. Schaffer. Clearly supply chain risk management is an
issue that the administration is focused on. Homeland Security
is working with partners at the table.
Mr. Chaffetz. How are they focused on it? Is this
happening?
Mr. Schaffer. Whether or not there are specific examples of
insertions is something I would rather talk about----
Mr. Chaffetz. I think you would rather not. It is just a
yes or no question. Is this happening or not?
Mr. Schaffer. We believe that there is significant risk in
the area of supply chain.
Mr. Chaffetz. Is it happening, to the best of your
knowledge? I am sorry. I thought I threw you a softball to
begin with. Is this happening or not?
Mr. Schaffer. I missed the very beginning of the question
and the wording that you gave me and I apologize. I don't want
to get this wrong. Can you rephrase for me?
Mr. Chaffetz. Are you aware of any component software/
hardware coming to the United States of America that have
security risks already embedded into those components?
Mr. Schaffer. I am aware there have been instances where
that has happened.
Mr. Chaffetz. What is Homeland Security doing about this?
What can we do about this?
Mr. Schaffer. This is one of the most complicated and
difficult challenges that we have. The range of issues goes to
the fact that there are foreign components in many U.S.-
manufactured devices.
Mr. Chaffetz. Yes. That is the obvious. Go faster, I only
have 5 minutes here. There are many foreign components in our
materials, yes. I got it.
Mr. Schaffer. There is a task force that DHS and DOD co-
chair to look at these issues with goals to identify short term
mitigation strategies and to also make sure that we have
capability for maintaining U.S. manufacturing capability over
the long term and are in a position to ensure that the critical
infrastructure pieces have what we need.
Mr. Chaffetz. It is terribly complicated, I understand it
is difficult, but the concern is that it is happening and
probably happening on a more frequent basis than most people
recognize. These things are embedded in devices and software
and people don't know that. It is very difficult to detect.
Let me move on and stick with you, Mr. Schaffer, on this.
There is a lot of discussion here about private to public
having to report to the government. How much did the
government--the White House, Homeland Security and others--work
with the private sector? The numbers are pretty big, upwards of
85 percent of the infrastructure that is used is from the
private sector, the networks used are run by the private
sector, but there is a lot of concern that the private sector
really wasn't at the table when this was developed. Were they
at the table and how much so?
Mr. Schaffer. With respect to the proposal you have before
you, as we said, we think this is the beginning of the
conversation. It was developed and informed by our long term
and existing relationships with the private sector. Frankly, I
have spent the vast majority of my career in the private sector
working as a chief information security officer and as a
consultant to large corporations.
We built this proposal based on what we have learned
through the National Infrastructure Protection Plan process,
our relationships with each of the sectors, the sector
coordinating councils, the ISACs and others. I believe this
proposal is designed to give the private sector tremendous
input into the process both in identifying the risk,
identifying the frameworks, building their own plans.
This doesn't prescribe specific technologies they need to
use, it doesn't give them a mandate to do this in any certain
way. It gives them an opportunity to participate in developing
a regime that will allow us to reduce risk.
Mr. Schwartz. Mr. Chairman, just briefly. The Department of
Commerce actually had a Notice of Inquiry last summer that
addressed many of the pieces that are now in this legislative
proposal that were informed by input from the private sector,
so at the beginning, there was some informed piece that came
from this.
Mr. Chaffetz. I guess one of the concerns I have moving
forward, for further discussion, one of the shortcomings I see
is how do we take it from the public realm and inform the
private sector? It seems to be very much a one way street. It
needs to be back and forth. I see you are all shaking your
heads, I hope there is concurrence on this. We will have to
work on the specific language and how that information would
flow because it does need to be communicated back and forth.
I have lots more questions but my time has expired. With
that, we will now recognize the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
DesJarlais for 5 minutes.
Mr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
gentlemen.
A growing threat in both the public and private sector
information systems is cyber attacks from foreign governments
or organizations mostly aligned with them. Cyber attacks
certainly are not exclusive to the United States, other
countries have experienced such attacks. At what point do cyber
attacks carried out by foreign governments become an act of war
or what some refer to as cyber warfare against another nation?
I would open that to everyone.
Mr. Baker. That is a legally difficult question to answer
but certainly acts that would be equivalent in their effects to
a kinetic attack on the United States would fall within the
category I think you are talking about there. If you look at
the effects that were equivalent to a kinetic attack, that
would be an act of war.
Mr. DesJarlais. Have we developed any effective means of
identifying who the actors or players in these attacks are?
Mr. Baker. Attribution is very difficult in this area. That
is challenging. It doesn't mean it can't be done, but it is
challenging. I would defer to my colleagues if they want to add
something on that.
Mr. Butler. We continue to evolve with the technology to
help us with attribution and tactics, techniques and procedures
but right now, it is a fairly intensive forensic analysis
process that we go through to attribute to actors.
Mr. DesJarlais. Both public and private sectors are deeply
interwoven and dependent upon each other for their operations
and functionality. For example, telecommunications and
transportation are heavily dependent on the power grid for
operations and vice versa. Does our current Internet or
communications infrastructure have enough redundancy built in
to ensure that we could survive a catastrophic attack on its
physical or technical assets, Mr. Schaffer?
Mr. Schaffer. There have been numerous attempts to look at
that question through risk analysis by various sectors
including the IT sector, the calm sector and the belief is
there is a significant amount of resiliency within the network.
Certainly the Internet was built with resiliency in mind and
the ability to route around various types of problems.
On any given day with any particular kind of attack, it is
hard to say whether you will have enough resiliency in that
particular place but I do think the architecture of the system
is designed to be quite resilient. There are certain pieces of
the puzzle that obviously need more security and that is where
I think we are with the legislative proposal today.
Mr. DesJarlais. Does the Federal Government have an
effective defensive posture to ensure that attacks on private
sector networks or infrastructure can be isolated with little
damage to its own assets?
Mr. Schaffer. I would say that we are very much, both
industry and government, dependent on one another in a variety
of ways. It would be very difficult to isolate the government
from the critical infrastructure pieces that are provided by
industry. As noted, they own a substantial portion of that
infrastructure.
Mr. DesJarlais. There have been a number of economic
estimates regarding the cost of a major cyber attack on the
economy. Are there consistent, reliable numbers that tell us
how much cyber crime or cyber attacks cost the United States
each year?
Mr. Schaffer. There are a wide range of estimates. I don't
know there is a single, consistent, across the board way to
estimate what those costs would be. Over the last several years
we have seen we are attaching more and more of our critical
infrastructure to the Internet for the efficiencies that it can
bring. That adds to the potential for damage if those systems
are compromised. I am not aware of a single metric that can be
used to identify how much damage is within the art of the
possible.
Mr. DesJarlais. Where are the most significant weaknesses
in our IT supply chain?
Mr. Schaffer. I don't know that I can identify the most
significant weaknesses within the supply chain. As I said, the
supply chain issues are increasingly complex because we do have
a global economy in which our products and equipment is
installed and embedded in foreign product, foreign product is
installed and embedded in our product, and the need to have
appropriate processes to address risk and manage ways of
identifying where there might have been a compromise to the
system is what we focus on in terms of programmatics at the
Department.
Mr. DesJarlais. Thank you all. I yield back.
Mr. Chaffetz. The gentleman yields. I now recognize the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the
panel.
I certainly agree that cybersecurity is perhaps the largest
growing single threat both to American infrastructure and to
national security. The number of cybersecurity incidents
reported by Federal agencies has increased from 5,000 to 41,000
over the last 5 years. One of the concerns I have is that when
we had hearings on this subject a few years ago in this
committee, we took testimony from a lot of Federal agency heads
who focused on the part of FISMA that requires education,
training and awareness. They could check off that box and say
80 percent of our work force is trained.
When you ask the question, are threats going up or down,
they were going up, of course, and are successful, hacking
attempts or cybersecurity threats going up or down, that also
was going up. I would ask first, Mr. Schaffer, and anyone else
on the panel, are we really working with the right metrics here
on the subject of cybersecurity with Federal agencies or are we
measuring the easy to measure?
Second, what kind of uniformity is there across dozens of
Federal agencies to take the proper measures to protect the
systems in place understanding the differentiation among those
agencies?
Mr. Schaffer. Thank you for the question. Indeed, the
reason you see this legislative proposal around FISMA is we
recognize there needs to be a change in the way FISMA works.
Even without the legislation in place, we have taken an
approach that is much more aggressive since the Department has
been asked to take on more responsibility.
We are meeting with the department CIOs to sit down and
walk through all of the various requirements, not just the
training requirements, but all of the requirements that
currently exist and talk about how to prioritize those things
that really matter and that will reduce operational risk.
Our approach is to get to continuous monitoring so we
aren't reporting annually with a piece of paper what is
happening on someone's network, which as you know is outdated
before the paper is written, but are seeing what is happening
on those networks, can correlate that data with what we are
seeing from our intrusion detection and intrusion prevention
technology at DHS and actually work with the departments and
agencies to reduce the risk they are seeing in terms of the
kind of attack experience they have on a daily basis.
Mr. Schwartz. You asked very good and extremely important
questions.
Mr. Connolly. I hope the chairman heard that, very good and
extremely important questions, Mr. Chaffetz.
Mr. Schwartz. In terms of what we are measuring, one of the
main problems we have seen is inspectors general have looked at
the controls that have been put in place as a checklist rather
than trying to get at the main set of problems out there. One
of the things we try to do in the administration proposal is to
provide more flexibility in the structure so that the inspector
general will look at what is important for that particular
agency.
At the same time as Mr. Schaffer suggested, we try to
increase automation through continuous monitoring through other
means that we have a better standard across all different
agencies. That doesn't mean we can stop other means of looking
at the best practices and the controls that are in place, but
we do need to do a better job of making sure we have the right
controls for the right agency. We think the administration
proposal does that with changes to FISMA.
Mr. Butler. I would just add what we see in the Department
of Defense I think is reflective of our general sense of where
we need to go with metrics. We look at technology, tactics,
techniques and procedures and people in an integrated way, so
as we work to harden networks and improve our cyber hygiene
practices, we also look at proactive defense measures that we
continue to incorporate in those areas.
Continuous red teaming, testing against what we are doing
helps us to update the metrics. As we have stood up,
organizational structures like Cyber Command and others, we are
moving more and more toward what others are talking about with
a continuous monitoring mode that builds beyond FISMA and helps
us to ensure what anomalies we are missing that potentially
could be problems down the road.
Mr. Connolly. Is there a mechanism within the Federal
Government for exchanging best practices, experiences, tapping
into the private sector expertise and the like? Is there some
kind of forum, formal or informal, that does that?
Mr. Schaffer. Actually, there is. One of the things DHS
sponsors is something called the Cross Sector Cybersecurity
Working Group. This represents the critical infrastructure, 18
sector cybersecurity resources and gives them an opportunity to
work together to bring the knowledge that one sector may have
learned to the other sectors. It is one of the goals of the
program to make sure that wherever we see an issue we can get
that information out to the entire community.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, I know my time is up but I
think that is very important point. We want to break down the
stovepipes here so that we are sharing experience and
intelligence across agencies to try to deter the threat.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. The gentleman yields.
We will now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Farenthold, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Farenthold. Mr. Schaffer, I think you used the term you
are seeing attacks every single day, 41,000 attacks reported.
We see this growing at an incredible rate. I am very much
afraid that we have a problem here that is going to be very
difficult and very expensive to fix, both within the government
and within the private sector.
Correct me if I am wrong. We have a wide variety of threats
coming from everywhere. We have nation states as possible
offenders, terrorists, criminals, industrial espionage, I guess
we will call them hobby hackers, a wide variety of people
intruding into computer systems. I don't think a day goes by
that I don't have to install some sort of security update on my
computer.
I guess my question is, I guess we need to take a multi-
tiered approach. Where do you see the focus needs to be? Do we
need to be focusing more on hardening systems to attack, do we
need to be focusing on prosecutions? Where is the balance we
will get the most bang for the buck?
Mr. Schaffer. Thank you for the question Congressman.
Frankly, I think we need to do it all. This is not a single
solution problem, it is not a problem that can be solved by any
one entity, it can't be solved by government alone, it can't be
solved by industry alone, it can't be solved by a single
technology. This is going to take a whole of government effort,
it is going to take a whole of society effort, right down to
individuals who need to apply the patches and the virus updates
to their machines.
The ecosystem was built in a way that allowed us to take
advantage of moving very fast but the security pieces have
been, for the large measure, bolted on after the fact. We are
trying now to fix those issues but I do think it is going to
require us to build better perimeters, apply those patches
everywhere on all of the systems, update those systems to the
best technology and do this vigilantly in all cases.
Mr. Farenthold. I guess I will open this up to the rest of
the panel. I don't know who might be the expert on this or if
anyone has any ideas. Does anyone have a clue what this is
going to cost in some reasonable term that we can understand?
The price of a computer now is $500, an average piece of
software, depending on what is? Percentage-wise, how much is it
going to raise the cost of computing to do this?
Mr. Schaffer. While I can't say how much it will cost to do
this, what I think has been said repeatedly is how much it is
costing us for not having done it. The cost to our society, all
that we are spending on trying to chase this problem, deal with
the intrusions when they occur, the intellectual property loss
that is going to hit us in terms of our economic
competitiveness at a later point in time, those costs are also
very hard to estimate but we know they are large.
Mr. Farenthold. Where do you balance it between what the
government spends and what the private sector spends and
businesses and what I have to spend in order to surf the
Internet at home?
Mr. Schaffer. What I think this proposal does that we never
had before is a way to design for critical infrastructure a
regime that actually allows for a standard of care to be
developed for clear frameworks to be laid out that industry
agrees with, they understand the risks, they know what they
need to do in order to meet those risks and make them go down.
If we do that, I think the markets will develop to produce the
products that will make that easier and less expensive if
everyone is working to that end.
Mr. Farenthold. I only have a minute left and I want to hit
on one other topic. I am deeply concerned that as you see
increased cooperation between the government and the private
sector, my data stored out in the Cloud becomes accessible to
the government and either by accident or through some sort of
fishing expedition, what I would consider to be my private
communications are accessible to the government or worse yet,
become public. How are we addressing those concerns?
Mr. Baker. We have to make sure, as I mentioned earlier,
that we have clear and understandable laws in place to protect
the legitimate privacy expectations of Americans. We absolutely
want that to happen. There are a range of different laws today
that protect your privacy, so whatever we do, we need to make
sure we address all of those sort of holistically, if you will,
because different types of data are protected under different
regimes and we need to make sure we do this in a smart way.
There are a variety of laws that are implicated and we need to
closely look at all of those.
Mr. Farenthold. I am out of time. Thank you all very much.
Mr. Chaffetz. I will now recognize the gentleman from
Idaho, Mr. Labrador, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As you know, there are private sector organizations that
exist today that are working to help private industry help
protect against these cyber threats. The estimate is about 80
percent of our cyber threats to security and critical
infrastructure is through the private sector. For example, many
of the critical infrastructures have organizations within which
companies can share threat information and best practices. The
government should always be looking to these organizations to
assist in the effort to protect the country.
Do you currently work with any private sector organizations
to facilitate the threat information sharing and best security
practices and if you do, can you tell me which organizations
you are working with?
Mr. Schaffer. Indeed, the Department of Homeland Security
is working with many private sector organizations in an effort
to share best practices and to share information about threats
and vulnerabilities. We work through the Sector Coordinating
Councils under the National Infrastructure Protection Plan; we
work with the ISAC organizations, the Information, Security and
Analysis Centers for the various sectors, including the
financial services sector; the multi-state ISAC which goes to
State and local governments; and the IT ISAC representatives
from the communications sector. We work with all of those ISAC
organizations.
Not only do we work with them, but we have been working to
integrate them into our process on the National Cybersecurity
and Communications Integration Center watch floor. We actually
have representatives from many of the sectors who are either on
or coming onto the floor and will participate in the incident
response plan processes to address issues when they occur.
We are working extensively with private sector
organizations. We can certainly get you a full list if you
would like after the hearing.
Mr. Labrador. Anyone else want to add anything to that?
Mr. Schwartz. NIST is designed to work very closely with a
range of private sector players, including the standards
development organizations and the wide range of other private
sector standards setting organizations and take the standards
best practices from their side, take the standards best
practices from the government side and develop those to do work
within the Federal Government and vice versa.
A lot of standards that are developed within the Federal
Government are then taken into the private sector and are free
and open for them to use as well. We have a strong relationship
and we could get you a full list if you like.
Mr. Butler. For the Department of Defense, consulting,
services and products are heavily engaged with a lot of
different security firms with regards to ensuring we have the
latest and greatest products installed. HBSS is an example as
we kind of worked through the Wikileaks mitigation but
continuous efforts working with them on threat mitigation.
Mr. Baker. A significant amount of information sharing goes
on as well with respect to law enforcement agencies, back and
forth. Obviously when you have a crime that has occurred, you
have information sharing that goes on, but in other forums, law
enforcement agencies, the FBI, the Secret Service, are working
regularly to make sure this information is shared back and
forth.
Mr. Labrador. I have one more question. While protecting
ourselves from cyber attacks we know is extremely critical,
many private industry individuals have witnessed a
proliferation of Federal initiatives dedicated to this issue.
For example, there are over 25 different working groups or task
forces being led by the Federal Government. Is there any
analysis being conducted right now that would provide ways to
streamline this activity to avoid duplicative spending and
minimize the amount of Federal dollars spent?
Mr. Schaffer. I think we are continually looking,
Congressman, at ways to coordinate our activity and make sure
the groups we are working with are focused on different
problems and are bringing to the table not duplicative but
complementary sets of information. I know within DHS, we have
several groups that do have overlapping jurisdiction, if you
will, they have some of the same members, but we have them
focused on different pieces of the elephant that is the
cybersecurity problem. We are working to try to coordinate and
make sure we are not introducing a lot of redundancy.
Mr. Schwartz. We haven't been afraid to close down working
groups that have outlived their time. Everyone working on this
issue has many meetings to go to for many of the different task
forces and the fewer we can have is a benefit. I think there
has been leadership in that regard in terms of trying to work
through a problem, cut it off and move on when we can do that.
Mr. Labrador. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Chaffetz. The gentleman yields.
I will now recognize the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr.
Langevin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the panel for their testimony today.
I want to return to an issue I raised in my opening
comments. Some members have objected to updating our Federal
cyber readiness due to potentially large, upfront costs.
Undoubtedly, these efforts will save billions of dollars in
efficiencies while providing long, overdue cyber protections
and integrity to our Federal networks.
This question would be more appropriate for an entity with
a top line view of our cyber efforts across all government
agencies such as the cyber director that I have proposed.
However, since the administration's current cyber coordinator
lacks this authority and as DHS is taking on the operational
lead on these efforts, I am going to pose the first question to
Mr. Schaffer and then to the rest of the panel.
Mr. Schaffer, what is your assessment of the costs required
to carry out the administration's plans to move to an IT
infrastructure based on continuous monitoring and automated
reporting that was proposed by the administration in its
legislative proposal, what efforts have already been
implemented, and what are your projected estimates on cost
savings and efficiencies and security as a result of these
efforts?
Mr. Schaffer. I think the key to the FISMA reform proposal
is that we recognize much of the work, effort and spending that
is done today to meet the FISMA requirements that are really
compliance oriented, check the box kind of exercises with an
annual report can be repurposed in a way that allows us to
actually buy down risk through the continuous monitoring and
other solutions being proposed.
The work that we are doing with the departments and
agencies on a general basis to improve cyber security across
the board can also be done in a way that will get us to better
FISMA compliance.
I can't give you a dollar figure with respect to how much
it will cost, but I can tell you that we believe over the long
run, if this is done and security is improved as dramatically
as we think it can be, the expense associated with all the work
we do to chase the problems and address all the intrusion
activity that is happening will be reduced. Net, I think we
will have a positive result over the long run.
Once we start building security into everything we are
doing, there is consistent data that suggests building it in is
much cheaper than bolting it on.
Mr. Langevin. The other parts of my question, what efforts
have already been implemented and what are your projected cost
savings on the efficiencies and security as a result of the
updates?
Mr. Schaffer. We are certainly happy to work with you to
think about how to score this. I don't have any numbers that I
can present today with respect to estimates of what the actual
savings would be. Again, we know this is the beginning of a
conversation and a proposal and expect the final result may or
may not look exactly the way we are now, but we certainly want
to work with you and the committee as we think about what the
cost estimates will be.
Mr. Langevin. Let me move on to another question. I have
noticed that one element left out of the legislative proposal
was a strengthened White House office with budgetary authority
and Senate confirmation. This is something I feel strongly
about. In fact, just last year, the White House moved further
away from this model by moving OMB's oversight for the Federal
security to DHS.
While DHS clearly has the operational lead for protecting
the .gov network, what authority do they have to oversee agency
budgets and actually compel these important technical
challenges actually be addressed? The various departments and
agencies, their mission, looking at State or Commerce, isn't
necessarily the security of our .gov network. How do we
actually compel compliance? OMB could do it but does DHS have
that sufficient authority because I really question that. Also,
I would like to know why wasn't a strengthened White House
office considered?
Mr. Schaffer. In the delegation of authority from OMB to
DHS to undertake the work we are now doing on FISMA, OMB
retained the budget authority to effectively be the entity that
enforces those requirements from a budgetary perspective. DHS,
as you pointed out, has the operational responsibility.
The legislative proposal would consolidate the oversight
responsibility with the operational responsibility that we have
and move things in the direction where we would be given the
authority to direct departments and agencies to take action to
improve their security and deploy appropriate protection.
With respect to today, you have a dual arrangement where
DHS has the operational responsibility and OMB has the budget
responsibility. That is the way it would line out I think
today.
Mr. Langevin. I know my time has expired, but for the
record, I would like to get an answer to the question of why a
strengthened White House office wasn't considered?
I yield back.
Mr. Chaffetz. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Schaffer, according to press reports, the U.S. Chamber
of Commerce has rejected the legislative proposal as
``regulatory overreach.'' We found an internal Chamber document
that revealed that the Chamber believed ``layering new
regulations on critical infrastructure will harm public/private
partnerships, cost industry substantial sums and not
necessarily improve national security.''
Their general concern is that it is overly broad. How do
you respond to that and how involved is the Chamber in these
types of discussions?
Mr. Schaffer. I believe this proposal is carefully crafted
to give industry a strong voice in designing the solutions, so
it is hard to understand the suggestion that it will be overly
expensive or over reaching when in fact, industry will have an
opportunity to say what the threats are that need to be
mitigated, what the framework should be in order to address
those risks and then develop their own plans in order to meet
those frameworks.
Mr. Chaffetz. Part of this proposal calls for Homeland
Security to authorized to publicly name critical infrastructure
providers whose plans you deem to be inadequate and then
publish those. How is that going to help protect them?
Mr. Schaffer. The transparency at the end of the day will
engage market forces, we believe, in order to drive toward
better results.
Mr. Chaffetz. You are going to tell the world, here are the
weakest of the weak. Is that what your plan is?
Mr. Schaffer. The proposal would provide summaries of the
plans and summaries of the evaluations. It is not as if all of
these entities aren't under attack today and if they are weak,
in fact, the adversaries are taking advantage of them. The
proposal here is to make sure that not just the adversaries
know they are weak, but in fact, the public knows and the
markets can take appropriate action.
Mr. Chaffetz. So which of these companies would be required
to report to the SEC, for instance, and have their plan
certified as sufficient? How does that work?
Mr. Schaffer. Those who are already subject to SEC
reporting requirements would be required to include this
information in that reporting. The proposal doesn't include any
suggestion that others would be required to come into that kind
of reporting.
Mr. Chaffetz. I have a lot more questions about that but
given the time, I want to go to one other quick subject. Let us
focus with Mr. Butler and Mr. Baker here.
Obviously a lot of these concerns come from overseas
players who are a little bit outside of our reach but
increasing penalties, how do we highlight these concerns? If
someone walked into a computer and physically blew it up, it
would be national news, a big deal. If someone comes in through
the back door electronically and is blowing up, destroying or
stealing information, nothing seems to happen, nobody seems to
know. How do we expose this and what kind of penalties can we
possibly put in place?
Mr. Baker. The issue is making sure we have the penalties
in place that we then can try to enforce. The enforcement part,
I agree with you is a separate question and a separate thing we
need to deal with. We deal with that in a variety of different
ways, principally through appropriations to make sure we have
enough people who are skilled in this area to go out and do
this around the world.
Mr. Chaffetz. How does that work on the international stage
when you have someone who is in some other country doing this?
Mr. Baker. Internationally, the FBI and the U.S. Secret
Service are engaged every day in working with international
partners to bring these kinds of people to justice.
Mr. Chaffetz. How many of them are actual state actors? You
have some kid in a van down by the river, I am sure, in some
other country doing this stuff, but you also have concerted
efforts from state sponsors. What are we doing about that?
Mr. Baker. On the state sponsors, I think I will defer to
DOD on that one.
Mr. Butler. In May, the White House issued the
International Cyberspace Strategy which beings to lay out
principles and norms that will guide our efforts as we try to
engage on this problem you highlighted. One of the ideas is to
work with nations to determine what is going on inside their
sovereign territory and like-minded folks getting together to
figure out what we need to do so we can not only share
information.
Mr. Chaffetz. My specific question is when you know it is
an actual country, a state, what are we doing about that? If
someone were to fire upon us, we would be outraged, but if they
seem to do it as a cyber attack, it seems to be quietly pushed
under the rug because we don't want to be embarrassed.
Mr. Butler. Again, I will go back to the International
Cyberspace Strategy for a moment. We say in that document that
as we look at cyber incidents and we deem potentially this is
something malicious and as we work through attribution, we
reserve the right to respond, and that is through a variety of
means. Those include law enforcement means, diplomatic means
and what have you. We are just at the beginning of now moving
from that declaratory position to now considering policy
priorities.
Mr. Chaffetz. Obviously we are going to have to explore
this in greater detail. We know it is happening on all levels
in all forms and it is one of the biggest threats to the United
States of America.
If there aren't any other questions from any other Members?
Yes, the ranking member.
Mr. Cummings. I just want to thank you all but I also want
to remind you, piggybacking on what Mr. Chaffetz just said, 9/
11 should be seared in all our memories and I know it is, but
the terrorists were trying to send a message, several messages
and one of them was disruption of our way of life.
When you think about terrorists and now that we have killed
Osama Bin Laden, trying to figure out ways to bring harm to the
United States, and everyone says how are they going to do it
next, somebody can actually sit a computer and do all kinds of
harm. I can hear from you we are dealing with this in the words
of the President, with the urgency of now, because it is
extremely urgent. I hope we will move this along as rapidly as
possible.
Again, I want to thank you.
Mr. Chaffetz. I also want to echo and thank you for your
work, your dedication and commitment. It is a very difficult
and challenging question. It is something incredibly nimble and
continues to evolve and change. There is no end to the
creativity of terrorists and others who wish harm to the United
States of America. We don't want to have another major, major
incident, someday we wake up and some major portion of our
infrastructure, whether private or public. This has to have a
lot more attention placed upon it. We certainly don't want to
have the kind of incident that we would all regret knowing we
could do everything we can to help prevent it.
At the same time, I think we also need to recognize we need
to preserve people's individual liberties, need to make we
don't overstep and overreach into what private companies are
doing, and finding that right balance will be one of the
challenges for this Congress and in the future Congresses as
well, but we will do so, I hope, in a very bipartisan way.
We thank you for your expertise. We thank you for being
here today.
The committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:05 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[The prepared statement of Hon. Gerald E. Connolly
follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1615.009


