- THE STATUS OF GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT: A LOOK AT THE FISCAL YEAR 2011 CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE STATUS OF GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT: A LOOK AT THE FISCAL
YEAR 2011 CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION, EFFICIENCY AND FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, MARCH 1, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-145

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-457 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Government Organization, Efficiency and Financial
Management

TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania, Chairman
CONNIE MACK, Florida, Vice Chairman  EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York, Ranking
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma                 Minority Member
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas                  Columbia

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 1, 2012....................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Gene L. Dodaro, Comptroller General, the U.S. Government
Accountability Office
Oral Statement...........................................     2
Written Statement........................................     4
Mr. Daniel I. Werfel, Controller, Office of Management and Budget
Oral Statement...........................................    25
Written Statement........................................    27
Mr. Richard L. Gregg, Fiscal Assistant Secretary, U.S. Department
of the Treasury
Oral Statement...........................................    32
Written Statement........................................    34

THE STATUS OF GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT: A LOOK AT THE FISCAL
YEAR 2011 CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 1, 2012,

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Government Organization, Efficiency
and Financial Management,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Todd Russell
Platts [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Platts, Guinta, Towns and
Connolly.
Staff Present: Ali Ahmad, Majority Communications Advisor;
Michael R. Bebeau, Majority Assistant Clerk; Robert Borden,
Majority General Counsel; Linda Good, Majority Chief Clerk;
Tegan Millspaw, Majority Research Assistant; Jaron Bourke,
Minority Director of Administration; Beverly Britton Fraser,
Minority Counsel; Ashley Etienne, Minority Director of
Communications; Devon Hill, Minority Staff Assistant; Paul
Kincaid, Minority Press Secretary; Mark Stephenson, Minority
Director of Legislation.
Mr. Platts. This hearing of the Subcommittee on Government
Organization, Efficiency and Financial Management will come to
order.
We certainly appreciate everyone's participation,
especially our witnesses. In the interest of time management,
we are going to dispense with opening statements here with
Committee members and submit our statements for the record, and
leave the record open for seven days for any other members to
submit opening statements or extraneous material, and go right
to our witnesses.
We are honored to have three very distinguished public
servants. We are grateful for your participation here today and
especially for your work day in and day out, as part of the
Federal Government's work on behalf of all of our Nation's
citizens.
We are honored to have the Honorable Gene Dodaro,
Comptroller General of the United States; the Honorable Daniel
Werfel, Controller of the Office of Management and Budget; and
the Honorable Richard Gregg, Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the
Department of Treasury. Again, we have had a chance to review
your written statements and we appreciate that preparation that
you provided us. It allows us to be a little more prepared for
a good engagement here today.
The practice of the Committee, if I could ask, now that you
are all seated, is to stand, and we will swear you in. If you
would raise your right hand. Do you solemnly swear or affirm
that the testimony you are about to give this Committee will be
the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Mr. Platts. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative. And Mr. Comptroller General, we
will begin with you and again appreciate your participation
here today.

STATEMENTS OF WITNESSES

STATEMENT OF GENE L. DODARO

Mr. Dodaro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It is a
pleasure to be here this morning. Ranking Member Towns, nice to
see both of you to discuss the results of our latest review of
the financial statements for fiscal year 2011.
I might take this opportunity, Mr. Chairman, with your
announcement that you are not running for re-election, I just
want to take this opportunity to thank you on behalf of myself
and all my colleagues at the GAO for your dedication to
financial management improvement. I think your efforts with the
DHS Accountability Act and improper payments, working on a
bipartisan manner with your colleagues has really made a
difference. I just want to thank you for that.
Mr. Platts. Mr. Comptroller General, I appreciate the kind
words. It has been a remarkable experience for the last 12
years. I don't know what is next, but I look forward to
whatever that chapter is. But as I said before we started,
working with you and your staff at GAO has been a great
experience and we are grateful. And working with my Ranking
Member, my former Chairman, we kind of keep swapping seats, who
is Chairman and Ranking Member. But the approach I know that we
have taken, along with you and our other witnesses, is just a
team effort. It has been a real privilege to work with you and
all here in Washington on behalf of the people of my district.
So I appreciate the kind words.
Mr. Dodaro. Sure, thank you. You leave with our
appreciation and best wishes.
With regard to our report this past year, as will be no
surprise to either of you, we again disclaimed to give an
opinion on the accrual based audited financial statements of
the United States Government. Three main reasons remain;
serious financial management problems at the Department of
Defense and issues at Treasury with both preparing consolidated
financial statements and eliminating inter-governmental
transactions.
Now, there are a few important developments with regard to
DOD that I would like to highlight this morning. First, in
addition to this Committee's focus, the House Armed Services
Committee has had a special panel on DOD financial management,
held a number of hearings, issued a report encouraging them to
continue with their improvements. So the Congress is getting
more actively engaged, and I think that is a very positive
development and hope that it continues as DOD progresses.
Also, having the Congress set a firm deadline of 2017 in
terms of auditability for the Department is an important step.
Secondly, Secretary Panetta has advanced those goals by
setting a date of 2014 for the audits of the statements of
budgetary resources. This is a very important early step and I
think will give indications as to whether or not they are going
to be able to make the 2017 date as well. Because it will
highlight additional problems up front.
Thirdly is that the Department has set priorities for the
beginning of their financial Management improvement in dealing
with budgetary resources and also the existence and
completeness of military assets. These are the things they care
about at the Department. And I think if they can't make
progress in these areas, it is going to be even more difficult
in dealing with some of the other issues associated with
preparing financial statements.
So I think all these elements, against the backdrop of a
lot of fiscal pressure that the Department is going to be
under, are creating the proper environment, hopefully, for
improvement. Now, one should not underestimate the serious
challenges that DOD is going to face in improving their
controls and systems and the skills of their workforce. But I
think these are encouraging signs.
With regard to Treasury, they have taken some important
steps in order to help deal with inter-governmental
transactions by engaging the agencies on a quarterly and
regular basis, which I think is very important. They have also
signaled their intent to prepare financial statements for the
general fund transactions, which is really important in order
to really figure out how to finally deal with this inter-
governmental transaction issue. There hasn't been enough
transaction history in order to make sure that they can find
and eliminate all these transactions. This will create a better
record for them to eliminate those transactions.
Also, again we have identified weaknesses and improper
payments and information security and tax collection
activities. I would be happy to talk about any of those and the
Qs and As.
Just in closing, Mr. Chairman, I would say it is really
critical that the Federal Government continue to make progress
in addressing these financial management challenges I have just
outlined at DOD and Treasury. But it is really important also
that the civilian agencies continue to maintain their record of
improvements and sustain that going forward. All these things
are critical to make sure there is proper accountability and
stewardship of the taxpayers' funds and also to more
effectively manage the cost to government. All this occurring
against a backdrop of really long-term serious challenges
facing our Federal Government.
So I thank you for the opportunity to be here today. At the
appropriate time be happy to answer any questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Dodaro follows:]

Mr. Platts. Thank you for your testimony. You certainly hit
some of the important high points, and your reference
specifically on the improper payments with Mr. Towns
introducing recent legislation, along with Senator Carper in
the Senate, to take kind of the next step, even going a little
further on how we can continue to tighten up the issue of
improper payments and preventing that from occurring up front,
rather than after the fact, trying to collect the money back. I
look forward to working with you and your staff on that issue
as well.
Mr. Werfel?

STATEMENT OF DANIEL I. WERFEL

Mr. Werfel. Thank you, Chairman Platts, and Ranking Member
Towns, for the invitation today to discuss the state of
financial Management in the Federal Government, and in
particular, the 2011 Consolidated Financial Report of the
United States. Sound financial management is essential to the
effective stewardship of taxpayer dollars and enabling agency
decision makers to make tough choices on day to day and long-
term management challenges. In this time of tight budgets,
families across the Country are sitting around their kitchen
tables and figuring out how to make the most of every penny.
And they should expect nothing less from their government.
To meet this commitment, last year the Administration
launched a campaign to cut waste, dedicated to combing through
the entire Federal Government and rooting out any areas of
waste an inefficiency. We have made tremendous strides to date.
We are cutting real estate costs, driving down the amount of
improper payments the government makes, closing data centers
and saving money on information technology, and reducing
administrative costs across the board.
Underlying all these efforts is the need for robust
accounting practices, effective internal controls and reliable
financial reports. These tools create an environment where
agencies can be more effective in meeting our most critical
bottom line results: effective and efficient programs, free of
error and waste.
In addition to providing a comprehensive view of the
Federal Government's finances, its current position as well as
issues and conditions that impact future operations, the
financial report provides us with an annual update on agency
financial audit results, a critical indicator of the success of
our efforts to strengthen financial management practices across
government.
On those efforts, I am pleased to report that great
progress was made in 2011. Twenty-three of the 24 CFO Act
agencies obtained an audit opinion. The best performance by the
Federal Government to date, and only two agencies received a
qualified opinion. Moreover, auditor-identified material
weaknesses continued to decline. And again, all major agencies
met the 45-day deadline for producing audited financial
statements at year end.
These successes are due to the tireless efforts, leadership
and long-term commitment of our Federal agencies. For example,
this year, NASA was able to overcome longstanding challenges
with reporting certain assets and achieve a clean opinion on
their financial statements for the first time since 2002.
Similarly, the sustained leadership and persistence of the
Department of Homeland Security led to them obtaining an
opinion on their balance sheet for the first time since the
Department's inception.
And although DOD was not able to obtain an audit opinion,
they have significantly accelerated their efforts for getting
there, with Secretary Panetta specifically expressing his
strong commitment to achieving an audit of the Department's
budgetary statement by 2014, which would establish a firm
foundation for full financial auditabilty by 2017.
As we move forward on these efforts, we are cognizant that
a foundation now exists that enables us to go beyond the
balance sheet to ensure every dollar spent on programs and
services is spent wisely. In today's continually challenging
fiscal environment, wasting money is inexcusable and cannot be
tolerated. As I mentioned earlier, we have already made
tremendous progress in cutting administrative costs, saving
money on real estate, reducing improper payments and other key
reforms under the campaign to cut waste.
But in each of these areas, there is still significant work
to be done in order to cut waste and improve efficiencies
wherever possible. To achieve these goals, we will continue to
improve financial management and identify ways to better manage
and report on how the Federal Government spends taxpayer
dollars. I look forward to working with Congress, GAO and the
financial Management community to achieve our mutual goal of
providing reliable and relevant financial information in a
readily available and easily accessible format.
Since I finished a minute early, let me echo Mr. Dodaro's
comments about your service to this Country, to this
Subcommittee, Mr. Chairman. I would just mention, earlier in my
career, I think it was around 2003, I saw you give a speech on
the CFO Act and financial management generally. Some of the
themes that you emphasized in terms of the purpose of the CFO
Act and that are, you talked a lot about the audits that we do
on a quarterly and an annual basis, financial statements are a
means to a larger end of better Management and better data for
information and decision making.
Those certainly resonated with me as I was starting out in
financial management in 2003. I started my career in government
in 1997, but got into financial management right at the time I
saw that speech. And it was very helpful for me in terms of
formulating my approach and my strategic vision for financial
management from OMB's perspective.
So for all your work, OMB thanks you and wishes you the
best of luck in the future.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Werfel follows:]

Mr. Platts. Thank you.
Secretary Gregg?

STATEMENT OF RICHARD L. GREGG

Mr. Gregg. Chairman Platts, Ranking Member Towns, thank you
for inviting me to talk about the financial report for the
United States Government for fiscal year 2011. Your interest in
financial management is greatly appreciated.
The financial report provides the U.S. Government,
President, Congress and the American people with a
comprehensive view of the Federal Government's financial
position. The projections in the report demonstrate that we
must continue to take action to put the Federal budget on a
more sustainable path. The Obama Administration is committed to
meeting that challenge.
The Affordable Care Act of 2010 and the Budget Control Act
of 2011, both of which Congress passed and President Obama
signed, are expected to help bring the Government's
expenditures more in line with its receipts. Together, these
two laws substantially reduce the estimated long-term fiscal
gap.
But there is still more work to be done. The fiscal year
2013 budget that President Obama submitted on February 13th
seeks to build on that progress through a balanced plan for
deficit reduction. The President's budget reduces projected
deficits by a total of more than $4 trillion over the next 10
years, by adding more than $3 trillion in deficit reduction to
the approximately $1 trillion in savings already enacted
through the BCA. These savings would cut the deficit and begin
placing the Federal debt on a downward path as a share of the
economy by the middle part of the decade.
Addressing our Nation's fiscal challenges will require a
sustained commitment, not just today, but for the long term. As
Secretary Geithner has said, ``Restoring fiscal sustainability
will require substantial additional changes, including tax
reforms to increase revenue and changes to make our entitlement
program sustainable over time.'' But these reforms, if done on
a broad-based and balanced way, and phased in over time to give
Americans a chance to plan and adjust, will not impose an
unfair or excessive burden on the citizens of this Country.
Let me turn to the financial report. The Federal
Government, as Mr. Dodaro said, continues to receive a
disclaimer of opinion on the government-wide audit. Last year I
spoke to the Subcommittee about my personal commitment to
addressing the audit issues for which Treasury is primarily
responsible, the mitigation of the inter-governmental out of
balance conditions and to improve the process for compiling the
report itself. I think we have made significant progress on
those two fronts over the last year.
Treasury, working in cooperation with OMB and GAO and all
the Federal agencies, is pursuing a number of strategic
solutions to resolve these issues and improve financial
management across government. For example, we have launched a
coordinated, multi-faceted effort to resolve inter-governmental
differences, including working groups that get together and
identify areas where we can not only clear out the out of
balance conditions but resolve the underlying problems. We have
taken the lead in working with agencies to resolve
reconciliation differences. We are creating metrics to go out
to the agencies to measure their performance and we are
developing an automated system to address the buy-sell issue
which is a complicated one in this area.
In addition, in this fiscal year, in fact, in June, we will
implement a central account group, or general fund, against
which millions of transactions can be reconciled and validated.
The original government-wide accounting construct lacked a
central account of this type, giving rise to the audit issues
that we have been facing.
And while additional work is certainly necessary, we
continue to clear out many of the audit issues that GAO has
identified over the years.
Let me just touch on a few financial management areas that
complement what Danny said about things that are going on
within the government and within Treasury. Within Treasury, we
have launched an automated electronic invoice that any
government agency can use to move away from paper invoice
processing to electronic processing. It will save money and
improve performance.
Treasury is also working to accelerate the use of
electronic transactions. Many of our payments are now made
electronically as a result of an initiative we started a couple
of years ago. We have moved savings bonds from paper to
electronic, and we also have the tax payments coming into
Treasury almost all electronic these days. Those three
initiatives alone will save about $500 million.
We are working with OMB to improve the payment process and
to identify potential for improper payments before the payments
go out through the goVerify program that we have put together.
And there is a host of other things that we have done.
The last one I would mention is the provision in the fiscal
year 2013 budget that consolidates the two fiscal bureaus that
report to me, Public Data and FMS. We are doing that primarily
to give us a greater opportunity to help other agencies across
the government in the financial management realm. We are also
going to save some money, but the primary reason is to
strengthen our capacity to deal with financial management and
to be a leader in financial management across government.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my remarks. I would like to
echo what my two colleagues said about your work over the years
in providing great leadership in this area. It has been greatly
appreciated by all of us in Treasury who have sat in this chair
and you will be sorely missed. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Gregg follows:]

Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. It has been an
interesting experience, in working with Mr. Towns on the
Subcommittee over the years, and trying to raise awareness in
the general public, I guess, that the issues that all of you
deal with every day are critically important.
I reference back that, years back when we had a hearing on
steroids in baseball and you couldn't fit everyone or all the
cameras in this room, I am a huge baseball fan, but if they
want to kill themselves doing steroids, that is not a priority
issue for this Committee. And yet when we are talking about how
we spend trillions of dollars, we have a lot of empty seats.
The issues you are working on every day really are the
issues that this Committee and the Federal Government needs to
be focused on. So I appreciate all of your nice words, and
certainly look forward to the final 10 months working with you
and then I will be a private citizen. Then I will keep tracking
how we are doing.
But we are going to try to get through some questions here.
The votes have gone up, but we are going to try to get through
as many as we can, so that ideally we don't have to have you
wait while we run over.
I am going to start with Danny, Mr. Werfel. You started a
reference I wanted to start with, which is, what is the real
purpose of what we do when it comes to audits and financial
statements. That is to have knowledge that we can then act on,
and not just once a year, but throughout the year. And to be
able to make informed decisions.
I will start with you, but if any of the three of you want
to comment. What percentage of the departments and agencies do
you think are still having to make heroic efforts to make that
45-day deadline as opposed to having in place the systems that
really are going to generate the information at the end of the
year ready for audit that we really are after? Because that is
what is ultimately going to benefit the department heads, the
agency officials in day to day Management. I know it is going
to be an estimate or a guesstimate, but any ideas?
Mr. Werfel. I would say that about, roughly 70 percent of
the major agencies at this time have hit their stride and
gotten their sea legs.
Mr. Platts. That is a seven zero?
Mr. Werfel. Seven zero, where--that is not, I don't mean to
say that they are as efficient as they can be. But I would say
that they have hit the point where there is a routine nature to
the manner in which the financial statements are put together
and the year-end activities occur.
Every once in a while, within those agencies, there is some
kind of surprise that comes up in October that is unexpected,
and there is a lot of scrambling and we might ramp into heroic
efforts mode. But more and more I think we have achieved a
stability. There are several agencies out there that still, it
is a lot of workarounds, and it is a lot of manual processes.
And you used the term heroic efforts. It is just not the right
efficiency point, they just haven't hit their efficiency. And
that impacts how they can manage more to the bottom line.
And I said in my remarks, the goal here is that financial
statement reporting, internal controls, basic accounting,
become a routine functionality, so that where you are doing
your heroic efforts and where you are staying up at night
worried is around things that are more impactful to the bottom
line, like are the dollars going to the right person in the
right amount.
Mr. Platts. General Dodaro?
Mr. Dodaro. I agree with Danny that things have gotten
much, much better over time. There is no question about it.
Another benchmark, though, that we look at is whether or
not the agencies are able to be in compliance with the Federal
Financial Management Improvement Act. We still have 11 of the
agencies that are out of compliance with one of the three
requirements there in terms of the standard general ledger, or
whether they are following generally accepted accounting
standards or Federal systems requirements. But it is much, much
better. It is hard to quantify, but there is no question that
it is marked Improvement from where we started back in 1996 and
1997 with these audits. There is no question.
A couple of areas, one area that we are still heroic
efforts, still at the IRS on the tax collection activities,
which is why we list that as a material weakness. We are still
using their statistical sampling estimates to estimate the tax
receivables. There is really not yet a good system there. They
are making good strides with their system improvements efforts,
but I would like to see more improvement over there. Because I
think it would benefit the taxpayers as well as the government
in that particular case. And of course, we have the issues at
DOD, DHS and a few others.
But by and large, I would give it a much improved
situation. We just need to keep it there. I am concerned, if
you notice, some agencies slip out of unqualified opinions,
slip back in, slip out. That is a little bit of a sign there
too, that they are not smooth, you don't have smooth processes
in place.
Mr. Platts. And continuing to have leaders like Secretary
Panetta, who are emphasizing this as a clarity issue, not in
place of their key functions at HHS or DOD or whatever, but
along with. That leadership at the top really plays a huge role
in whether they stay focused and don't slip out.
Mr. Dodaro. That is essential. That is essential, as well
as continued emphasis from OMB and Treasury.
Mr. Platts. Yes.
Mr. Secretary?
Mr. Gregg. The only thing I would add would be to reiterate
what Danny said, is that whether it is the financial report or
any other kind of operation or accounting process, you can't
jump into it once a year and expect to deal with the issue
appropriately. It has to be an ongoing process, and many of the
things that we are working on is to not have the period that we
have to issue the financial report to address the imbalances.
But throughout the year, work at the agencies and OMB and GAO
to know what the causes of those are and fix them so
ultimately, when we get to the end of the year, we could be at
some point pushing a button and the report is generated and the
reconciliations are there.
Mr. Platts. Thank you.
One other quick question, then I am going to turn to the
Ranking Member. DOD, obviously is a huge part of ever getting
to a clean audit, the Secretary has been great in setting the
priority there, and getting to 2014 with the statements. Do we
think that is realistic? In other words, I think just a few
months back we had the CFO at Air Force saying they were going
to have trouble meeting the 2017 deadline, and now we are
talking about part of that being 2014. Your estimate of whether
we can meet that goal, which we need to, and obviously Congress
has said we will, in law. But we have said some other things in
law about financial Management that were not yet achieved.
Any idea?
Mr. Dodaro. I think this time we have more interim measures
to be able to determine whether we are going to make 2017 or
not. If you recall, in the past, DOD always had an out year
estimate of when they were going to make it. But there weren't
interim milestones to be able to tell.
That is why Secretary Panetta's decision on 2014 is so
important. If they can't make 2014, and get audits on the
statement of budgetary resources, it is going to be really,
really difficult to make the 2017 goal. So I think over the
next couple of years, particularly, I applaud the Marines,
because they have gone out front, as they usually do, and are
trying to get their statement of budgetary resources audited.
They are trying for the third time this year. I think every
year the are learning more, and hopefully the other Services
will benefit from their experience.
So these interim milestones, Mr. Chairman, I think will
give us a better, more realistic assessment than trying to
speculate at this time about 2017.
Mr. Platts. Great.
Mr. Werfel. I absolutely agree. I have talked many times
about what I thought was a critical missing piece to the
Defense Department's efforts. It is what I call a moment of
truth for the finance shop. They have many moments of truth at
the Defense Department more broadly.
But for the finance shop, the rest of government looks at
November 15th each year as the day in which they have to hand
in their final papers and get graded. And in many agencies,
that is embedded into performance appraisals and it is embedded
into the manner in which the effectiveness of the CFO and their
entire operation is working.
But the Defense Department, they have had a disclaimer for
so long, they don't have that healthy stress that exists. But
by Secretary Panetta putting a line in the sand and saying, we
will be auditable on the statement of budgetary resources by
this date, I know for a fact that internally inside the Defense
Department, this is making waves and people are recognizing
that there is a line in the sand and for agencies like Air
Force and others, they are moving in new directions to try to
make sure they meet that commitment.
And it is a smart line in the sand that he has drawn,
because the statement of budgetary resources is so central, the
budget execution, whether program managers and field commanders
throughout the Defense Department can know what cash they have
on hand, what their obligation rate is, what their expenditure
rate is, to meet emerging commitments. That is the bread and
butter of what they do.
And you can convince people that if you can't pass this
test, then it is impacting your mission. Now you are in a place
where you will get more accountability and I think it is a good
place to be.
Mr. Platts. Great.
The Ranking Member, Mr. Towns.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I am pleased to see that the rates of improper payments
have decreased, as we discussed in our hearing on this matter
several weeks ago. Today, however, I want to focus on the
President's goals to recapture at least $2 billion in improper
overpayments by the end of the fiscal year 2012. So I guess,
let me ask you, Mr. Werfel, your testimony indicates that
Federal agencies are on track to meet or exceed the President's
goal in 2012.
My question is simply this. If we proceed with ten new
payment recovery audit programs as has been proposed by my
legislation and Senator Carper's legislation, would you expect
to see a significant impact to the recovery of the improper
payment fund?
Mr. Werfel. I would. I think that the challenge that we are
having right now is making the transition from recovery audits
and a contractor/vendor payment setting to recovery audits in a
grantee-making environment. Let me explain that. The recovery
audits first launched as a legal requirement in 2002. It
focused on vendor payments. So we have this, we built up this
capacity to send in these specialized auditors and scrub both
the agency's books and the contractor receiving the funds books
and find errors, keep a portion of what they find. The
incentive structure is there. And the process is working very
effectively.
That was expanded to Medicare. And it was a seamless
transition, because the Medicare processors operate very much
like contractors. There is an expectation that the way they
keep their books would be audited, and auditable. And the types
of transactions between the agency and the Medicare contractors
looked and felt a lot like Federal contract payments. So there
is familiarity.
Where we have been challenged is in expanding that to
grants. So we have not yet figured out exactly how to maximize
the impact of sending recovery auditors down to States, local
governments, universities, it is a much different proposition.
There are a lot of different cultural issues. When Federal
employees knock on the door of a State government office and
say, we are here to audit, show us your paperwork, it is very
different than showing up at a Medicare claims processor. And
that is something we need to work on.
I will finish by saying that in Medicaid, the Affordable
Care Act specifically expanded, and the expectation to do
recovery auditing in Medicaid, which operates, as you know,
like a grant program. And HHS, with this pressure of, this
healthy pressure of needing to be successful in the Affordable
Care Act, has gotten out front and done a lot of work and
issued the regulations and done a lot of outreach to get that
Medicaid program started. It started in January of this year.
I am very hopeful that with that program, if it can get off
the ground and get off the ground well, that a lot of lessons
would be learned that we can carry over to other State and
grant programs.
So to go back to your answer, absolutely, Congressman
Towns, we will increase, we will go way above $2 billion, if we
can expand beyond contracts to grants effectively. We just
haven't yet figured out the exact critical path, but Medicaid
is going to be a critical moment in time for us.
Mr. Towns. Right, thank you very much. Is there anything
that we should do on this side to sort of help you implement
it?
Mr. Werfel. I think that the important point is to keep us
accountable, make sure that we are reporting to you
consistently on the different challenges we are seeing in the
grants realm, the State and local government realm, so that
there is an openness and a dialogue around how to fix this. It
may be at some point in the there is a future hearing where
this is your first panel and your second panel are State
controllers or State finance directors, and you are asking
them, help us figure out how to make a recovery audit program
work at the State level. This is something that I think is
going to require that type of collaboration to make it work.
Mr. Towns. Right. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Platts. We are going to need to run for votes. I do
have some others, and I think it is only going to be about 15,
20 minutes. Probably no more than 20 minutes, and I should be
able to be back. So I apologize in holding you, was hoping to
get through more.
But as a follow-up to your answer, I appreciate the
suggestion, I think it is a great one as far as when we are
looking at Medicaid and these grant programs to get that
insight from the States and how they can better partner with
us, something I think we will look at doing with the auditor
general in Pennsylvania or the equivalent position in New York.
You are right, if we are going to be successful in improper
payments in a lot of these areas, especially Medicaid being
from a dollar level one of the biggest, we are going to have to
have a better relationship, because it is ultimately at a State
level where those dollars are being spent and need to be
tracked.
We are going to stand in recess for approximately 15 to 20
minutes then continue. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Platts. Hearing will come to order.
I offer Mr. Towns' apologies, he is having to run to Energy
and Commerce now, so he won't be able to join us. But I do
appreciate your patience and while I catch my breath, having
run over and back to the Floor to try to expedite the hearing
here.
I want to pick up, we were talking about DOD, and certainly
one of the big challenges. General Dodaro, in your testimony
you talk about the importance of implementing the enterprise
resource planning system and the number of challenges, ten,
when you talked about six of the nine of the critical ERPs had
experienced delays. One of the things that caught my attention
was two to twelve years of delay that you referenced, and that
you have made recommendations to DOD to try to improve their
implementation of these plans as well as to deal with the cost
of them. You reference in your testimony cost increases
totaling almost $7 billion.
Can you expand on what you think the challenge DOD is
facing here, and especially, if we are talking about 2014 for
the first statement, being auditable, 2017, to be able to have
the whole department audited, when we see two to twelve year
delays with implementing ERPs, that is not real encouraging.
Mr. Dodaro. Basically the problems that DOD is having here,
and I would be happy to submit our detailed reports for the
record, where we have outlined all the recommendations, aren't
dissimilar from what we see in other IT investment issues
across government in terms of making sure, you have to have the
requirements there, properly outlined, the fact that they have
to make sure that they stabilize the systems going forward. And
it has proven to be a difficult issue across government in
terms of managing these IT investments.
And DOD business systems modernization more broadly is on
our high risk list. So it is not just isolated in the financial
management area, but it is a broader issue. We have recommended
that DOD have better enterprise architectures to manage their
systems. Right now they have over 7,000 different systems,
2,000 investments in new ones. It is a massive activity. And to
have an enterprise architecture to guide it.
A lot of the information they are going to need eventually
comes not just from the financial management community but from
logistics, procurement, and other parts of DOD.
So there are two really sets of issues here. One is to have
a good architecture, where all these systems can be integrated
properly, because that is one of the big problems now. Then
secondly is to manage the systems using a disciplined process
that is put in place. Many of our recommendations go to
instituting good practices.
Mr. Platts. Is one of the challenges, since we are talking
multiple years of implementation, to then have access to that
good information, from when there is a change of
administration, does that an impact on why we see delays
estimating two to twelve years? Is that a factor, or is it more
that they are just not putting in place that architecture to
then follow along and implement?
Mr. Dodaro. It is more the lack of disciplined systems than
it is a change in administration. Although we have recommended
in the past that you need to have a chief management officer at
the Department of Defense. Right now, the Deputy Secretary is
double-hatted, but there is a CMO structure in place in the
Services, and a deputy CMO that reports to the Deputy
Secretary.
So we are watching that very carefully to make sure, and I
hope that that makes a difference in instituting more
disciplined management practices in place.
A big challenge DOD is going to have, even if they have the
good systems, is getting the right data entry to get reliable
data in there. Part of the issue is that they are being able to
document a lot of their transactions. Having not been able to
document some of their transactions was one of the main reasons
they couldn't get an opinion on the Marine Corps statement of
budgetary resources.
So a lot of this is really, I think, better perfecting and
having discipline in the record-keeping and their systems and
development, which hasn't been a priority in the past.
Mr. Platts. We are going to be doing a hearing in a couple
of weeks with Army, related to personnel and accounting.
Mr. Dodaro. You will see that issue vividly in that
hearing.
Mr. Platts. And that kind of leads to the broader issue,
and you referenced it, General Dodaro, and maybe if any of the
three of you want to comment, that a number that jumps out is
that in the past fiscal year, we spent almost $80 billion on IT
systems. Yet we are still having the difficulty of how those
systems are being implemented and then generating useful
information.
Is there, in the big picture, not just DOD, but in any of
the departments or agencies, is there any one issue that as a
committee we should be conscious of that IT implementation,
expenditure and actual how the money is used, that is most
problematic, that we are spending tens of billions and not
maybe getting the return on that investment that we hope to?
Mr. Dodaro. I would say there are two things the Committee
could focus on. One is the implementation of this IT dashboard
that has been put in place. We have made recommendations, that
dashboard is helping because it better tracks the performance
of the systems enhancements on cost schedule and whether or not
they are really going to achieve the results that they are
intending to achieve.
So there is much more transparency now than there ever has
been. We have made further recommendations to make sure that
information is most current as possible.
But that gives the Congress and the public a window into
the performance of these new systems investments. And we can
work with you to provide our recommendations on that area.
Secondly, I was here two days ago talking about
duplication, overlap, fragmentation of the Federal Government.
I pointed out, at DOD and Energy Department that we identified
37 different investments totaling over a billion dollars that
were potentially duplicative. So if you are spreading your
talent out across more systems than you really have to, and you
are not concentrating on managing the performance of a fewer
number of systems properly, you are going to have even bigger
problems. So the potential, having processes in place,
investment management processes to look at the portfolio of
programs and make sure that you don't have duplicative
investments. And many of these occur in administrative systems,
whether they are in personnel management systems. We also
talked about the Office of Personnel Management and other
agencies are developing individual case Management systems for
background investigations on their own, rather than using one
common system. I was pleased that OMB accepted our
recommendation to work with OPM and to try to streamline that
across process.
So I think there are plenty of fruitful opportunities for
the Committee to pursue in this area.
Mr. Platts. Yes, I, because of being in another markup,
wasn't able to be at the hearing on Tuesday. And DOD is a
perfect example, 7,000 systems that you know there is overlap,
duplication in those that could have been much better managed.
And because it wasn't, now to try to get control or bring it
under control is going to be very challenging.
Mr. Werfel?
Mr. Werfel. I would like to add a few thoughts if I could.
First of all, I appreciate Mr. Dodaro mentioning the IT
dashboard. Obviously transparency is the staple of any
effective government reform effort. Bringing to light credible
and reliable information about the status of projects helps
drive accountability.
And I agree with Mr. Dodaro about the emphasis on
duplication and overlap.
The one area that I would suggest the Committee look into
is an area where we have been extremely focused from the start
of this Administration, and that is on the overall size and
scope of our IT projects, our basic assessment is that we have
not historically as a government done a good job in right-
sizing the business requirements for these systems. We take on
a lot of nice to haves in terms of what our systems need to do.
And we bought into, I think unfortunately, a notion that we
can move to these large, single instance systems that can solve
multiple problems simultaneously in a seamless way. And on
paper it looks good. But when you get down to the practicality
of whether our government organizations have the capacity to
manage the change involved, which is a lot of business process
change, it is a lot of data cleanup, it is cultural changes and
training, all things that need to happen. But if you take on
too big of a project, we tend to never get across the finish
line in the way we envision.
So our emphasis has been on downsizing and down-scoping our
IT projects across the board into more bite sized chunks. And
here is what that does. It does a couple of key things. By
doing that, you get to meaningful points of functionality
quicker. So if you have this large project, and even the best
project management team in the world is going to take five
years to deploy, a lot of the key senior officials involved
won't be there five years from now. And the taxpayer is not
getting the benefit of an active system for another five years.
If you say, okay, our first landing point will be 18 months
from now and it won't do everything that the full vision does,
but it will give us meaningful return on investment
functionality within 18 months, well, first of all, the senior
leaders will be there. And on that go-live date, there will be
a sense of accountability. And it creates a change management
environment that is more manageable.
So we have in financial systems over the summer of 2010, we
looked at every financial system project with this thought in
mind. And we shrunk the budget of our financial systems by $1.6
billion, just on the notion of, you have asked for too much,
you have asked for too many nice to haves. We are doing that in
a lot of other areas.
So I think as a government, we need to be on a better diet
in terms of what business requirements we are asking our
systems to do, and look for these shorter bursts of
functionality. The challenge we have with agencies like DOD are
that they have already, when this Administration came on board
with this guiding principle of smaller, more targeted, higher
priority business needs for our systems, the Defense Department
had already launched into these broad ERPs. It is hard to walk
back from the big systems once you are halfway down the
football field.
I think they are looking very closely at areas where they
can as they are implementing forward shrink the size of the
problem, shrink the footprint of business requirements, make
some important adjustments so that they can get to meaningful
deployment sooner.
Mr. Platts. I know we saw, I am drawing a blank on the name
of the program at DOD where they had spent $100 million over I
think seven years, with no, as you say, result. By the time
they got far along, it was realized that it couldn't actually
do what it needed to do, and the taxpayers were out the money
without a benefit.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, a couple other points I would suggest
along these lines. One is we pointed out in our report that was
released Tuesday not only duplication systems but for cost
saving opportunities . And one in Defense was this next
generation email system for the Navy, where they looked at
different alternatives and then they actually selected an
approach that wasn't one of the alternatives that they had
identified. And it was much more costly and involved many more
contractors than any of the alternative approaches. So we
recommended re-assessing that.
What we have been trying to do at GAO is get in earlier in
these decisions along the lines that Mr. Werfel mentioned early
on.
One of the major pieces of legislation that this Committee
sponsored many years ago was the Clinger-Cohen Act that
actually put chief information officers in place across
government. The idea there was to have a disciplined investment
management process, to do more modular approaches and not the
big systems approach.
So I think this Committee has opportunity to look at how
well that is working. We could provide a lot of assistance in
that area.
Mr. Platts. That might be, using the specific example of
the Navy system where we maybe partner with you to do some
productive oversight and help to see if they will reevaluate
what their decision was. Secretary Gregg?
Mr. Gregg. If I might add, actually, you can do these
things successfully. Just to give another point, the Bureau of
Public Debt, which is part of the Fiscal Service, they provide
services to other government agencies accounting services,
through a franchise activity. They are well along to
implementing an upgraded ERP. They are on time, they are under
budget. And they have done that two or three times. It gets
down to identifying exactly what you are going to do and
sticking to it and having the management, discipline to do
that.
And the minimizing the reliance to the extent you can on
outside contractors.
Mr. Platts. Which agency or office was that?
Mr. Gregg. It's the Bureau of Public Debt, part of the
Fiscal Service. They provide franchising services to 55 or 60
smaller government agencies in the accounting area. They have
done that and they are on schedule to implement that.
Mr. Platts. Maybe we need to loan those men and women out
to DOD on their ERPs.
Mr. Gregg. The one thing that often, I think both Gene and
Danny alluded to it, is that these projects tend to grow. And
the Public Debt office service, this is what the service is,
and in one respect it may be somewhat vanilla. But they don't
modify it for their customers. This provides basic, good, sound
accounting, and they don't deviate from that. If you don't want
to come and be their customer, then that is fine. But if you
do, here is what you get. I think that has really paid
dividends for them over the years, and for their customers, in
keeping the costs down and the quality high.
Mr. Platts. Yes. I want to touch on kind of a different
issue, different track. And it relates to one of the audit
issues raised by GAO, was Medicare cost growth. Secretary
Gregg, in your testimony you talk about the projected savings
because of the Affordable Care Act and what will transpire. And
the GAO referenced that as one of the areas of concern. We
probably saw evidence of that just a few weeks back, with the
payroll tax bill, where at least for the next 18 months, we are
suspending the provider payment reductions, which would have
been drastic and ultimately led to less access to care for
seniors.
Secretary Gregg, if you want to comment, given that that
legislation is now passed and is an example of I will say the
fallacy of the Affordable Care Act on the fiscal impact, there
really won't be savings, because of that type. Congress, we are
not going to let Medicare provider reimbursements drop 25
percent or more now, or I would contend, ever, because of what
it would mean to seniors getting access.
Mr. Gregg. I think two things. One is that the auditors for
the associate programs identified in their view significant
uncertainties about the amount that was identified. Having said
that, I think there is still significant savings through the
Act.
Mr. Platts. I am not saying there is not anything in the
Act. But if I remember, and this number, my memory is it was
$220 billion or $240 billion over ten years, was specifically
related to Medicare provider payment reductions. I am pretty
sure it was over $200. I don't remember the exact number. That
is significant, that aspect of the bill.
Mr. Gregg. And I think there are a couple provisions in
there where the auditors and GAO said, well, based on
experience that there is some uncertainty whether or not these
are actually going to be realized. I think that was the reason
for the disclaimer. But on the one hand you have a statute that
is in place, and on the other hand, you have past experience
that might suggest that additional legislation may come along
and modify it.
Mr. Platts. I think it is one of the challenges when we
pass the bill, and then as we go forward with audits, whether
it is CBO and how they score the bill or now how we try to
assess its actual impact, is CBO did what they were required to
do, look at what the bill said and score it based on what it
said, even though everyone knew at the time it passed that we
would not allow, as we now have not allowed those payments to
drop.
Until we get to a more frank or accurate, I am trying not
to use the word honest, meaning I don't think there is any
intent of dishonesty, but the reality of the impact was we
didn't have an accurate or honest assessment of the impact, we
really will struggle with trying to have a true understanding
of the fiscal situation or challenges coming, and then how we
deal with them.
Mr. Dodaro. There are really a few things I would like to
comment on that I think will help shed some light on it. One
is, the financial statements were prepared, as you mentioned,
in order to assume that the law was enacted. But there are
uncertainties. Now, a couple of things in that regard. One is
the reimbursements to doctors, which you mentioned was
deferred. And there are questions about whether that will
continue to be deferred or not in the future. That is one
answer.
Now, there are provisions in the health care legislation to
reduce payments to hospitals that are different. Supposedly the
hospitals have agreed to accept those in exchange for greater
coverage of individuals under health care. So that should be
okay, perhaps, if that arrangement holds over the next decade.
Then there is the question of assumed productivity
increases in other parts of the health care profession. That is
another degree of uncertainty. So those are the reasons that
led us to disclaim to give an opinion on there. And you have a
lot of inherent uncertainties in the health care field anyway
in terms of cost growth. But I just wanted to offer those
comments.
Mr. Platts. Because we are trying to assess what, in
reality, future Congresses will do, they are always going to
have some uncertainty in how we make those projections. I don't
want to dismiss, Controller Werfel referenced earlier the
Medicaid aspects of the bill, of trying to have a proactive
approach that can prevent misuse of funds, as one of those
examples of a positive aspect.
So while I was opposed to the bill in total, I don't want
to dismiss or contend that there are not aspects of it that I
think are wise and good policy going forward.
I want to touch on just a couple of things. General Dodaro,
you talk about in your statement compliance with auditing laws,
and you referenced earlier the Federal Management Financial
Improvement Act and the number of entities still not in
compliance and the impact that has. Would any of you comment,
are we doing a better job? And this has been one of my
frustrations, I guess, whether I was Chairman or Ranking Member
here, that we have laws that are not complied with but there is
no consequence for those who fail to comply. Are we doing a
better job of sending, and Mr. Werfel, you might have mentioned
earlier, DOD, the fact that the Secretary is saying in 2014 we
will do this, that there is a better understanding in the
Department that there is a hard deadline and there will be
consequences. Unless we have consequences, the deadlines
ultimately don't mean anything. Here we have laws that are
being ignored and not complied with.
Are we doing a better job of sending the message out,
whether it is civilian or with DOD, military personnel, that
you are giving this charge and you will fulfill it, and if not,
it will reflect on you from a personal standpoint in your job
rating or assessments? Is that culture changing at all?
Mr. Werfel. I think it is. There are examples of statutory
requirements where there were no particular sanctions where the
global accountability on it was so high that we, that we were
going to make it no matter what. The example I am referring to
is the Recovery Act. All the various reporting deadlines within
the Recovery Act to get the information out, that we had to
stand up a nationwide data system in a matter of months and it
took an enormous amount of combined stakeholder engagement and
senior leadership attention to get that all done, all in not
just the name of a statutory deadline but a broader expectation
that Congress, the President, citizen intermediaries like the
media all placed on----
Mr. Platts. So the public, the fact that it was a very
transparent public aspect helped to make sure that--yes.
Mr. Werfel. Yes. And then on the other end of the spectrum,
if you have a law that is out there that doesn't have that type
of attention, whether inherently within an administration,
there are no hearings on it and the media is not paying
attention, you might see situations where statutory deadlines
are missed and there is not a lot of accountability or
attention to it.
I think the place likely to land is somewhere in the
middle, where clearly, where there are moments in time where a
statutory deadline is surrounded by a tremendous amount of
attention from this Committee, from other committees, from the
Administration, it is kind of, it feeds off each other. We end
up in a situation where these deadlines are consistently met.
But you can't prioritize everything. And you can't expect
that in all situations. For those places where we don't see
that, I feel there can be different things we can do to drive
greater accountability, including organically within the
government embedding these things in performance appraisals,
which is happening more and more, thanks to efforts at OPM and
others to try to enforce more performance-based work from
Federal employees and tying merit-based promotions and salary
increases and things like that.
And then there are some creative things that I have seen
come out of this Committee and on the Senate side in the area
of improper payments, saying that if the IG finds you non-
compliant, there needs to be a disclosure to the Hill with
these kinds of explanations. There is a transparency element to
that, an additional reporting requirement to that, that can be
helpful.
So it is finding that right calibration, but yes, I think
there are moments in the Federal financial frame where if there
is not enough attention to it and not enough teeth in the
statute, it is hard to keep everyone in line on every single
requirement.
Mr. Platts. So maybe a good example, if my good friend, Mr.
Towns, was here, in the coming term, 2013-2014, he would say if
he was Chairman, and I would say whoever succeeds me as
Chairman from our side, but that they work with DOD, not wait
until 2014, but in early 2013 maybe mid-year 2013, in getting
to that 2014 deadline that DOD knows that this Committee,
whoever is in this chair for the next two years, leading up to
that 2014 deadline, is very public about scrutinizing DOD
meeting that deadline?
Mr. Werfel. Yes. It is like the point Gene was making on
the IT dashboard. It is out there, there is a report card for
it, it is public. It reinforces. If there are interim report
card moments for the Defense Department that are public, that
is going to be a better ingredient for accountability and
sustained leadership attention than if we just wait until 2014
and see what happens.
Mr. Dodaro. I would offer a couple of observations on this.
First, the last update we did of the high risk list, we took
two times off the high risk list. In both of those cases, over
a dozen hearings had been held by Congress since we put the
area on the high risk list to get them off. There is no doubt
in my mind that that would not have happened absent
Congressional oversight and top commitment by the
Administration. One was personnel security clearances, we were
way behind in clearing people, and that was a big issue after
9/11. So the Deputy for Management at OMB and the OPM Director
led a task force, they focused on it, Congress focused on it
and it got fixed. There were metrics, they moved to a specific
period of time.
Now, I contrast that to the Anti-Deficiency Act which has
criminal and civil penalties in it, and we know there have been
violations, but nobody has ever been prosecuted as a result of
those violations. So I think transparency and involvement of
top people, where there is a coalescing of Administration
priority and Congressional priority and things get done. And
that is really, I think, the proper vehicle to pursue.
I was involved in the original development of the
legislation back in 1996 that created the Financial Management
Improvement Act. And there was in draft legislation, there were
penalties in there. If you didn't achieve compliance, your
budget was reduced by so much, but that created so much
problem. And people were afraid, I think rightfully so, of
unintended consequences, that that could occur, that that was
removed from the final legislation that is in place. But in my
view, there is no substitute for Congressional and
Administration attention.
Mr. Platts. That may be, as we look at the remainder of
this year, with the number of oversight hearing issues, such as
the State cooperation on Medicaid and grant programs, perhaps
with Navy and IT, and that type thing, we look at maybe in the
fall one that is DOD-specific on where they are, to kind of set
the stage for whoever does succeed me as chair.
And as far as getting more attention, I always think about
asking the three of you to admit to steroid usage so that we
would have more media focus on these important issues. So for a
future hearing, we may ask you to start bulking up.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Platts. And I appreciate your patience. If I can, maybe
two final issues. I always have too many probably for the time
frame. In the testimony, and I guess it goes to one of the
uncertainties and the impact of the economic recovery efforts,
and specifically, General Dodaro, you referenced the $316
billion in future payments related to Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac and what that ultimate cost is going to be.
That number, I have not seen before, and maybe just missed
it. But it is, to me, was much higher than any estimates I had,
which were $150 billion, $200 billion. Can you comment on that
and is that a pretty, do you think, a pretty solid estimate of
what that ultimate cost is going to be?
Mr. Dodaro. So far, and probably the numbers you are
referring to that are most often referenced is what has already
been paid, which is about $183 billion recently. This morning
in the paper, another disclosure about losses for this last
quarter for one of the NGSEs.
The $316 billion, there is also a disclosure in there that
there may be an additional $60 billion over and above the $316.
Now, this changes every year based upon circumstances and
estimates. So we will have to watch it. But I do think that
ultimately this will be one of the greater costs of the
financial recovery efforts, will be Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae.
That is setting aside even what the transition issues would be,
once the Congress settles on what their ultimate disposition
should be.
So this is something we are watching closely, the same way
we are watching under the TARP program, we still have to exit
from AIG, General Motors. We have made recommendations to
Treasury that they have the expertise to be able to divest
there at an appropriate point in time to protect the taxpayers.
And so all these investments we are watching very closely
going forward.
Mr. Platts. And obviously that has a huge impact on the
bottom line, when we talk about future liabilities and our
fiscal position.
Mr. Dodaro. Oh, definitely. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are
huge entities and they have a lot of repercussions.
Mr. Platts. Great. We have been joined by the gentleman
from Virginia, Mr. Connolly. Do you have questions?
Mr. Connolly. I do, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to our panelists. Mr. Dodaro we heard from
just the other day. Mr. Werfel, we have missed you. There was a
period of time during Congress I thought you had a cot
somewhere. But thank you so much for your willingness and
patience to share with members of Congress. Mr. Gregg, welcome.
Mr. Dodaro, there has been a lot of talk about balancing
the budget and ways we can do it. I want to talk to you a
little bit to follow up on the conversation we had in full
committee the other day. Do you remember what percentage of GDP
revenue Federal revenue represented the last time we balanced
the budget?
Mr. Dodaro. Not off hand.
Mr. Connolly. Would 19.6 percent roughly sound right to
you?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. And 20.5 percent the very last year we
balanced the budget? Roughly, roughly guess.
Mr. Dodaro. All right.
Mr. Connolly. And it is somewhere between 14 percent and 15
percent today?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Would it be fair to say that when you look at
the fact that we are at 25 percent spending, which is too high,
higher than it was last time we balanced the budget, but
revenue is too low, relative to that record, that we have to
address both sides if we really seriously want to put ourselves
on a sustainable path toward balance in the Federal budget?
Mr. Dodaro. I am on record as saying we need to address
everything, revenue, entitlements and other government
spending.
Mr. Connolly. Would it be fair to say that it would be a
very hard climb to try to balance the budget only on the
spending side of the ledger?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. Gregg, in your testimony, you actually said, you
pointed out that the Affordable Care Act reduced Federal
outlays and helped reduce deficit spending, if I understood
your testimony correctly.
Mr. Gregg. Pardon me?
Mr. Connolly. I said, in your testimony, you talked about
how the Affordable Health Care Act actually helped reduce
Federal outlays and long term actually will contribute to
deficit reduction. Is that your testimony?
Mr. Gregg. And while there is some uncertainty on the
numbers, the savings are still very significant.
Mr. Connolly. Very significant. Do we have any evidence
with respect to, for example, Medicare premiums or Medicare
Advantage premiums that maybe the promise of the Affordable
Health Care Act is in fact being realized, or shows some
empirical evidence that it might be? Did Medicare Advantage
premiums go up or down the last two years?
Mr. Gregg. I am sorry, Mr. Connolly, I can't answer that.
But I can get an answer for you for the record.
Mr. Connolly. Would it surprise you to learn that as a
matter of fact the answer to that is they went down both years
for the first time in the history of the program?
Mr. Gregg. No.
Mr. Connolly. And Medicare premiums this year went down.
And in both cases, especially Medicare Advantage, the number of
people enrolled, because one of the criticisms of health care
reform was, it will destroy Medicare Advantage, in both of the
subsequent years since passage of the Act, not only did
premiums go down, benefits went up, with lower cost to the
consumer, and the number of people registered actually
increased very significantly. Other than that, the predictions
of killing Medicare Advantage have been proved correct.
We were talking, Mr. Dodaro, the other day about metrics.
And one of the things, and I know the Chairman certainly has
not only concurred with this concept but tried to help it
along, there are some investments we can make in the Federal
Government that actually have huge return on them. I want to
give you the opportunity to revisit the issue of what that
ratio was for every dollar we were investing in new resources
at GAO, what was the payoff for taxpayers in terms of dollars
saved?
Mr. Dodaro. Basically, our return on providing, the record
at GAO returning financial benefits for every dollar invested
at GAO in the last four years was on average $91 to every
dollar invested in GAO.
Mr. Connolly. Ninety-one to one?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. The last year was 81 to 1.
Mr. Connolly. And what has happened to your budget?
Mr. Dodaro. Our budget has been reduced about 8.3 percent
since 2010. And our number of staff by the end of this year
will be 11 percent lower than it was in 2010. That will be the
lowest staff level that we have had in GAO since 1935.
Mr. Connolly. I would say to my friend, the Chairman, whose
retirement still causes me sorrow, because his voice is going
to be very much missed here in the Congress, this Subcommittee
has done some pioneering work on a bipartisan basis, looking at
issues like this, improper payments. And Mr. Werfel, you
testified about this, and I hope the Chairman will indulge me
just a few more seconds. We have to get out of this mindless
narrative that all spending is the same and all spending is
bad. There are such things as strategic investments.
A hundred and twenty-five billion dollars a year in
improper payments, if we could in theory bring that to zero
times ten, that exceeds the sequestration number we are
sweating buckets of blood about around here. If you could have
even half that 91 to 1 ratio, let's say in the first year it is
that, but you come down a little bit in the next year, it is
still a bargain. Instead, we are at the lowest level since
1935. We are actively dis-investing in opportunities to enhance
revenue and to catch waste, fraud and abuse and mistakes early
on and prevent them. That is good for taxpayers.
This Subcommittee has talked about the need for, and thank
God the Congress passed the Federal Acquisition Institute
Training Bill that I introduced. And again, Mr. Platts was a
co-sponsor. It is penny-wise and pound-foolish not to have
highly skilled, highly trained managers of big, large
contracts. What can go wrong if you have someone who doesn't
really know what they are doing?
Mr. Dodaro. Lots.
Mr. Connolly. Right. And so it just, we have to change the
narrative around here. Again, I want to thank my friend, the
Chairman of the Subcommittee, who has tried to change the
narrative around here about this. We need to highlight that
kind of statistic more. We need to educate our colleagues
around here that it aint all the same and that there are some
investments worth making if we share this goal about reducing
the deficit and getting our arms around the fiscal situation.
Well, what are the tools we need? And all too often we have
substituted ideological rhetoric and political catch phrases
that are not a substitute for thoughtful, analytical work about
what are the analytical tools we need, frankly, to do our job
and do it better.
Mr. Werfel, I have not given you an opportunity. If the
Chairman will indulge one more minute, just to allow Mr. Werfel
to respond. I thank the Chair for his indulgence.
Mr. Werfel. I think you are hitting on a central issue:
where are there investments that have a positive return on
investment for the taxpayer, in particular in program
integrity. Every year the President's budget includes a suite
of program integrity proposals that will improve our track
record on improper payments in Medicare and improve tax
enforcement. The numbers are staggering in terms of the types
of savings we can achieve, over a one-year window, over a ten-
year window. Either way you are looking at very large numbers,
in the $100 billion range.
Often, those investments are not enacted through the
appropriations process. And it is enormously frustrating that
investments that can return dollars and help us in our battle
against the deficit are not enacted. So I agree.
And I also would emphasize that I think as we move forward
as a Federal Government, the more that we can do to improve the
analysis that we have on the return on investment of our
dollars, whether it is for GAO, Inspector General's shop, a new
fraud detection technology that we need to invest in, and we
can expose that and make it clear, I think we are better off.
This is an area where this Committee can play a critical role
in highlighting places, in any President's budget, whether it
is this one, the next one or the previous one, where those
investments have a positive return to drive down error and
improve efficiency. More people need to be singing that song
that you are singing and bring attention to it.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the Chair for his consideration.
Mr. Platts. I thank the gentleman for his comments and
being right on point. When you look at the number, the $91 or
$83 return for every dollar spent, perhaps the gentleman and I
can look, as we move into the appropriations process, see if
there is a way in a bipartisan way to make sure we are making
that investment specifically, and being able to make that case
of the wisdom of it and the return to the taxpayer.
We are going to conclude, and I want to thank each of you
again for your insights that you share with us and giving us
some more work to do with your knowledge and things that we
need to highlight. We will keep the record open, as I said
earlier, for seven days for any additional information you want
to provide, or members that want to provide a statement for the
record.
I know I will have the chance to interact with you some
over the next 10 months, but I very much appreciate what you do
every day and your commitment to good fiscal management, which
is one of the Federal Government's most important
responsibilities, is how we handle the hard-earned dollars of
our fellow citizens. I know each of you and your staffs are
focused very much on that day in and day out. That is
commendable.
When I talk about public service being a calling, what you
are doing epitomizes that calling of serving your fellow
citizens. So thanks for your testimony and your patience as we
had to break for votes.
This hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:44 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


