- SOLUTIONS NEEDED: IMPROPER PAYMENTS TOTAL $115 BILLION IN FEDERAL MISSPENDING

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SOLUTIONS NEEDED: IMPROPER PAYMENTS TOTAL $115 BILLION IN FEDERAL
MISSPENDING

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION,

EFFICIENCY AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 7, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-130

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-028                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Government Organization, Efficiency and Financial
Management

TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania, Chairman
CONNIE MACK, Florida, Vice Chairman  EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York, Ranking
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma                 Minority Member
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas                  Columbia

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on February 7, 2012.................................     1
Statement of:
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., a U.S. Senator from the State of
Delaware...................................................     6
Werfel, Daniel I., Controller, Office of Management and
Budget; Michael Wood, executive director, Recovery
Accountability and Transparency Board; and Beryl Davis,
Director, Financial Management and Assurance, Government
Accountability Office......................................    16
Davis, Beryl.............................................    29
Werfel, Daniel I.........................................    16
Wood, Michael............................................    25
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Carper, Hon. Thomas R., a U.S. Senator from the State of
Delaware, prepared statement of............................    11
Davis, Beryl, Director, Financial Management and Assurance,
Government Accountability Office, prepared statement of....    31
Towns, Hon. Edolphus, a Representative in Congress from the
State of New York, prepared statement of...................     4
Werfel, Daniel I., Controller, Office of Management and
Budget, prepared statement of..............................    18
Wood, Michael, executive director, Recovery Accountability
and Transparency Board, prepared statement of..............    27

SOLUTIONS NEEDED: IMPROPER PAYMENTS TOTAL $115 BILLION IN FEDERAL

MISSPENDING

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Government Organization, Efficiency
and Financial Management,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m. in
room 2247, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Todd ``Russell''
Platts (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Platts, Farenthold, Towns, and
Connolly.
Staff present: Sharon Casey, senior assistant clerk; Mark
D. Marin, director of oversight; Tegan Millspaw, research
analyst; Laura L. Rush, deputy chief clerk; Peter Warren,
legislative policy director; Jaron Bourke, minority director of
administration; Beverly Britton Fraser, minority counsel; Devon
Hill, minority staff assistant; and Paul Kincaid, minority
press secretary.
Mr. Platts. The committee will come to order.
I am glad to welcome everyone here today and appreciate
everyone's interest in this important topic.
The hearing today will address improper payments made by
the Federal Government and will continue this subcommittee's
examination of Federal financial management issues.
In fiscal year 2011, the Federal Government reported $115
billion in improper payments. We know that this is only an
estimate and that the total amount of improper payments is
unknown and likely even higher.
Improper payments occurs for a variety of reasons, but they
are the result of poor financial management. Programs are
particularly vulnerable to improper payments when agencies fail
to maintain effective internal controls, adequate financial
management systems or insufficient oversight. These programs
are classified as high error.
In fiscal year 2011, the Office of Management and Budget
identified 11 high error programs. These 11 programs made up 94
percent of all improper payments identified in 2011. At the top
of the list are Medicare and Medicaid programs which account
for over half of all reported improper payments. Other high
error programs include unemployment insurance, social security
and the earned income tax credit. Some of these high error
programs are uniquely challenged due to their large budgetary
obligations. However, they all share similar problems of
ineffective, internal controls.
In order to reduce improper payments, agencies must
reevaluate their internal control structures and increase
accountability in program management. There must also be more
effort to ensure that agencies report their improper payments.
Although not all agencies are required to report such improper
payment estimates, some agencies that are required to do so are
failing to do so.
The most significant agency failing to report is the
Department of Defense, although both the Government
Accountability Office and the Defense Office and Inspector
General have found that the Department is at a high risk for
improper payments. Over the past decade, there has been
significant work by both President Bush and his administration
and President Obama and his administration to reduce and
prevent improper payments.
While some agencies have made progress in identifying and
reducing improper payments in certain programs, many of the
agencies still lack the necessary framework of internal
controls that could lead to a sustainable decrease in such
payments. It is clear that better solutions are needed to
protect taxpayer dollars and to bring accountability to Federal
spending.
An increased focus on preventive controls would allow
agencies to stop more improper payments before they are issued.
Better detection methods would also help prevent and recover
more payments. Most importantly, the government must do a
better job of identifying the root causes of improper payments.
Until we understand how and why these payments are being
made, it will be impossible to effectively prevent them.
Billions of taxpayer dollars are misspent every year through
improper payments. This administration and agency leaders have
made significant efforts to reduce these payments and the work
is both important and commendable. However, we need more
solutions to better protect taxpayer funding.
We are honored to be joined here today by Senator Carper to
discuss a bill currently being considered to help reduce
improper payments. We will also hear from witnesses on the
problems that lead to improper payments and what we can do to
prevent them. We certainly are grateful for each of the
witnesses who will share their expertise and knowledge with us
here today and look forward to their testimony.
I am now honored to recognize the ranking member, the
former chairman of the full committee, Mr. Towns from New York,
for the purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I am pleased that we are continuing to examine the progress
we have made in reducing improper payments and also the
challenge which remains.
I would like to welcome Senator Carper, a dedicated,
committed and tireless champion, of good government in the
other Chamber. It is my hope that we can work closely together
on our proposal to build a bridge between where we are now and
the elimination of improper payments in the future.
Mr. Werfel, it is good to see you again. Ms. Davis and Mr.
Wood, welcome, and I look forward to your testimonies.
The Obama administration has put forth very robust
initiatives to eliminate improper payments which is one of the
key components of the President's effort to eliminate waste in
government. I am encouraged that we have seen some positive
results. In fiscal year 2011, the Federal Government shrank the
amount of improper payments by 4.7 percent or $5.3 billion
compared to the prior year.
While this is a significant accomplishment, the level of
improper payments is still unacceptably high. Some of the
initiatives responsible for the drop in improper payments
include the Do Not Pay list which the President called for in
June 2010 in order to prevent ineligible recipients from being
paid repeatedly.
The VerifyPayments.gov Web site was created to enhance this
effort. We will hear from Senator Carper today about a
legislative fix that would make checking the Do Not Pay list
the law of the land. The President also asked agencies to be
transparent about the amount of improper payments and to
account to the American public for their actions in addressing
the problem. I am pleased that the PaymentAccuracy.gov Web site
has been up and running and shows the exact information which
is also a great response.
President Obama expanded the use of payment recapture
audits as a way of detecting paying errors and recovering
improper overpayments. Since 2010, agencies have recaptured
nearly $1.9 billion in improper payments for our Treasury.
Once again, we look forward to hearing Senator Carper's
proposal on how to improve this initiative. A healthy financial
future for the United States requires sustained efforts from
more than one source. We have to watch what we spend, get rid
of the waste, increase revenue and reduce improper payments all
at the same time to accomplish this goal.
Our witnesses are the professionals in our government
dedicated to achieving all of these goals. They will explain
our gains, our challenges and propose solutions that will keep
us on the path to eliminating waste in our government.
I am looking forward to working in a bipartisan way to
reduce the cap and capturing the improper payments.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. On that note, I yield
back and I am anxious to hear the Senator from the other side.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Edolphus Towns follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.002

Mr. Platts. I thank the gentleman and certainly echo Mr.
Towns' comments about work on this issue in a bipartisan and
bicameral manner because it is truly about protecting the
taxpayers' hard-earned dollars.
We will have the record open for 7 days for other Members
who want to submit an opening statement or extraneous material
for the record.
We are honored to have the senior Senator from Delaware,
the Honorable Thomas R. Carper, also chairman of the
Subcommittee on Federal Financial Management, Government
Information, Federal Services, and International Security of
the Senate Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee.
Senator, I thought I had a committee with a long title but I
think you have outdone me.
Mr. Chairman, we really appreciate your efforts. You are a
long-time leader on government reform issues and especially
about protecting taxpayer funds. Not only do we look forward to
working with you, but we are honored to have you here to share
your insights about the legislation you have introduced.
Without further ado, Mr. Chairman, the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF HON. THOMAS R. CARPER, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE
STATE OF DELAWARE

Senator Carper. Thank you, Chairman Platts, and my compadre
and friend, for many years, Ed Towns.
I came to government, as I mentioned to you earlier, to
Congress in 1982 when we are about to run out of money in
Social Security, not reduce payments, but literally in 1983,
run out of money entirely.
We had a Republican President, Ronald Reagan; Democratic
Speaker of the House, Tip O'Neill; and a lot of Democrats and
Republicans here went to work and I used as a blueprint a
commission led by Alan Greenspan and solved the problem, not
forever, but for another 25 or 30 years and put Social Security
on a pretty good path. It was that bipartisan spirit, the House
and Senator working together, the legislative and executive
branch with some really smart people who joined Alan Greenspan.
I come to you in that same spirit that led us to that
success in 1982 and 1983 and hopefully we can rekindle that
here today. I thank you very much for the chance to come by and
to revisit these old haunts and to have a chance to see both of
you too.
As everyone in this room knows, we have faced record budget
Federal deficits in recent years. The national debt now stands,
I am told, at something over just $15 trillion, well over
double what it was just a decade ago. The last time the debt
was this high I think was at the end of World War II. That
level of debt was not sustainable then and it is not
sustainable now.
I talk a lot about cultures that we have here in Washington
and suggest that what we ought to do is establish a different
kind of culture when it comes to spending. A lot of people
think we have a culture of spendthrift around here and that we
should replace it with a culture of thrift. I agree and I am
sure you do too.
I think we need to look in every nook and cranny of Federal
Government, including domestic spending, defense, entitlements,
and tax expenditures. We need to ask the question is it
possible to get better results for less money or is it possible
to get better results for the same amount of money, and if it
is, let us do that. Do what works and frankly do more of that.
In order to be effective in the important work of
identifying areas where we can spend taxpayers' money more
effectively, we need to sharpen our pencils, stop making the
kind of expensive, avoidable mistakes that lead to improper
payments.
Before going any further, I want to take just a moment to
explain what it means for Federal agencies to make improper
payments. Improper payment occurs, as you know, when an agency
pays a vendor for something it did not receive or maybe even
pays twice for what it did receive. It can occur when a
recipient has died and is no longer eligible for payment or
when a vendor owes the government money and legally should not
be getting a payment until a debt is repaid. Of course,
sometimes people or companies receive payments that are
actually fraudulent.
Federal agencies have estimated, as you noted, improper
payments at levels of more than $100 billion annually during
the past few years. Whenever I talk to people out on the stump,
in my State or around the country about one of the keys to
reducing the deficit is to address improper payments, their
eyes kind of glaze over when I say the words improper payments
until I tell them how much they were, until I say, did you know
improper payments were $121 billion last year. That gets their
attention.
Those payments come from over 70 programs and more than 20
agencies and include programs like Medicare, Medicaid, civilian
and military pay at the Department of Defense, and at FEMA, to
name just a few. Clearly this level of inaccuracy particularly
as the Federal Government struggles with our massive debt and
deficit is unacceptable.
Fortunately, we can do something about it. If the truth be
known, we already are and we are beginning to make some
progress. I want to take a moment to say this. The folks
sitting behind me from GAO, I just want to thank them for being
great partners with all of us in trying to identify areas where
we are in danger of wasting a lot of our taxpayers' money.
I want to give OMB a lot of credit. The last administration
under President Bush said we have a problem with improper
payments and we should do something about it and got us started
on this path. This administration, to their credit, has pushed
it hard and OMB has been very, very supportive of our efforts.
There are several additional effective tools that are able
to curb wasteful and fraudulent payments. Today, I just want to
outline a couple of steps that Congress can take now that will
make an even bigger dent in improper payments and help get
Federal spending back on track.
According to GAO, the Federal Government made an estimated
$121 billion in improper payments in fiscal year 2010. I was
encouraged to learn that the early data for fiscal year 2011
shows a slight drop in the level of improper payments to
approximately $115 billion, even though more agencies have
begun reporting their improper payments.
For example, 2011 estimates include something that 2010 did
not and that is improper payments for the Medicare Prescription
Drug Program for the first time and even though that is
included, we still see apparently improper payments dropped
from 2010 to 2011 by about $6 billion, that's a lot of money.
That is twice the budget of the State of Delaware in a single
year.
Having said that, error rates and the amount of money lost
to avoidable errors still remain at unacceptably high levels.
While agencies are beginning to make progress in implementing
new anti-waste, fraud controls and procedures, I believe a lot
more work needs to be done to identify, recover and prevent
improper payments. I like to say if it isn't perfect, make it
better. With us all working together, we can make it better.
What disturbs me about the problem here in the Federal
Government is that we seem to make these kinds of mistakes at a
rate much higher than a business or the average family would
tolerate or could afford and we keep making them over and over
again. Having said that, we are making some progress in
improper payments as I noted earlier.
In 2010, you may recall Congress passed and President Obama
signed into law, the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery
Act, a bipartisan bill. Dr. Coburn and I collaborated on it. We
had a lot of bipartisan support in passing it. This new law
aimed at making agencies and agency leadership far more
accountable for the expensive mistakes that they make. Again,
it represents bipartisan and bicameral progress in this
important area.
The 2010 law basically does four things. First, it says
Federal agencies across the board have to report improper
payments. Second, you have to stop making them. Third, we want
you to go out, where it is feasible and where it is practical,
and recover the moneys that have been improperly paid. Fourth,
we called for agency managers to be evaluated, at least in
part, on how well they complied with this new law.
A wide variety of ideas have been put forth on how to
further curb improper payments and in the progress, reduce our
budget deficit and begin whittling down our debt as well. For
example, recognizing that more than half of all Federal
improper payment estimates are from the Medicare and Medicaid
Programs, last year that same guy, Senator Tom Coburn and I
teamed up to introduce legislation to curb waste and fraud in
both of those programs, Medicare and Medicaid.
The bipartisan legislation is S. 1251, the Medicare and
Medicaid Fighting Fraud and Abuse to Save Taxpayer Dollars Act.
We take a series of commonsense steps to identify and prevent
fraud and waste in Medicare and Medicaid. It drills down into
specific waste and fraud challenges within health care such as
physician identity theft, the need for improved fraud data
sharing between the Federal Government and State agencies, and
quick identification of improper payments to medical providers.
Our bipartisan legislation is now attracted 33 co-sponsors,
a third of the Senate, bipartisan. There is now a companion
bill in the House led by Congressman Peter Roskam and
Congressman Carney from Delaware, my colleague and friend, John
Carney.
Our legislation has garnered the support of a wide of
organizations including the National Taxpayers Union, Citizens
Against Government Waste, and AARP, not always names you hear
together in the same sentence. Most of the provisions of these
bills are based on GAO's good work and the Inspector General
recommendations.
Let me briefly focus on an important new measure that would
help all Federal agencies prevent, detect and recover improper
payments. Bipartisan legislation that I co-authored with
Senator Susan Collins, S. 1409, the Improper Payments
Elimination and Recovery Improvement Act, is now making its way
through the U.S. Senate. This measure builds upon the 2010
Improper Payments law that Tom Coburn and I introduced and
shepherded through.
Our new bill recently passed by unanimous consent in the
Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee. I am
hopeful it will soon see action on the floor of the U.S.
Senate. I see the word action and Senate in the same sentence,
I hope to see action on this legislation in the Senate.
Let me talk about a couple provisions in the bill and I
will close.
Too often, Federal agencies make improper payments to
individuals who could easily be identified as ineligible. Some
of these individuals are applying for benefits using a false
address--their address may not meet the criteria for
eligibility. Take for example, a person with a job applying for
unemployment benefits using the name of someone who may
actually be dead.
Of course those listening to this hearing may ask the
obvious question of would a Federal agency ever pay
unemployment insurance benefits to an individual who has died
or someone who is trying to commit fraud? That is a good
question. Unfortunately, the answer is that all too often
agencies simply do not do a very good job of coordinating their
efforts to prevent improper payments or communicating about
best practices.
When I meet folks who have been married a long time, 50, 60
or 70 years, I say to them what is the secret for being married
50, 60 or 70 years? The best answers I have ever heard are the
same, the two C's, communicate and compromise. What we need
here is a lot better communication.
Many of those agencies also have antiquated data bases and
computer systems for tracking basic payment information. All
too often, we simply don't allow agencies to access the
information they need to avoid giving scarce taxpayer dollars
to the wrong people.
To their credit, the administration, through executive
action, is establishing a Do Not Pay Initiative. This effort
involves screening recipients of Federal funds against a list
of those ineligible to receive those funds before we cut a
check, for example, or make a payment. For example, before an
agency could award a contract to a company, the agency would
have to cross check against the Do Not Pay data base which will
include a central, comprehensive data base of companies and
entities that are no longer allowed to do work with the Federal
Government because of a fraud conviction or some other reason.
Our improper payment legislation establishes the Do Not Pay
Initiative in law throughout the Federal Government. We believe
it makes several important improvements to the initiative and
adds some tools and procedures to help agencies access data.
The legislation also addresses what is called death fraud
and other improper payments to deceased individuals. Too many
agencies pay benefits to individuals who are deceased and are
therefore no longer eligible for payments under program rules.
For example, the Office of Personnel Management's Inspector
General reported that $601 million in improper payments were
made to Federal retirees who have already died during the last
5 years.
However, such payments to dead people were not unique to
one program. Last year, one of my home State newspapers
reported that 28 years after a Delaware woman had died, one of
her relatives was still pocketing, collecting and cashing her
social security checks. Improving the collection, verification
and use by Federal agencies of data on individuals who have
died will help curb hundreds of millions, if not billions, of
dollars in improper payments.
Our legislation requires that the Office of Management and
Budget, in consultation with other agencies and stakeholders,
identify specific solutions and report back to Congress in 180
days after passage. The legislation also includes provisions to
strengthen and make more consistent the methods used by
agencies to estimate improper payments. This is an issue
identified by both GAO and the Inspector General.
Finally, the bill establishes a series of recovery audit
contracts to assure that agencies actually recover
overpayments. Recovery audit contracting has already proven
very successful in the private sector, as well as in several
Federal agencies, including within the Medicare Program. In the
Medicare Program, we have witnessed recovery of improperly
spent taxpayer dollars approaching $2 billion in recent years.
We expect those recoveries to continue to growth.
I anticipate that the Senate will look as favorably on S.
1409 as it did on the Improper Payments Elimination and
Recovery Act. I want to invite the members of this panel and
the House of Representatives to join us in this new effort by
introducing a companion bill to S. 1409, improving it where
possible, and passing it.
Let me conclude by noting that we are here today in large
part because we believe we have a moral imperative to ensure
that scarce resources we put into Federal programs are well
spent. We must use every tool available to put our fiscal house
back in order and to give the American people the government
they expect and that they deserve.
It is the right thing to do on behalf of the taxpayers of
this country who entrust us with their hard earned money. By
working together on this latest series of commonsense
initiatives, I believe we can take another important step
toward earning their trust once again.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Senator Carper follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.006

Mr. Platts. Senator, thank you for a well stated synopsis
of the challenges before us, the progress we have made and what
we need to do as your legislation proposes. We certainly do
look forward to working with you.
I certainly appreciate a couple of the points you made. It
is always good to be able to kind of poke fun at ourselves.
Your reference to action in the Senate is appreciated on the
House side. We sometimes share that sentiment.
Senator Carper. I have sat in your seat.
Mr. Platts. Exactly. I would say personally, of all the
points you made, as one who will celebrate 22 years of marriage
this summer, looking to hit 50 and 60 and beyond, compromise
and communication both in marriage and in government are
necessary for success. I think that is a very important message
for all of us here in Washington to keep things simple with
what works at home in our marriages can work here.
I know I speak for the ranking member as well and the
members of this committee in saying we do look forward to a
partnership between the House and the Senate, bicameral,
bipartisan, just to do right by the American people. We are
grateful for your efforts here today to share your insights.
Senator Carper. These are a couple of our ideas we wanted
to share with you. They are not just Democratic ideas, not just
Republican ideas, just smart ideas. You all have a lot of good
ones over here. I note you are going to be here for one more
year and you will be stepping down and sailing off into the
sunrise.
I just want to say we all have good ideas. We just need to
do a better job of sharing those ideas with us and
communicating better to say what do you think of this, let's
see if we can work on this together. In the instances I talked
about and some good stuff that you have for us to pay more
attention to, and we would love to do that.
Mr. Platts. We look forward to it. Thank you again.
We will take a brief recess while we reset for the second
panel.
[Recess.]
Mr. Platts. We were happy to have Senator Carper with us,
his insights and commitment to good government issues,
especially fiscal responsibility.
We are also delighted and honored to have the next panel.
We welcome all three of you and appreciate your willingness to
share your expertise with us. The Honorable Daniel I. Werfel
serves as the Controller for the Office of Federal Management
at the Office of Management and Budget. Mr. Mike Wood is
executive director of the Recovery Accountability and
Transparency Board. Ms. Beryl Davis is Director of Financial
Management and Assurance at the Government Accountability
Office.
We appreciate your testimony, not just today, but day in
and day, the work that each of you is doing to serve our fellow
citizens and well protect the hard earned tax dollars of all
Americans.
Pursuant to committee rules, now that you are seated, if I
could ask you to stand so that we can swear you in. I ask that
you rise and raise your right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Platts. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
affirmed the oath. Please be seated.
We have had a chance to review your written testimony and
if you can try to keep your initial statement today about 5
minutes. If you need to go over some, we are not going to be
sticklers too much for that, but we do want to save time for
questions and answers and to have a more engaged discussion
with you as we can, time allowing.
With that, Mr. Werfel, would you like to begin?

STATEMENTS OF DANIEL I. WERFEL, CONTROLLER, OFFICE OF
MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET; MICHAEL WOOD, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
RECOVERY ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY BOARD; AND BERYL
DAVIS, DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND ASSURANCE, GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

STATEMENT OF DANIEL I. WERFEL

Mr. Werfel. Thank you, Chairman Platts, Ranking Member
Towns and distinguished members of the subcommittee for
inviting me to discuss the Federal Government's efforts in
preventing, reducing and recapturing improper payments.
We can all agree that improper payments degrade the
integrity of programs and compromise taxpayers' trust in their
government. In fact, combating improper payments has been a
leading priority of the administration's campaign to cut waste.
Our intensive efforts to reduce improper payments are guided by
the President's bold goals and by key reform ingredients such
as transparency, accountability, collaboration and innovation.
These efforts are producing real results. We are on track
to meet or exceed the bold goal set by the President, having
decreased the governmentwide error rate sharply from 5.4
percent in 2009 to 4.7 percent in 2011 and by doing so, avoided
making more than $20 billion in improper payments over the last
2 years. We have also nearly met the President's goal to
recapture $2 billion in overpayments to contractors.
Today, I would like to quickly highlight three important
initiatives that anchor our efforts. First, the 2009 Executive
order on Reducing Improper Payments, we have made great strides
in implementing this Executive order by identifying agencies
with high error programs that account for the majority amount
of improper payments, establishing supplemental measures to
provide more frequent and current measurements for the majority
of these high error programs, and selecting accountable
officials responsible for coordinating agency efforts to reduce
improper payments. All of this information is transparent and
readily available to the public at PaymentAccuracy.gov.
Second is the implementation of the Improper Payments
Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010, IPERA. Last year, OMB
released guidance to agencies on implementing IPERA to ensure
that they are properly assessing risks in their programs,
measuring and reporting improper payments and establishing
corrective action plans and reduction targets.
IPERA also expanded agencies' authorities and requirements
for recapturing over payments and created sanctions for
agencies that are found noncompliant with the law by their
Inspector General.
Third is the implementation of the Do Not Pay solution. In
June 2010, the President directed the establishment of a single
point of entry where agencies could access relevant data before
determining eligibility for a payment or award and thereby
avoid paying ineligible recipients. In addition to this
memorandum, the Government Accountability and Transparency
Board recently recommended that OMB work with agencies and the
Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board to create a
centralized accountability framework that all agencies can use
to prevent waste, fraud and abuse.
In response, the Department of Treasury has established the
GoVerify Business Center, a single entry point that agencies
can access to determine eligibility information prior to making
an award or payment. The GoVerify Business Center is comprised
of two components. One component is the GoVerify Portal, a Web-
based, single entry access portal that assists efforts to
prevent improper payments by enabling agencies to access data
sources at a centralized location. The other component is the
GoVerify Data Analytics Services, a resource that provides
advanced data analytics to identify trends, risks and patterns
of behavior that may lead to further investigation on the part
of the agency.
When the President took office, improper payments were on
the rise. Today, based on efforts underway, and the
collaborative work of the administration and Congress, we are
on track to meet or exceed the President's goals to cut
improper payments by $50 billion and recapture $2 billion in
overpayments to contractors by the end of this fiscal year.
We have seen error rate reductions in almost every major
program with a history of significant errors, including
Medicare, Medicaid, SNAP, rental housing, the earned income tax
credit, Pell grants and supplemental security income. As I
referenced earlier, without these declines, the government
would have made over $20 billion in additional improper
payments in 2010 and 2011 combined.
The administration will continue to work through the
Campaign to Cut Waste to reinforce a sense of responsibility
and accountability for taxpayer dollars and make clear that no
amount of waste in our Federal programs is acceptable.
Thank you again for inviting me to testify. I look forward
to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Werfel follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.013

Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Werfel.
Mr. Wood.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL WOOD

Mr. Wood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and distinguished
members of the committee. Thank you for being able to appear
before you today to talk about this important matter and
potential solutions to reducing improper payments based on work
done by the Recovery Board.
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 created
the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board, tasked in
part with preventing fraud, waste and abuse of recovery funds.
Last summer, the President issued an Executive order
calling for the creation of the Accountability and Transparency
or GAT Board to make recommendations based on lessons learned
from the Recovery Act, implementation of the Board's successes
applying these approaches across government spending.
At the same time, Congressman Issa and Senator Warner
introduced legislation, the DATA Act, that among other things,
would create a new, independent agency, the Federal
Accountability and Spending Transparency Board, to provide
accountability and transparency for federally funded
activities.
Even before the creation of the GAT Board and the DATA Act,
the Recovery Board realized key lessons: that transparency
drives accountability and that the tools we have built for
these dual purposes have proved useful from both a program and
oversight perspective. Along with Recovery.gov, the Board has
received wide acclaim for building our Recovery Operations
Center, ROC, which combines traditional law enforcement
analysis with sophisticated software tools, government data
bases, and open-source information to identify high-risk
recipients.
This accountability solution provides an in-depth fraud
analysis capability to identify non-obvious relationships
between parties, and provides a predictive-analysis model,
useful in focusing limited government oversight resources. The
Board is now conducting pilots on a fraud prevention tool with
agency personnel as well as with the Offices of Inspectors
General via the Board's new FederalAccountability.gov Web
portal. This framework has the potential to open the ROC tools
and approaches more fully to investigators and practitioners
throughout the Federal Government.
Our goals are to help agencies in performing their own risk
evaluations before awarding Federal funds and to help
enforcement officials to conduct reviews in order to prevent
and detect fraud, waste and abuse in Federal spending.
Pilots with agency procurement, grant and financial
officials just began. With our expanded 2012 appropriations
language, Congress provided some flexibility for us to develop
and test new applications on non-Recovery funds and we plan on
broadening the scope of these pilots.
FastAlert, a new application within the
FederalAccountability.gov framework, provides awarding
officials with the ability to quickly access risk factors
associated with entities that seek or have received Federal
funds. The Board feels FastAlert can be applied to all Federal
spending from pre-award to the payment phases.
Our work on FederalAccountability.gov and FastAlert is in
keeping with the GAT Board's December report to the President
which noted the ROC ``has been instrumental in keeping
fraudulent actors from attacking Recovery programs, using
cutting edge forensic technology to protect taxpayer
interests.'' This technology has applications across the
government and that is why the GAT Board recommends that
agencies work together to create a centralized framework that
leverages the ROC and similar technologies, allowing us to
share data and coordinate our efforts to detect and prevent
fraud. It is also in keeping, I think, with the internal
control guidance established by OMB for improper payments that
cited our lessons learned as well and came to a sililar
conclusion.
Payments resulting from fraudulent activity are only a
subset of the wider problem of improper payments. However, the
Board's tools would assist in identifying questionable entities
in the preventive pre-award phase, and as a review prior to
payment. In consultation with OMB and the Department of
Treasury, we have incorporated features like batch searches and
program specific data bases to better meet agency needs.
Realizing full implementation of FastAlert is complicated
by some common problems that Congress, agencies and executive
leaderships must solve. The computer matching provisions of the
Privacy Act may restrain oversight activities, a problem that
is solved by the DATA Act. True data management also requires
that the government standardize data and provide more modern,
open access to data bases.
Agencies are often reluctant to share data bases due to
fear of violating the Privacy Act, leaving inadequacies in
payment and awarding tools. We have the technology and know-
how, and with your help, the governance, access, and data
issues can be swiftly solved.
That concludes my prepared remarks and I will be happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wood follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.015

Mr. Platts. Thank you, Mr. Wood.
Ms. Davis.

STATEMENT OF BERYL DAVIS

Ms. Davis. Chairman Platts, Ranking Member Towns and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
be here today to discuss improper payments in Federal programs.
My testimony will cover agencies' reported progress in
estimating and reducing improper payments, the challenges ahead
of us and how to move forward in improper payment reduction
strategies. An improper payment is any payment that was made
incorrectly, in the wrong amount and includes payments as well
as overpayments. Also it includes payments that lack sufficient
documentation.
Progress is being reported by Federal agencies in both
estimating and reducing improper payments. In fiscal year 2011,
Federal agencies estimated improper payments of $115.3 billion,
as noted by Chairman Platts, a decrease of $5.3 billion from
that of the previous year. This figure is about 4.7 percent of
the $2.5 trillion in total spending, as noted by Ranking Member
Towns.
The estimate was attributable to 79 programs spread across
17 agencies. The 10 programs with the highest dollar amounts
accounted for about $107 billion or 93 percent of the total
improper payments. The 10 programs with the highest rates of
improper payments had rates that ranged from 11 percent to over
28 percent.
Although progress has been reported, the Federal Government
continues to face challenges in determining the full extent in
improper payments. Some agencies have not yet reported
estimates for their risk assessable programs. In addition,
internal control weaknesses continue to exist that heighten the
risk of improper payments occurring.
Estimating methodologies need to be developed. For example,
there are two DOD programs related to commercial payments where
the estimating methodologies are still being developed. For
this reason, the programs could not be included in the
governmentwide estimate for this year.
Given the amount of Federal dollars that are flowing into
these risk acceptable programs, it is really critical to
enhance our efforts to improve and reduce improper payments.
Continuing and expanding activities are needed to move forward
in the following three reduction areas. First is identifying
and analyzing root cause of improper payments. Second is
implementing effective controls that would prevent improper
payments in the first place. Third is implementing effective
detection controls that would identify and recover improper
payments.
Regarding the root causes, identifying and analyzing the
root causes of improper payments is key to developing
effective, preventive and corrective action plans.
Beginning in fiscal year 2011, agencies were required by
the Office of Management and Budget to categorize their root
causes into three different categories. We found that only
about half of the 79 programs with improper payment estimates
were actually using those three root cause categories. Without
detailed and specific information, agencies are really hampered
in their ability to take action to prevent and to reduce
improper payments.
Regarding preventive controls, strong preventive controls
serve as the front line defense against improper payments and
many agencies are in the process of implementing those
controls. Preventive controls involve a variety of activities
such as up-front validation of eligibility through data sharing
and a predictive analytic test that can identify patterns of
potential risk for fraud.
Addressing program design issues is another preventive
strategy. For instance, agencies may explore whether complex
and inconsistent program design could actually contribute to
improper payments. Effective strategies for reducing improper
payments may actually call for streamlining and for redesigning
or changing those program requirements.
Finally, regarding detective controls, agencies need
effective detective techniques to identify quickly and to
recover improper payments that actually result in losses to the
government. Recovery auditing such as that used in the Medicare
Program is an example of identifying contractor overpayments.
Detection activities play a significant role not only in
identifying improper payments but also in determining and
highlighting those areas where there is a need to enhance our
preventive controls.
Chairman Platts and Ranking Member Towns, that concludes my
prepared statement. I would be happy to answer any questions
you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Davis follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74028.034

Mr. Platts. Thank you, Ms. Davis.
We will go to questions. We are glad to be joined by the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly. Before we go to
questions, did you want to make a brief statement?
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, I thank you so much for your
indulgence. I have two other hearings at the same time and I am
the ranking member on one of them.
I wanted to come because first of all, I wanted to thank
you for your leadership and yours, Mr. Towns, on this important
subject.
Here we were sweating in the so-called Super Committee to
try to identify $1.2 trillion over 10 years. Here we have
improper payments that are $125 billion plus every year which
would exceed actually the goal of the Super Committee if
somehow we could get it to zero.
We are never going to get it to zero but it seems to me
that one of our goals in this subcommittee and in pursuing this
subject is how do we put in place processes that push us toward
that goal and in doing so, we make a very substantial
contribution to debt reduction and to getting our Federal
spending under control without having to take a meat ax to
substantive investments that matter to the country.
I think this is one of the most promising endeavors of the
entire committee, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you again for your
leadership. I thank our panelists for being here.
Please forgive me when I have to duck out to return to my
primary subcommittee.
Mr. Platts. We appreciate the gentleman making an effort to
be here and his words regarding this issue and as we conveyed
to Senator Carper in his testimony, the bicameral, bipartisan
effort to focus on this issue. As you well stated, if we were
successful, we would more than exceed the $1.2 trillion that we
were after in the Super Committee.
I will yield myself 5 minutes now for questions.
I certainly thank each of you for what you are doing every
day to help prevent improper payments as well as the overall
good fiscal management of government. I do want to acknowledge
very much so the efforts of this administration and the number
of initiatives. Mr. Werfel, you highlighted them well.
I do want to caution in how we use numbers and statistics
when we talk about $20 billion toward a $50 billion goal. That
is a guesstimate because the percent went down that therefore,
we avoided $20 billion. We really do not know if we did or not;
we are just applying 5.4 percent in 2009 to today at 4.7 and
perhaps we saved. We don't really know for certain if that is
an accurate number.
Because if we take that approach we would also have to
acknowledge that we also know that improper payments that have
not been identified went up with DOD being the biggest culprit
here of not being able to properly identify improper payments.
Their budget is higher today than it was in 2009, therefore
there is more money that is not being properly identified to
prevent improper payments.
That is just a caution but it is a specific concern as we
look at the numbers because they do give us guidance of are we
having success, taking strides in the right direction and
specifically with the Department of Health and Human Services.
The biggest challenges are Medicare and Medicaid. As we have
heard, about half or a little over half of all improper
payments identified are those programs in that department.
It is my understanding that there has been a change in the
methodology and what they consider an improper payment within
the Department of Health and Human Services and specifically
that if they identify an improper payment and recover it, then
it is not counted as improper payment because they actually got
the money or prevented it in some way.
Is that your understanding and your thoughts on that if
that is the case?
Mr. Werfel. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman.
Actually, the HHS methodology fix is as follows. They
determined there is a paperwork process they go through once
they sample a payment to determine whether it was accurate or
not. All that paperwork doesn't come in all at the same time;
it takes time to investigate the accuracy of the payment. What
happens is at the point in time at which they have to put down
their pencils and do their error measurement, they still have
paperwork outstanding and they haven't fully addressed whether
the error is an error or not.
Historically, for any area where they had to put down their
pencils because they were out of time and it was time to do
their annual report, they counted everything that they didn't
get full paperwork as an error. They have been looking at this
for a few years. In consultation with their Inspector General,
they thought perhaps we are over stating our errors by doing
this because they started looking at historical numbers.
They put their pencils down on say November 15th so they
can issue their audit report. On December 1st or December 15th,
the paperwork comes in and they get the answer in full in terms
of whether the error was an error or not. They determined they
could go back and look at historical records and say based on
historical records, there is a certain percentage of that
paperwork over time that actually comes in and is not an error
versus it is an error.
They decided what was a more fair presentation of their
error was to adjust their error rate based on historical
numbers that dictate say we have 10 paperwork that is
outstanding, historically three of those are errors and seven
of those turn out to be accurate. That is true for a year so we
are going to apply that percentage for the paperwork
outstanding this year for the error. That is the change they
made.
Believe me, Mr. Chairman, we would not have been
comfortable with the change if the Inspector General had not
endorsed it. The Inspector General agreed that it was a fair
presentation. That is why the change was made.
Mr. Platts. There is nothing where even if they identify
something up front, a question where they put their pencil
down, but if they identify a payment that was made improperly,
that they recovered it, that it is no longer counted as an
improper payment, you are not aware?
Mr. Werfel. I am not aware of that. There are certain
isolated incidences that I am aware of where an agency makes a
payment and can subsequently discount their error rate by a
quick recapture of that amount. That takes place, for example,
in social security and in many ways, we allow that within the
methodology because under the law and regulations, they are
compelled to make the payment even when they know it is wrong
because the due process hasn't been complete.
For those where they know they are about to make a payment
they believe is an error but they are compelled to, then they
can get the due process done and quickly pull it back, we have
discounted those. I am not aware of this situation occurring in
HHS.
Mr. Platts. I am hoping that is accurate across the board
because that would defeat our goal here which is to identify
why we are making improper payments because ultimately that is
how we prevent them in the future.
A second question before I yield. I am certainly glad with
Part D now being part of the analysis, the first year that the
Prescription Drug Program is now being looked at, but CHIP and
TANF are two that are not. I know there are two issues here.
With TANF, it is State partners and more challenging and with
CHIP, it is statutory of when they can start looking at error
rates.
If you or other witnesses could comment on what we should
expect with TANF and CHIP? Is there a guesstimate of what their
error rates are likely to be? What is that going to do to the
numbers? May be we can't because we don't have good enough
data, but if any of you could comment, that would be helpful.
Mr. Werfel. There are different data points that we could
possibly share with you. I am not sure I have them at my
fingertips where the agency, in particular on TANF, has gone
out and done a measurement. With TANF, there are a lot of legal
questions that have not yet been resolved in terms of the
ability of HHS, when the program converted from AFDC to TANF,
there were certain alleged restrictions placed on what the
agency could do to audit payments.
As a result, I think it was about 5 or 6 years ago, the IG
used its enforcement and investigative authority to go downward
and the measurement themselves, which is unusual. Typically in
all the situations of which I am aware, the agency does the
measurement and the IG evaluates the sufficiency of the
measurement and whether the necessary corrective actions are
taking place.
Because the IG went ahead and did that, we got some insight
into some of the error. I think they did an error measurement
in about three States, so yes, we found there were significant
errors in TANF when that study was done. There were very, very
important perspectives that were coming from the State
government challenging the HHS IG methodology.
There is a lot to sort through there but I agree completely
that until we have a measurement on TANF, our overall
measurement is incomplete. I just don't know that we, without
Congress' help, have a path forward on that particular program.
Mr. Platts. I think that is an important point. As you and
the IGs work through that issue, if there is a legislative
barrier we need to take a look at, we welcome that information
on how to partner with you.
Mr. Wood or Ms. Davis.
Mr. Wood. No.
Mr. Platts. I yield to the gentleman from New York for the
purpose of questions.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Davis, let me ask, in your testimony you state that
identifying and analyzing the root causes of improper payments
is the key to developing corrective actions to reduce and
prevent improper payments. What has GAO identified as the main
root cause of improper payments among Federal agencies?
Ms. Davis. That is a good question. There are many answers
to that and it would be difficult to put everything into one
specific category.
As you know, there are three different categories
established by OMB: documentation/administrative,
authentication medical necessity and verification errors. The
compliance is about 50 percent as far as agencies reporting
they have identified root causes within those.
I can give an example that I think might be helpful to you.
For example, the Department of Labor's Unemployment Insurance
Program has determined that most of the errors there are due to
people who have actually gone back to work and are still
continuing to collect benefits. As an information point, the
Department of Labor has been working with HHS who has a Do Not
Hire data base and they are looking at that data base to help
and assist them in determining when people actually go back to
work.
There are many, many reasons. There are many administrative
errors. The issues presented have been categorized into those
different areas. We noted that the explanations were in all
three areas when we received information from the different
agencies but the first area, the documentation and
administrative area, seemed to have the highest recurrence or
frequency of reasons for root cause information.
Mr. Towns. Senator Carper said something that really,
really bothered me. He indicated that an example of a person
who had expired and 20 some years later, they were still
receiving his or her social security money. I know it is the
obligation of the family to report but is there any way we can
connect with the funeral director and require some
responsibility there in terms of from a legislative standpoint?
It seems to me that should be easy to fix. If a person expires,
the funeral director would indicate this person is no longer
with us, therefore no further payment should be made.
Does this make sense? I am trying to get my arms around
what we can do to cut down on the numbers because they still
seem to be very big. Anybody?
Mr. Werfel. I agree, Congressman. This is an area we have
delved into after the President directed the creation of the Do
Not Pay List because in that memorandum, the President
specifically called out the Social Security Death Master File
as a dataset that we need to make sure we are checking more
robustly to prevent these payments.
There are a couple challenges. There is imperfect
information in the Death Master File. The Social Security
Administration has tried a variety of different efforts to
improve the timely and accuracy of that data base, including
working in some cases with States on programs to get funeral
directors to report information more frequently. There are
other mechanisms in play that can improve that but it remains
an imperfect data base and that can be part of the problem.
The other challenge, and this is something I think Congress
can help us think about very closely, the access to the Social
Security Death Master File and all these various data bases are
not seamless. There are I believe legitimate but challenging
legal barriers for an agency to access information whether it
is the Privacy Act or data security issues.
Even if we get a fully robust and timely complete Death
Master File, which is a challenge we are working toward and
Social Security is working on with us, the next hurdle is
making sure that the agencies have real time access to that
data because the 20-year example is egregious and we need to
stop that.
The higher risk is the more recent death situation where we
didn't get the data, the payment went out and I think that is
the higher probability of where we are going to make an error
and that is where more of the improper payments are. To close
that particular gap, we need to make sure we are getting access
to data. We need to figure out good solutions to some of these
legal issues because the Privacy Act and the data security all
these issues are legitimate. We just need to figure out if
there is a way to get agencies access to that information
quicker while still protecting those other important interests.
Mr. Platts. I yield myself time again. One is a follow up
on Mr. Towns' question and the discussion about reporting of
root causes and the failure by the majority in dollar amount of
the improper payments did not come along with the proper
identification of the root causes.
In the Improper Payments Act of 2010, sanctions were
created for agencies that do not properly comply with the law.
I think that goes to the issue of not properly reporting the
root causes of improper payments. HHS, which again has the
majority of these improper payments, their auditors said for
the eighth year in a row now, they have failed to comply with
the original Improvement Act of 2002.
Mr. Werfel, I know the 2010 act is a little over a year old
but what type of sanctions should we expect to see and what, if
any, are being pursued because of the failure of agencies to
fully comply?
Mr. Werfel. The Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery
Act, which was passed in July 2010 I believe, for the first
time changed the landscape on improper payments and added this
concept of sanctions and increased accountability. Those are
really triggered, I believe, on the Inspector General's review
and their assessment, and based on the different type of
noncompliance, whether it is failure to report root cause or
having an error rate that is too high, whatever the issue is,
or not reporting a program.
For example, we discussed TANF in the HHS realm. The IG
will report and I think those reports are due, and with the
enactment of IPERA, we are now kind of in that first phase of
IG assessment, and those reports are due in mid-March. At that
time, we will have a good sense of what the landscape of non-
compliance is and then the statute will trigger a variety of
different repercussions such as special reports to Congress,
requirements in terms of how discretionary funds are used to
combat improper payments.
This is something we hope will help reinforce the
importance of these things that are not being complied with. It
is something we will have to evaluate together to see if those
sanctions are doing their job or if we need to think
differently and raise the stakes.
Mr. Platts. Do you see, under the President's Executive
order, we created accountable officials? They kind of go hand
in hand with the law of trying to ensure compliance and make
sure there isn't a reason for sanctions. Can you comment on how
the administration sees the accountable officials working with
the requirements for sanctions if there is noncompliance?
Mr. Werfel. Absolutely. Let me start by saying I have had
the privilege and the opportunity of being at OMB across the
entire life span of the Improper Payments Initiative starting
with the passage of the IPIA in 2002 until today and I believe
firmly that this administration has set a new bar in terms of
accountability.
The President himself has been actively engaged on the
issue. I have been in meetings where he has talked to Deputy
Secretaries directly about his concern over this issue. The
establishment of the senior accountable official is a part of
the blend of different things that the administration is doing
on a whole variety of management improvements.
I think we need to look at a broader picture. From the HHS
perspective, you mentioned that half our balance sheet is HHS
for these improper payments. There is a tremendous footprint of
work going on at HHS right now. It is a major, major top
priority. I mentioned the President, the Vice President is also
interested in this. The Vice President is now holding quarterly
Cabinet meetings on waste and improper payments is an essential
theme of those meetings. I think in two of those meetings,
Secretary Sebelius has presented to the Vice President on HHS
efforts. This is at the very highest level.
I will point out I think it is important to note that while
there are areas HHS needs to improve upon, when you step back
and look at the amount of improper payments that HHS makes, it
is staggering, but at the same time, the major programs in HHS,
all the parts of Medicare and Medicaid, those error rates are
declining and have declined several years in a row. That is an
important trend and demonstrates that the agency effort is
having an impact.
As everyone in this hearing has noted so far, there is a
lot more work to be done but I think the trend is positive.
Mr. Platts. If you use Part D as kind of the newest major
program to come online, I think an error rate of a little over
3 percent versus over 8 percent for Medicare and Medicaid, I
hope that means since it is a new program, we are getting it
right up front as opposed to trying to correct problems down
the road with Medicare and Medicaid after the fact.
Mr. Werfel. I would say that the Department is much more
focused and has much more resources they are bringing to bear
on improper payments at the birth of Part D than they did at
the birth of the other programs. I think that is one of the
reasons why you are seeing a Part D error rate that is lower
than the other programs.
Mr. Platts. Hopefully that continues. Before I yield to Mr.
Towns, I think all three of you had an opportunity to hear
Senator Carper's testimony and are familiar with his
legislation. It may not be fair to ask without him here to
respond, but what do you think is most important in his bill
that we should be looking at or is there anything that concerns
you in a broad sense.
Mr. Werfel, maybe for you specifically, the Do Not Pay part
of his bill, do you think it aligns with what he is proposing
legislatively and what the administration is already seeking to
do or is there something we should be aware of in the
groundwork already laid that we don't undo it legislatively by
taking a different approach?
I will start with Mr. Wood, Ms. Davis and then Mr. Werfel,
we will finish with you, the broad pros and cons of the bill
and then specifically the Do Not Pay part for Mr. Werfel.
Mr. Wood. Thank you and I will touch on the Do Not Pay as
well because we have been doing some work in that related area
at the Recovery Board.
I think it is a strong bill and I think it improves the
methodology for collecting this data. As Mr. Werfel said, the
data is not always perfect. We seem to be moving in a direction
to get that.
One of my concerns, at the Board, our tools are focused
more on prevention and oversight. That is what we have been
doing with the Recovery Act. We have done a fairly good job on
that. We have talked to both OMB and GAO and the Treasury
Department is building this GoVerify system about our
technology and their technology.
My concern with the Do Not Pay area would be being to
prescriptive in what do you have to look at for Do Not Pay. At
the Board, we take sort of a broader approach. We have our
Recovery Operations Center, we have a system where you can run
entities or individuals through it and come up with a list of
people who would clear and then take a closer look at people
where you think there is a problem because there are a lot of
false positives and so forth.
We have talked to Treasury about our approach. Danny
mentioned it is difficult to get access to some of these data
bases. We are still working on getting all the data bases
listed in the Executive order that talked about Do Not Pay.
The one area I think I would be concerned about in looking
at that from a technology standpoint and an oversight
standpoint is being too prescriptive in here are the three
things you will check. There are a lot of things you might
check.
For instance in the Recovery Operations Center, one of our
successes has been able to look across government. You can look
at things, for instance, these recovery audits which are
recouping payments, you can look at them across government
perhaps using non-structured data analysis to find if there are
trends and similarities where you might not expect them.
DOD may collect some money that is very similar to what
Social Security Administration is collecting and for the same
reasons that it gets to the root cause analysis. There are some
technological approaches you could take that are interesting,
some of advanced, cutting edge sorts of things that you really
don't want legislation tying your hands on any of that.
I don't think it does at this point but that is one area,
in reviewing it, that I would mention.
Mr. Platts. In essence, making it clear that if the
legislation identifies certain data bases to look at.
Mr. Wood. These, plus perhaps others, and the methodologies
might go beyond one check.
Mr. Platts. Ms. Davis.
Ms. Davis. Since GAO has not formally reviewed the bill, I
cannot specifically comment. I can say that at a very high
level, the intent of the bill for accountability transparency
purposes is certainly an admirable goal. I can also make a
statement again very generally that some of the concepts in the
bill such as looking at high priority programs and data
matching, comparing data bases, are best practices that we
really talked about in many of our reports. Other than that, I
really cannot comment.
Mr. Platts. Mr. Werfel.
Mr. Werfel. Similar to Ms. Davis, we have not run the
appropriate process across the administration so I can present
an administration position, so I don't want to state anything
that could be represented that way.
I will say on a general matter, and reinforcing my point
earlier, the number one barrier to success in the Do Not Pay
environment is going to be access to data. I think one of the
most important things Congress can do to help on improper
payments is to help us pull back the onion layer on these
various data bases and figure out how to navigate this
important tension between privacy and security and the need to
have this information to enforce program integrity outcomes.
I think right now we haven't tackled the issue directly and
therefore, every time we determine that access to a data base
is going to be helpful to drive down improper payments, we go
through a very long and laborious process to try to figure out
how to thread the needle and get the data in and we are not
serving the taxpayer effectively by taking it one at a time. I
think that is one of the most important things we can do as a
community.
Mr. Platts. We certainly saw that in our oversight hearings
regarding the Internal Revenue Service and taxpayer identity
fraud and the challenge of access to information preventing
that type of fraud from occurring.
I understand you can't speak as far as the administration
position. As it currently stands, are you aware of anything in
the bill regarding the Do Not Pay aspect of it that would undo
the efforts currently underway by the administration regarding
Do Not Pay?
Mr. Werfel. I am not aware of anything that I would undue.
If I understand the bill correctly, its intent is to reinforce.
Again, I would go back to this broader question of data access
as the big issue that is going to help accelerate and drive
greater success outcomes. I don't know of anything in the bill
that undoes it.
Mr. Platts. I yield to the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Towns.
Mr. Towns. Mr. Wood, can you explain what factors you use
to predict whether a program is susceptible to fraud?
Mr. Wood. I don't know if I have a perfect explanation of
that but we do look at a whole series of factors. When we were
doing the Recovery Act early on, we worked very closely with
the various Inspectors General, and with the program officials
and OMB to come up with a list of what we considered high risk
programs. That was based on a whole series of analysis,
historical information, data we might have on hand, what type
of spending it was going to be and what seems to be more
subject, at least historically, to risk. As Mr. Werfel keeps
mentioning, part of our issue with the Federal Government is we
don't have good historical data sets around some of these
things.
We look at a whole series of things. We are building a
product called the fraud scorecard which is very similar to
something you might see in FICA and the actually the people who
developed it are building it for us. When we look at it, the
difficulty we have is we don't have as good historical data
sets of bad actors. That kind of information just wasn't
collected in a manner that would help us. You take the people
who did things incorrectly versus those we know who did it
correctly and you build some factors where you could do that
using technology.
At the Board, we have combined both technology and sort of
commonsense rules of thumb on what we see as high risk areas.
That is what we are looking at. The Board is looking at
identifying these high risk areas and trying to initiate
preventive measures, better internal control, training,
different checks on who we are giving money to, that type of
thing.
If I could figure out a good set of characteristics for
fraud, I would probably be very wealthy.
Mr. Towns. You wouldn't need this hearing.
Mr. Wood. Yes, we could design a solution. Hopefully that
is helpful. We sort of look at a matrix of things. At the
Board, we are lucky we have technology that we are able to
apply that is very powerful as well that needs to be
interpreted by humans.
Mr. Towns. I noticed that there have been 70 leads of
possible fraudulent activity to various agencies. Will you be
able to get results as to whether or not what you suspected
really happened? I am trying to figure if there is a feedback
mechanism?
Mr. Wood. Yes, there is and we actually just started an
effort at the Board to go out and work closer with the IGs to
build that better feedback mechanism that if we send out
information, what is happening with that, is it really
actionable and does it turn into cases. Unfortunately, if it is
a criminal matter, that could take a couple years, so we are
fairly young in that regard. We have only been around for a few
years and a couple of years before we sunset.
We are building a feedback. We have a new chairman, Kathy
Tighe, who has come over to replace Earl Devaney who had been
there for the last few years. That is one of the things Kathy
has been working on, to try and get this feedback loop in place
so we can answer those questions very specifically.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much.
Mr. Werfel, people doing wrong sometimes find different
ways and methods to move on to continue to do wrong. What steps
have been put in place to ensure that individuals and entities
that are on the list do not simply create a new company or
continue their fraudulent activities by changing their name?
Mr. Werfel. That gets to what Mr. Wood talked about being
the real game changer in terms of addressing error reduction.
The Excluded Party List GSA has of those suspended and debarred
from receiving Federal payments, if we do a one dimensional
match and say I am about to pay 30 vendors and I run a match
against the GSA data base, I could very well not see any of
those 30 entities appear, assume none of them are suspended or
barred and move forward.
As you point out, the reality may be that one of the
entities I am about to pay was a suspended and debarred entity
not a few years ago but has reincorporated under a new name and
therefore has done so in a way that eludes our ability to make
sure we stop that payment. In order to get at that, you have to
do two things. You have to access more detailed and robust sets
of data. You can't just rely on the simple, uni-dimensional GSA
list, you have to do some investigation outside of that list to
understand the history of some of these companies and the
relationship of some of these companies. Fortunately, where we
are today in the information age, that type of information is
available.
As Mr. Wood pointed out, you need human beings that know
how to ask the questions of data. It can't simply be the
technology doing the match, you have to be smart enough to look
for patterns and trends and profile some of this information to
say this is the type of company that we have seen before that
has been reincorporated in a new name, so we know exactly how
to ask the data.
It is not easy to do. I think the good news, Congressman
Towns, is that because of the great work that is going on, the
Recovery Board has plowed new ground in terms of showing us the
way in terms of how to look at the data multi-dimensionally.
When we build our GoVerify Center, I mentioned earlier it is
not just the technology, there is an Analytic Center, it is for
this exact reason because just the technology won't solve the
problem, you need the analytics as well in order to stay ahead.
I think where you would be pleased is if HHS was here
talking about some of the work they are doing in fraud
detection. They are asking these multi-dimensional questions
they didn't ask previously. They are starting to look and
understand trends and patterns of behavior they didn't once
know about. Frankly, the Recover Board helped them raise their
game because the Recovery Board did a pilot of their tool with
HHS and showed them some new tricks and new ways of staying
ahead of the fraudsters now being deployed at HHS.
We are not where we need to be yet but there is some
promising direction taking place. We are starting to have more
robust approaches to fraud detection.
Mr. Towns. My time has expired but I have one quick
question. I know you asked about the legislation and I heard
the response. Is there anything more we need to do on this side
of the aisle that might help you be able to work much more
effectively and be able to solve some of the problems you keep
running into?
Mr. Werfel. From my standpoint, there are a couple of key
things. Last year's President's budget, for example, includes a
series of program integrity proposals that we believe have a
dramatic and important impact on improper payments that have
been in budgets for years and not been enacted for whatever
reason.
In some cases, it is investing in more reviewers and
investigators but that infrastructure you invest in has a
return on investment, sometimes $11 for ever dollar invested.
Those are really, really important things that we need to be
very careful if we are not going to make those investments in
understanding the cost we are bestowing on the taxpayer when we
don't do that.
There is also included in previous Presidential budgets
legislative changes that provide tools, for example, to the
Treasury Department or others that help us wield certain tools
to help collect data or enforce improper payments more
effectively. Whenever I am asked that question, I try to call
attention to those remaining program integrity provisions that
are not provided for.
I reiterate, helping us crack this nut of data access,
making sure we can balance those policy tensions and third is
what you are doing today, these types of hearings, it is
powerful and important for me to go back to the agencies and
say I was just up on Capital Hill, they were demanding answers
on improper payments, that empowers me to work with the
community to make sure they are dedicating the necessary
resources to address the problem.
Mr. Towns. Thank you.
Mr. Wood.
Mr. Wood. I would second the item on access to data sets.
Anything the Congress could do to alleviate some of the
problems we run into because of the Privacy Act. There is a
tension; you don't want to release privacy information but at
the same time, the government needs to be able to match some of
the data in an easier way.
The second piece related to data is anything you could do
in your oversight role or in other legislation to push data
quality and standardization. We have new tools that allow us to
reach into some of these data bases that are fairly antiquated
and match data but that is a difficult thing to do.
There are a lot of people maintaining these data bases and
if they would do it in a more standard way, build them in a
more modern way where we can get access to the data much easier
than we do today, that would be very beneficial so we could
share data easier. Those would be my two points.
Mr. Towns. Thank you.
Ms. Davis. Congressman Towns, I would echo the earlier
comments about the value of these hearings. I think they show
the transparency and the importance of this issue, so that
would be my first comment.
My second comment might be looking very deeply at some of
these program design issues to the extent they might be
affected by legislative barriers. Medicare is a very good
example of how we have partnerships with the States but it is
very difficult because there are so many complex and
inconsistent requirements among the States. It creates
difficulties and is certainly something that would affect
improper payments.
The other area is working more closely with GAO as you have
been doing. We have a number of projects currently in process.
We have a couple of Medicare projects related indirectly to
improper payments; we have two projects in Medicaid that are
looking at improper payments. One of them is specifically
looking at CMS estimating methodology. One is in the design
phase so it is very early. The other is expecting a report
probably this summer, may be around June.
We are looking at DOD looking at a number of things related
to improper payments along with some of their estimating
methodologies, looking at the Recovery Audit Program and
regulations affecting improper payments.
We continue to do that and would be happy to continue to
work with you in any way we can and any issue related to
improper payments.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your generosity. I know I went
way over my time.
Mr. Platts. You and me both.
A final comment, Mr. Wood, those projects with Medicare and
Medicaid, and Mr. Werfel, with your discussions as part of your
testimony with HHS in the broad sense of the leadership of
Secretary Sebelius and the commitment they are making. We may
want to look at a hearing specific to HHS programs that may
include what GAO is looking at and allowing the Department to
share what they are doing. Certainly it is important given the
size of the improper payments that come under that Department,
but also what they are doing that can be beneficial across the
Federal Government departments and agencies.
That is something we can look at maybe later this summer,
to have GAO participate with those projects, it would have to
be a bit later in the summer. I think it would be a good idea
for us to look at that.
I do want to again thank each of you for your testimony. As
always, we are very blessed by the knowledge and expertise our
witnesses bring to us. Mr. Werfel, you have been before us a
good number of times over the years, probably both when Mr.
Towns chaired as well as when I have chaired. To all of you,
and especially Mr. Werfel, your leadership on these issues and
the partnership you have had with this committee for a long
time is appreciated.
We are going to keep the record open for 7 days if there
are other materials to be submitted and look forward to
continue to work with you on the macro sense as well as the
micro sense such as Senator Carper's legislative proposal as we
go forward.
This hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


