- HOW FEDERAL RESERVE POLICIES ADD TO HARD TIMES AT THE PUMP

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HOW FEDERAL RESERVE POLICIES ADD TO HARD TIMES AT THE PUMP

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON REGULATORY AFFAIRS,
STIMULUS OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT SPENDING

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 25, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-50

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-523 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs, Stimulus Oversight and Government
Spending

JIM JORDAN, Ohio, Chairman
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York, Vice    DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio, Ranking
Chairwoman                           Minority Member
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JIM COOPER, Tennessee
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              JACKIE SPEIER, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 25, 2011.....................................     1
Statement of:
Reinhart, Vincent R., resident scholar, American Enterprise
Institute for Public Policy Research; Robert P. Murphy,
economist, Institute for Energy Research; Dean Baker, co-
director, Center for Economic and Policy Research; Greg
Wannemacher, president, Wannemacher Total Logistics; Karen
Kerrigan, president and chief executive officer, Small
Business and Entrepreneurship Council......................    15
Baker, Dean..............................................    35
Kerrigan, Karen..........................................    49
Murphy, Robert P.........................................    22
Reinhart, Vincent R......................................    15
Wannemacher, Greg........................................    43
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Baker, Dean, co-director, Center for Economic and Policy
Research, prepared statement of............................    37
Jordan, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Ohio:
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Staff report.............................................    70
Kerrigan, Karen, president and chief executive officer, Small
Business and Entrepreneurship Council, prepared statement
of.........................................................    51
Kucinich, Hon. Dennis J., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Ohio:
Article dated May 24, 2011...............................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Murphy, Robert P., economist, Institute for Energy Research,
prepared statement of......................................    24
Reinhart, Vincent R., resident scholar, American Enterprise
Institute for Public Policy Research, prepared statement of    17
Wannemacher, Greg, president, Wannemacher Total Logistics,
prepared statement of......................................    45

HOW FEDERAL RESERVE POLICIES ADD TO HARD TIMES AT THE PUMP

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 25, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs, Stimulus
Oversight and Government Spending,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:11 p.m., in
room 2247, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jim Jordan
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Jordan and Kucinich.
Staff present: Ali Ahmad, deputy press secretary; Joseph A.
Brazauskas, counsel; Benjamin Stroud Cole, policy advisor and
investigative analyst; Gwen D'Luzansky, assistant clerk; Tyler
Grimm, professional staff member; Peter Haller and Kristina M.
Moore, senior counsels; Christopher Hixon, deputy chief
counsel, oversight; Justin LoFranco, press assistant; Jaron
Bourke, minority director of administration; Claire Coleman,
minority counsel; Ashley Etienne, minority director of
communications; Jennifer Hoffman, minority press secretary; and
Carla Hultberg, minority chief clerk.
Mr. Jordan. The subcommittee will come to order.
And let me first apologize to our witnesses. We just can't
control the schedule, and we had, as you know, a number of
votes on the floor. I particularly want to apologize to Mr.
Wannemacher from the great Fourth District of Ohio for having
to wait. Making constituents have to wait, that is even more of
a problem.
So we will get organized and start. We will do our quick
opening statements and get right to your testimony. And the
schedule is, now that we are postponed, we may have many
Members who are unable to be with us today. Hopefully some will
be able to join us. But we want to thank you all for being here
for this hearing on such an important topic.
Today's hearing of the Regulatory Affairs Subcommittee
concerns two issues: how higher prices at the pump are hurting
real people in their day-to-day lives and how a decline in the
strength of the dollar, among many other factors, has had a
significant role in adding to the price at the pump.
In Ohio, the unemployment rate is still at 8.4 percent, and
the average gas price hit an all-time high of $4.16 earlier
this month. This has put unbelievable strain on families'
budgets and forced painful sacrifices.
For the millions of Americans without jobs, rising gas
prices has compounded their already-tight financial situations.
Just this week, in a story in the Chicago Tribune, they
reported that higher gas prices have restricted the unemployed
from looking for work beyond their immediate communities, which
has, of course, limited their options.
The trucking industry, which we have represented here
today, has experienced the full blow of these price spikes. The
average national cost of diesel fuel is $3.99 per gallon, and
trucking companies are now being forced to implement a
surcharge and higher rates to offset their cost increases.
And while some industries have been hit harder than others,
the effects ripple throughout our economy and are being felt by
grocery stores, pharmacies, and in every other place that
Americans spend their money.
We are familiar with some of the factors driving up the
price of oil, including fear of supply disruptions because of
the turmoil in the Middle East and increased demand from
developing nations. But one major factor often overlooked in
the policy discussions is how the weakening of the dollar has
caused the price of oil to rise, and, I would argue, frankly,
the price of many commodities.
Under Chairman Ben Bernanke, the Federal Reserve undertook
an aggressive and unprecedented effort known as quantitative
easing, while keeping interest rates at or below zero. Between
December 2008 and March 2009, the Fed purchased $1.7 trillion
of Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities. The goal of this
first round of quantitative easing was to reduce unemployment
and ensure, ``price stability.'' Yet, the results of QE1 proved
lackluster.
Nevertheless, the Fed pursued the old definition of
insanity: doing the same thing over and over but expecting
different results. Late last year, the Fed began purchasing
Treasuries at a rate of about $75 billion a month and a second
round of quantitative easing, known in the shorthand as QE2.
Now, at the most basic level, quantitative easing is about
printing money. And the most basic result is that the value of
the dollar falls, commodity prices increase, and American
consumers are hit with higher costs of goods and services they
purchase. Unsurprisingly, this is precisely what has occurred.
The Joint Economic Committee recently released a study that
looked at the strength of the dollar since quantitative easing
began and found that 57 cents of the current per-gallon price
of gasoline is directly attributable to the dollar's decline.
Today's hearing will attempt to lay bear the consequences
of reckless monetary policy and highlight the need for
corrective actions to foster a real and sustainable economy
recovery.
Since November 2008, the value of the dollar has declined
by 14 percent, and it continues to fall. In fact, by the most
widely used index of the dollar strength, the dollar is now at
its weakest point on record.
And while we may grant what the Federal Reserve vice
chairman, Donald Kohn, noted earlier last year, that the
Central Bank is in uncharted waters, experience with financial
disruptions of the breadth, persistence, and consequences of
the past several years, there is no denying that the Fed knew
full well that such an undertaking in the realm of monetary
policy could have a weakening effect on the dollar, which would
mean an increase in the price of commodities bought and sold
internationally.
And, ironically, Chairman Bernanke testified a couple of
months ago before the Senate Banking Committee that he knew
that rising gas prices could negatively affect American
consumers and hinder an economic recovery. He stated,
``Sustained rises in the prices of oil or other commodities
would represent a threat both to economic growth and to overall
price stability.''
It is the intent of this hearing to broaden the discussion
about the causes and effects of higher gas prices so as to
fully understand action the Federal Government can and should
take to aid distressed American consumers and American small-
business owners.
With that, I yield to the ranking member for an opening
statement.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Jim Jordan follows:]

Mr. Kucinich. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for holding
this hearing. And when you and I talked, we were both sharing
our concerns about the high price of gasoline that is really
quite devastating to families in our respective districts. So I
think that this hearing will help draw much-needed attention to
the plight of American businesses and families as they struggle
to deal with the effects of high oil prices.
And this hearing brings to us witnesses who are esteemed,
and their presence here is quite appreciated. Thank you.
Congress cannot continue to allow American consumers to
bear the brunt of our energy policies, which grant oil
companies massive tax deductions in exchange for the privilege
of reaping an unimaginable profit from extraction from the
earth. Despite the worst economic crisis since the Great
Depression, oil companies are charging record-high gasoline
prices, and they have continued to make the highest profits of
any industry in the world.
Low-income families across this country, including in my
own district in Ohio, are especially harmed by high gas prices
because they have a crippling effect on the price of food.
While gas prices have recently come down a little, they are
still too high for many Ohioans and Americans who have seen
their incomes stagnate and decline. And I am very concerned
that the burden gas prices place on American families and
businesses could threaten any economic recovery.
With gas prices sky-high, this hearing can play an
important role in helping us understand the cause of oil price
volatility. As my friend, Mr. Jordan, notes, we share a, to put
it mildly, antipathy toward the Fed. And, at the same time, I
am concerned that, on this particular case, that we may risk
missing the forest for the trees. Because, in my research, I am
still trying to determine what kind of control the Fed has in
terms of key drivers of high oil prices.
Now, the oil prices have soared recently, in part because
of the rising demand in developing countries such as Brazil,
China, and India. While consumption of oil in the United States
may be slowing, global demand is at record levels, causing
prices to soar. War, unrest in the Middle East countries, the
oil-producing countries, has also driven up prices. The Fed
doesn't have any control over these price-determinative
factors. And it doesn't oversee the derivative market for oil
that has really had a lot to do with fueling gas price spikes.
We know the Commodity Futures Trading Commission does have
something to do with it. And what has been happening is that
speculators have been betting on the future price of oil, and
they have contributed to the sharp increases in oil prices. And
what they are doing is they are encouraging oil producers to
hoard their commodity in the hopes they will be able to sell it
later at a higher future price. So it is speculation in the
commodity futures, in the oil commodities, that I think is
something that is very important to focus on.
The full committee released a report on Monday finding that
excessive speculation could be inflating gas prices by as much
as 30 percent. So, I mean, do the math. You know, we are paying
over $4 in some regions. That is what the price has been.
Yesterday, the CFTC charged five oil speculators with
manipulating the price of crude oil in 2008 and making a $50
million profit from the scheme.
Mr. Chairman, I would like unanimous consent to enter into
the record a New York Times and CNNMoney.com article reporting
on the Commodity Futures Trading Commission enforcement
actions.
Mr. Jordan. Yeah, without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

Mr. Kucinich. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And stopping the manipulation of the market for the energy
on which we are painfully dependent will have a significant
impact on lowering gas prices. We have to ensure that the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission has the resources and
authority to implement the Dodd-Frank reforms passed last year
to curb rampant oil speculation.
Most fundamentally, volatility in oil and gas prices will
continue to threaten American prosperity until we change our
Nation's energy policy. We have to free ourselves from oil
dependence, which has enriched oil companies and left Americans
struggling to pay for gas to go to work. It has also left us
with an environment that has been spoiled. The path to a
sustainable energy future demands that we focus on energy-
efficient technologies and renewable energy resources for our
energy supply.
I want to thank the chairman and thank the witnesses. I
look forward to your testimony. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Dennis J. Kucinich
follows:]

Mr. Jordan. I thank the ranking member.
Again, let me welcome our witnesses and apologize. With the
change in schedule, we are going to have a lot of Members who
are going to be unable to be here who would otherwise have been
here at the 1 o'clock hour.
We have Mr. Vincent Reinhart, formerly the director of the
Division of Monetary Affairs at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System. He is currently a resident scholar with
the American Enterprise Institute.
We have with us Dr. Robert Murphy. He is an economist with
the Institute for Energy Research; Dr. Dean Baker is the co-
director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research; Mr.
Greg Wannemacher is president of Wannemacher Total Logistics;
and Ms. Karen Kerrigan is president and CEO of the Small
Business and Entrepreneurship Council.
It is the practice of this committee to swear witnesses in,
so if you would just stand and raise hand and then just answer
in the affirmative.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth? If you do, say, ``I do.''
All right, thank you.
Let the record show everyone answered in the affirmative.
And we will go right down the list, starting with Mr.
Reinhart from AEI.

STATEMENTS OF VINCENT R. REINHART, RESIDENT SCHOLAR, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC POLICY RESEARCH; ROBERT P.
MURPHY, ECONOMIST, INSTITUTE FOR ENERGY RESEARCH; DEAN BAKER,
CO-DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR ECONOMIC AND POLICY RESEARCH; GREG
WANNEMACHER, PRESIDENT, WANNEMACHER TOTAL LOGISTICS; KAREN
KERRIGAN, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, SMALL BUSINESS
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP COUNCIL

STATEMENT OF VINCENT R. REINHART

Mr. Reinhart. Thank you, Chairman Jordan and Ranking Member
Kucinich, for the opportunity to discuss monetary policy and
the price of oil.
I believe that this is an appropriate use of the
subcommittee's time, as both the net rise and the volatility of
oil prices over the past 9 months are partly a predictable
byproduct of the Fed's expansion of its balance sheet in its
policy known as quantitative easing.
QE was essentially designed to give a nudge to risk-taking.
Fed officials announced they would purchase riskless Treasury
securities on the hope that investors would reinvest the
proceeds in riskier assets, such as corporate equities and
bonds. But not all the effects of QE has played out in
financial markets. Since the Fed firmly signaled in August its
intent to launch the latest round of QE, oil prices have risen
from $76 a barrel to around $100 per barrel.
Why does the Fed matter for oil prices? The producers of
oil, as well as other commodities, typically sell their output
in a worldwide market priced in U.S. dollars. Thus, they care
about the current and expected future purchasing power of the
dollar and how that will translate into goods and services back
home. But QE has been associated with higher inflation and
dollar depreciation, which combines to erode the purchasing
power of the foreign producers of commodities. Thus, some of
the rise in the nominal price of oil has been to catch up with
that erosion.
More important in shaping near-term oil price dynamics has
been the nudge to investors from QE to move from safe to
riskier investments. The commodity market has been one outlet
for that reinvigorated search for yield. This has been
reinforced by the Fed's policy of keeping short-term nominal
interest rates near zero, which keeps it cheap to trade on
borrowed funds. Such speculation can fuel spasms of enthusiasm
or angst that trigger wide swings in prices, although, on net
and over the longer term, speculators neither consume nor
produce oil.
This increase in the price of oil and its heightened
volatility poses three distinct problems for the Fed and for
the macro economy:
First, a rise in energy costs of one-third takes a distinct
bite out of Americans' budgets, working to restrain spending in
an economy already burdened by lingering balance-sheet problems
from the financial crisis. As of yet, the oil price shock is
not as large as those associated with severe macroeconomic
dislocations of the past half-century, though.
Second, increases in the price of oil, as well as those of
other commodities, have fueled an upsurge in inflation and a
depreciation of the dollar on foreign exchange markets. Fed
officials continue to believe that people are not likely to
expect the prices of other goods and services to rise
commensurately. If so, and if commodity prices do not continue
to rise, then the level upshift in oil prices will ultimately
pass out of inflation calculations.
Third, in recent months, the world seems to be a much less
safe place. This makes the near-term balance between oil demand
and supply volatile. This could, to the Fed's regret, also make
global investors more skittish and undercut some of the
benefits in financial markets attributable to QE.
On net, it is likely that the economy-wide effects of the
energy shock are unpleasant but not derailing to economic
expansion. But this is a gamble, and one that Fed officials
must apparently have accepted when they decided to launch QE.
We will live with the consequences of that judgment in coming
quarters.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Reinhart follows:]

Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Reinhart.
Dr. Murphy.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT P. MURPHY

Mr. Murphy. Well, thank you for having me, and thank you
for having this hearing. I think it is very important that the
public realizes the possible role the Federal Reserve has been
playing in high oil prices.
Unfortunately, a lot of my prepared remarks are going to
overlap with what Mr. Reinhart said, so I wish I had gone
first, and then he would be copying me. But I will go ahead,
and maybe I will say his same points in somewhat different
language.
So, of course, what everyone knows is that the Federal
Reserve has expanded its balance sheet since the crisis set in
by about $1.6 trillion, in terms of what is called the monetary
base. So that is how much physical currency is in circulation,
plus banks' checking account deposits with the Fed, as it were.
So, to put that number in perspective, from the time the Fed
was founded in late 1913 up until the fall of 2008, they hadn't
put that much in. So the Fed has added more in the last 2\1/2\
years than the entire history of the Fed up until that point.
Mr. Jordan. And that number was $1.6 trillion you said?
Mr. Murphy. Right. About $1.6 trillion, yeah, is how much
they have added since September 2008 to the monetary base. And
up until that point, it was $932 billion, from 1913 to then.
So when we say it was an unprecedented intervention, I
mean, that is not hyperbole; it really is. And, of course, we
know, at the same time period, the price of oil, depending on
when you start and stop it, has almost tripled. So the question
is, do the two have anything to do with each other or is it
coincidence?
So, in my written testimony, I gave the two main mechanisms
by which Fed policy could be driving the increase in oil
prices.
The first one is what the Joint Economic Committee focused
on in their recent report, and what they looked at was just the
fall in the dollar against other currencies. Because, as Mr.
Reinhart said, oil is an international fungible commodity, so
oil prices basically have to be the same for everybody once you
adjust for currency exchange rates.
And so, if the dollars fall against other currencies, that
means the oil price quoted in U.S. dollars is going to go up,
everything else equal. So, in other words, Americans have seen
oil prices go up more than the Japanese, for example.
Mr. Jordan. Right.
Mr. Murphy. All right. So if you look at--the JEC report
looked at from, I guess, when QE1 was announced in November
2008 up until whenever this report came out, and they said the
dollar fell about 14 percent, looking at the index they used.
And so, on those calculations, that is how they are coming up
with the figure that, if the dollar had stayed as strong as it
was when QE1 was announced up until today, then right now gas
prices at the pump would be about 57 cents lower. OK?
So that is the logic they are using to come up with that
estimate, is they are saying the dollar has fallen since the
announcement of QE1 and then QE2. And, hence, if the dollar
stayed the same, then gas would be 57 cents cheaper at the pump
right now. That is what their argument is.
But there is a whole other possible mechanism that they
didn't address, and that is, is it possible that the broad rise
in commodities in general, regardless of the currency that you
are using, could that also be influenced by Fed policy? And I
would argue that it is, but it is hard to come up with a
quantitative amount.
Just for qualitative arguments, commodities in general have
gone up, so it is not just that oil went up. It is commodities
across the board. And even, like, for example, gold and silver,
since the crisis and fall of 2008 until now, gold has gone up
about 80 percent and silver something like 210 percent. All
right?
So I don't think that--I think it is very plausible to say
at least some of that is due to people are afraid of the dollar
being debased, and so they are rushing into the precious
metals, you know, as an inflation hedge. It is not just that
people in China are giving more jewelry as presents and that is
why gold and silver are up so much. All right?
So if you buy the logic there when it comes to gold and
silver, it is not a stretch to say, well, maybe some
investors--you know, there is lots of liquidity floating
around. What are they going to do with their money? They are
not going to put it in real estate, obviously. Maybe they don't
want to put it in the stock market because the economy is bad.
Maybe they are going to go into commodities, thinking, you
know, surely wheat and oil are always going to have a demand,
and so that is a way to protect my wealth in case there is
future inflation.
So that is the other possible mechanism by which Fed policy
could be worked. So, you know, given whatever the world price
of oil is if the dollar falls, that is one thing. But the other
mechanism is maybe commodities, as part of that huge upswing,
is people are trying to hedge themselves against inflation. So
those would be the two----
Mr. Jordan. And if I could interrupt you for a second.
Would you say, so that is not--that is maybe just good, smart,
practical investing versus any type of speculator driving the
price up?
Mr. Murphy. Well, yeah. I mean, it depends on your
perspective. To me, that is like saying, you know, it is cold
out because the thermometer is showing a low reading. I mean,
if people think that something bad is going to happen, then
they react. And that is the whole point, or one of the points,
of having futures markets in the first place, is to anticipate
future movements.
Mr. Jordan. Right. We will give you 30 more seconds if you
want, since I took some of your time.
Mr. Murphy. That is fine.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Murphy follows:]

Mr. Jordan. All right. Thanks, Doctor.
Dr. Baker.

STATEMENT OF DEAN BAKER

Mr. Baker. Thank you, Chairman Jordan and Ranking Member
Kucinich. I appreciate the chance to talk on this set of
issues.
I want to make three main points. First, what I am going to
say is that the Fed's policies at most contribute a very small
amount to the increase in the price of gas. Second, I am going
to say that a decline in the dollar is both desirable and
necessary. And then, very briefly, I will just say that most of
the rise in the price of oil has been attributable to other
factors, and the three obvious ones I think have all been
mentioned here: one, the growth in the developing world; two,
the instability in the Middle East; and the third, that there
is certainly speculation in the oil market, which I would argue
has had some effect on prices.
OK, the first point, the quantitative easing policy, I find
it hard to quarrel--I have been a critic of the Fed quite
often, and often quite harsh--but I find it hard to quarrel
with their policy here. We have had the worst downturn the
country has seen since the Great Depression. It was a situation
that called for a very aggressive response. And the Fed gave,
to my mind, a relatively timid one, with its policy of
quantitative easing, given the current circumstances.
So the intention, of course, was, by buying large amounts
of mortgage-backed securities and government bonds, that they
would not just lower the short-term rate, which they had
already pushed down to zero, but lower the long-term rate. And
this would have three beneficial effects. On the one hand, it
would give some boost to investment. Second, it would make it
easier for people to refinance mortgages. We have 30-year
mortgages at the lowest rate they have been in more than half a
century. And, third, that it would actually lower the value of
the dollar. That was quite deliberately one of the intentions,
the idea being that would encourage net exports.
It did, I would say, have somewhat of that effect, but I
think the impact has actually been very limited. I think there
is a real distortion in this discussion in the sense that there
was a big run-up in the dollar in the fall of 2008. So if you
go back and look at the history, the dollar rose by around 14
percent between the summer of 2008 and the fall, which was a
direct response to the financial crisis. There was a flight to
safety. People have always gone to the dollar when there has
been a flight to safety. That has led to a large increase in
the value of the dollar.
You could perhaps blame QE1 and QE2 for helping to
stabilize world financial markets and, that way, getting over
that fear, but we should have expected that run-up in the
dollar would be reversed once we saw the economy stabilize to
some extent.
As it stands now, the dollar is just a little bit below
where it was, I think about 2 percentage points below where it
was before the run-up.
And I should point out--I can come back to this--I think
there is a misunderstanding about the broad index, which is
what I assume you referenced in saying that it is at the lowest
level ever. I think that, when you look at a measurement issue
in there, it is really not. I can come back to that.
But the other point I wanted to make in that respect is
that the dollar had been falling. This is not something that
just happened. So the dollar had been falling from 2002 until
the financial crisis in 2008. And if we just envision we had
continued on that downward trend, the current value of the
dollar is still about 16 percent higher than what it would have
been on that trend. So there is nothing new in this story.
The second point, we need a lower-valued dollar. In a
system of floating exchange rates, the dollar fluctuates to
equalibrate trade. We have a very large trade deficit,
currently about $600 billion. The only mechanism I can think of
to get that down is a lower-valued dollar.
As I said before, I take that was one of the main
motivations of the quantitative easing policy because that is
how you boost our net exports. You make our exports cheaper for
people living in other countries. You make imports more
expensive for people living in the United States. That is
unpleasant, but there is no way around it.
In the context of the price of oil, the way I would see it
is that if we deliberately try to have an artificially high
dollar, we run a high dollar policy even though it is leading
to very large trade deficits, in effect what that means is we
are borrowing money from foreigners to subsidize our
consumption of imports. In this case, we are talking about the
price of oil. We would all like cheaper gasoline. I would like
to pay less at the pump, too. But I am not really sure it is a
good policy to tell our kids that we are going to be borrowing
huge amounts of money from abroad so that we could have cheaper
gas today. That is what a high dollar policy means.
The last point I was going to say is that, you know, it is
easy to find the culprits, if we want to call them that, in
terms of what is pushing up the price of oil. We have countries
like China, which is now the second-largest consumer of oil,
growing 10 percent a year; India coming up fast as well, also
growing 10 percent a year. That is leading to rapid increases
in demand for oil. There is no corresponding increase in the
supply.
Uncertainty--we all know about the situation in the Middle
East. And we could certainly fairly easily tie the most recent
run-up in the price of oil--it went from roughly $80 a barrel
to over $100 a barrel when the civil war in Libya broke out in
earnest.
The last point, speculation. We know there is speculation
in the market. Ranking Member Kucinich referred to the article
in the New York Times today about SEC action against
speculators that pushed the price of oil to $150 a barrel
before the downturn. Clearly, there is some speculation again
today.
So, just to conclude, I would say that, you know, if we
take a look at the Fed's actions, I'd say for the most part
they have been, you know, largely on the right track. And
insofar as they contribute to the higher price of oil, I really
don't think there is anything we can or should think to do
about that.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Baker follows:]

Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Dr. Baker.
Mr. Wannemacher.

STATEMENT OF GREG WANNEMACHER

Mr. Wannemacher. Chairman Jordan, Ranking Member Kucinich,
I really appreciate this opportunity to testify today regarding
the impact of higher oil prices on the trucking industry.
Oil prices have a dramatic effect on our business. Part of
our business is a trucking operation. We operate 38 trucks; 33
trucks operate in the mid-Atlantic and Midwestern States, and 5
other trucks operate locally, shuttling loads to our various
distribution centers and to our customers' plants, picking up
customers' loads, and making local pickups and deliveries.
The cost of fuel has risen to be our single largest expense
item. When I took over our company in 1991, fuel expenses were
only 6 to 7 percent of revenue. During the last 4 years, our
fuel expenses were the following as a percent of revenue: 32
percent in 2007; 41 in 2008; 29 in 2009, 31 in 2010. Now, in
the first quarter of 2011, that expense was 36 percent of
revenue.
Over the years, we have tried various techniques to better
control our exposure to the fluctuation in fuel costs. We have
had our own fuel tanks until the EPA regulations made it
uneconomical for a fleet our size. We tried hedging a portion
of our anticipated purchases to lock in the pricing. We
contract with fuel service providers to buy at a fixed rate
over their cost or off the listed pump price. We have set our
trucks' top speed at 65 miles per hour, installed onboard
auxiliary power units to eliminate idling, gone to wide base
tires with a system to keep the tires properly inflated at all
times. And, of course, we have contracts with our customers
that include fuel surcharges to help offset the fluctuation of
fuel costs.
For a fleet our size, hedging in contract fuel purchases
are extremely challenging and very time-consuming. Small
operations find themselves at a disadvantage, trying to find
the time necessary to stay informed and educated on the
constantly changing pricing structures and formulas the vendors
try to institute.
Fuel surcharges are the least cumbersome for us to manage.
The biggest challenge with this is that customers want you to
lock your rates in for a minimum of 1 year. Depending on how
their business is doing and whether they will take the time to
renegotiate annually can also be an impediment. Because of our
small size, in some instances we do not provide enough impact
on their capacity to get their attention.
The fuel prices we are encountering today are having a huge
impact. The best way to explain this is to illustrate how much
profit we lose with fuel prices at the current levels. Let me
explain how fuel surcharges are implemented.
Fuel surcharges only apply to loaded miles. Our fleets run
about 15 percent empty miles. Our average truck runs 2,700
miles per week. The fleet average is 6.6 miles per gallon.
Fifteen percent of the miles are equal to 405 miles per truck
per week which we see no reimbursement for the increased cost
of fuel.
The impact from the average cost at $2.50 per gallon for
fuel, last seen in the fall of 2009, to the recent average of
$4 per gallon is $1.50 per gallon on the 62 gallons it takes to
run the 405 miles. Roughly speaking, that is $92 in lost money
per truck per week. Remember, I told you we run 38 trucks, so,
therefore, that is almost $3,500 per week. At the current rate,
it will be a loss of $180,000 for the year for our fleet.
Now, if it weren't for the higher fuel prices, we would
recognize four potential areas for those extra funds: First, we
could invest in more trucks; second, we would look to increase
technology; third, to increase our drivers' pay; and, finally,
to reduce the debt on our equipment.
Since 2008, many fleets have reduced the size of their
operations, and significant amounts of others have simply gone
out of business. Now we are starting to see a shortage of
trucks. With the capacity shortage, we would utilize the extra
money to increase the size of our truck fleet. This would
create more jobs at our company. We could immediately grow our
fleet 10 percent if the fuel prices were back down to $2.50 a
gallon.
A primary objective of our company is to look at and invest
in new technologies and innovations that can help improve our
fuel mileage. We do a cost-benefit analysis on any proposed
improvements to justify any expenditure. It is imperative that
the payback period is shorter than the useful life of the
equipment and will not hinder the resale value at trade-in
time.
During the downturn in the economy, most trucks, including
ourselves, found it necessary to reduce drivers' wages to
remain competitive. If fuel costs could get back in line, I
believe you would see an increase in drivers' wages across the
board.
Our final option would be to reduce the amount of debt we
still have on our equipment. Solidifying the net worth of our
company will enable us to secure better financing terms in the
future. And it is certainly no secret that bankers today are
taking a closer look at companies' debt-to-net-worth ratio.
During the fuel spikes in 2008, we elected to gradually
reduce our fleet down from 64 trucks to the current level of 38
trucks. If pricing continues to vacillate, we will definitely
reduce more to prevent losses. We certainly don't like to be
put in this position, but we can't continue to put the
remainder of our company at risk. Since it is our largest
expense item, stabilization in the cost of fuel is extremely
necessary and vitally important to provide the ability for
trucking operations like ourselves across the country to remain
in business.
We have absorbed the cost increases due to regulations of
EPA on our truck engines and fuel-storage facilities, as well
as the escalation of other government regulations and enlarged
payroll taxes caused by high unemployment in all sectors of the
work force. We cannot continue on this wild ride created by
speculators and some in our government holding back on drilling
opportunities that would reduce our dependency on foreign oil.
Not just trucking companies, but the American people need
stabilization in fuel prices.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify, Chairman Jordan.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wannemacher follows:]

Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Wannemacher. We appreciate
getting the small-business owner's perspective.
Ms. Kerrigan.

STATEMENT OF KAREN KERRIGAN

Ms. Kerrigan. Well, thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman
Jordan and Ranking Member Kucinich. Thank you for hosting
today's hearing and for inviting the views and concerns of
small-business owners to be considered on this important issue.
I have been asked to provide a general snapshot, if you
will, regarding the impact of high gas prices on small-business
owners and entrepreneurs. Needless to say, the high costs are
making it very difficult for small businesses to compete, to
grow, and even survive in what remains a very, very difficult
economic environment.
For many small-business owners, sales and revenues remain
weak while business costs continue to move higher. Business
owners, for example, are very, very concerned and continue to
stay burdened with high health insurance costs, with employee
benefit costs. At the same time, raw material costs continue to
go higher. Supplies, shipping, etc., all these costs continue
to go higher. And with weak revenues, this is squeezing small-
business owners.
So, obviously, costs are a major issue for small-business
owners, how to control them, how to contain them, how to deal
with them and remain competitive in a very, very competitive
global economy. Tight cash-flows, combined with slim profit
margins, limit the flexibility that many small-business owners
have in responding to higher costs, particularly unexpected
ones.
So, unquestionably, small-business owners are feeling the
pinch of higher gas prices. The regular feedback that we
receive from our members, as well as small-business owners
across the country, point to significant effects that we
believe are undermining the economic recovery.
This feedback has been backed up by our latest
``Entrepreneurs and the Economy'' survey that we released this
week, which finds that the specific ways that business owners
are dealing with higher gas prices could have profound
consequences for our economy, and particularly if prices remain
high. Seventy-four percent of business owners, according to
that survey, report that higher gas prices are having an impact
on their business. Forty-seven percent report that higher gas
prices are affecting their plans to hire new employees. Forty-
one percent have raised prices due to higher gas prices.
Twenty-six percent have had to cut employees or their hours
worked. And, staggeringly, 38 percent believe if gas prices
remain high or increase further, their business will not
survive.
Obviously, how business owners respond to higher gas prices
not only impacts their own competitiveness and capacity to
grow, but also impacts the overall health of the U.S. economy.
If small-business owners are not hiring, if they are cutting
hours or if they are cutting jobs, our entire economy suffers.
Likewise, if small-business owners are putting fewer resources
into investments and innovative projects, the vibrancy of the
economy suffers along with the overall national
competitiveness.
So high gas prices are hitting the two major pain points of
small-business owners. Obviously, higher gas prices are raising
business costs, which is forcing many business owners to do
things like raising prices that put them at a competitive
disadvantage. Second, high gas prices are hurting sales, as
customers have fewer disposable dollars to purchase the goods
and services provided by small-business owners. And as I noted
in my written testimony, a survey, DollarDays.com survey, found
that 64 percent of business owners report lower sales due to
higher gas prices.
Especially as our Nation is working to emerge from the
recession, it is more important than ever that small businesses
operate in a more predictable environment. I think they
continue to tell us that uncertainty pretty much rules their
everyday operations. Without certainty, without predictability,
small-business growth will be stunted and these firms simply
will not be able to create the large-scale number of jobs that
are desperately needed by our economy.
Thank you again for hosting this hearing, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Kerrigan follows:]

Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Ms. Kerrigan and all our witnesses.
Mr. Wannemacher, you mentioned fuel costs went from 6
percent, I think you said, 6 or 7 percent, to now somewhere in
the last 3 years a range of 30 to 40 percent. Is that accurate?
Mr. Wannemacher. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Yeah, I mean, that is huge. And, obviously, it
has had an impact on your industry and, I assume, every other
trucking industry out there. But have you noticed your
customers, that it is impacting them? If we listen to Ms.
Kerrigan's testimony, obviously it is. But have you seen that
in a firsthand way with your customers that you deal with?
Mr. Wannemacher. Yes. The biggest impact is, you get the
small companies that aren't--you know, the larger companies are
familiar with fuel surcharges and are willing to absorb that.
But it is the smaller companies that don't ship as many
truckloads in a week that it really is alarming to them. And
they try to absorb those things rather than try to pass them on
to their customers.
Mr. Jordan. Right. Right, right.
And you have seen that, as well, Ms. Kerrigan? Relative to
the surcharge issue, have you had any specific examples with
your folks on the surcharge issue?
Ms. Kerrigan. On being impacted by surcharges?
Mr. Jordan. Yeah.
Ms. Kerrigan. Shipping I think is a huge one, you know,
where, you know, anything that they are receiving--florists. I
think the florist industry, in particular, are receiving a fair
amount of surcharges on shipping.
Mr. Jordan. Uh-huh. The other thing you mentioned in your
testimony, Ms. Kerrigan, was the other regulatory concerns,
other regulations that are a concern to business owners. One of
the focuses of this subcommittee is, you know, regulation and
how that impacts business.
Talk to me about some of the things--in addition to the gas
price issue, we have other things that government is doing.
Talk to me about some of the specific things that you think are
negatively hurting job growth and economic growth right now.
Ms. Kerrigan. Well, gosh, where do you start?
Mr. Jordan. You or Mr. Wannemacher, either one.
Ms. Kerrigan. Well, one big one, I think, is the health-
care issue and, you know, the concerns about what the health-
care reform bill, as it gets implemented, what it means for
their health insurance costs. Because they don't see them going
down; they continue to see them going up. You know, what the
employer mandate is going to mean for their business, what the
fines are going to mean.
Mr. Jordan. Right. And it is this cumulative effect that
concerns me and I think concerns many Members of Congress and
obviously concerns--so it is not just--well, you can point to
one, but it is one on top of the other. Now you throw in the
gas price issue.
Ms. Kerrigan. It is one on top of the other. I mean, there
is the tax issue and uncertainty----
Mr. Jordan. Right.
Ms. Kerrigan [continuing]. Of what their taxes are going to
be. I mean, there is the implementation of Dodd-Frank. What is
it going to be in terms of their cost availability of capital
and loans? It is all that.
It is very difficult to get traction. And a business owners
needs momentum, they need traction in order to grow and have
the confidence----
Mr. Jordan. Right.
Ms. Kerrigan [continuing]. To do the things that they need
in order to invest and to create jobs.
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Wannemacher, can you comment on the
cumulative effect that concerns so many of us?
Mr. Wannemacher. You know, it is. It is just a compounding.
When you have the EPA issues--for example, when the EPA changed
the regulation on the truck engines, we ended up paying about--
the first round, it was about $6,500 for just the EPA
regulations. The second round was an additional $8,000. And so
it is just a compounding thing of those type of things.
When we went to low-sulfur fuel, which gave us lower fuel
mileage, higher-cost trucks, lower fuel mileage, and, you know,
we can only pass on the fuel surcharge based on the price of
fuel. So that was also a loss.
And then what Ms. Kerrigan said, also, about the health
care. I mean, that just creates such an instability in your
mindset as far as going forward, those added-on costs of
government regulations that really have no--really don't belong
there, in a lot of instances.
Mr. Jordan. Uh-huh. Great.
Let me turn to our other guests, and we will do a second
round here.
I am just curious--and let me start with maybe Mr.
Reinhart--in the last couple years--and I genuinely don't know
the answer to this one--has the Fed been the largest purchaser
of Treasuries? Are they the single largest purchaser and/or
holder of Treasuries in the last, say, 2 years?
Mr. Reinhart. No, actually. Here is a good comparison----
Mr. Jordan. That surprises me. Because I think it is, like,
$75 billion----
Mr. Reinhart. So when the Fed----
Mr. Jordan. So who is their largest holder? Is it----
Mr. Reinhart [continuing]. Put QE2 on the table in August,
since then it has expanded its balance sheet by $500 billion of
extra Treasury securities.
Mr. Jordan. OK.
Mr. Reinhart. Over that same period, foreign official
entities have increased their holdings of government securities
held in custody at the New York Fed by $1 trillion.
Mr. Jordan. OK.
Mr. Reinhart. So, in some sense, as Dr. Baker noted, the
net depreciation of the dollar has been pretty modest, so you
can't say it contributes a lot to the rise in oil prices. But
that actually masks two effects. The Fed has been buying
Treasury securities with $500 billion of extra dollars, which
would tend to move the dollar lower.
Mr. Jordan. Sure.
Mr. Reinhart. But, at the same time, foreign official
entities have been buying a trillion dollars of Treasury
securities with their own currencies, tending to offset what
the Fed is doing.
Mr. Jordan. OK, but you said foreign. So, total foreign
holdings of Treasuries is bigger than the Fed----
Mr. Reinhart. Oh, most certainly.
Mr. Jordan [continuing]. Single biggest holder? Are they
bigger than--so the single biggest entity holding Treasuries
today, in the last few years, would be the Fed?
Mr. Reinhart. The single biggest entity in terms of the
stock holdings of government securities right now would be
foreign official entities.
Mr. Jordan. Combined?
Mr. Reinhart. Yes. That is, the reserve managers, China,
India, Russia, Brazil, and the like.
Mr. Jordan. OK. Got it. And then would the Fed be second?
Mr. Reinhart. The Fed would be second.
Mr. Jordan. Ahead of other funds and individuals and etc.?
Mr. Reinhart. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. OK. OK.
I will get back to that, but I want to get to our ranking
member, and then we will do another round.
The gentleman from Cleveland is recognized.
Mr. Kucinich. Let me ask Mr. Reinhart just a quick
followup. I was distracted for a second. I want to make sure I
got your answer.
Of the trillion dollars that is being purchased, did you
say who is buying those from abroad? China, you said?
Mr. Reinhart. So, all we know is that the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York holds Treasuries--government securities in
custody for foreign official accounts.
Mr. Kucinich. Right. But----
Mr. Reinhart. That went up a trillion dollars.
Mr. Kucinich. OK. Got it.
Mr. Reinhart. We don't know the composition of it.
Mr. Kucinich. OK.
Dr. Baker, in a March 2, 2011, Congressional Research
Service report entitled, ``The U.S. Trade Deficit, the Dollar,
and the Price of Oil,'' which I am going to ask unanimous
consent be entered into the record----
Mr. Jordan. Without objection.
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In this, CRS agrees with your assessment that the Fed's
monetary policy actions have not been the main driver of higher
oil and gas prices.
Now, can a case, however, be made here that there is a
tangential effect that the Fed has on these prices? I mean,
some of our witnesses have made that. Would you comment on
their analysis?
Mr. Baker. Well, again, I would say--and the CRS report, of
course, agrees that there was some impact in lowering the
dollar. But, again, I think that was relatively modest, you
know, and I think most of the evidence suggests that.
The other issue is, I had said and the other witnesses I
think suggested this, maybe put in a different way, but that
the low-interest-rate environment does create a situation in
which you are likely to see some speculative run-up in the
price of oil and other commodities. And I think that has
certainly been true. That was certainly true in the period in
2007-08, when oil hit $150 a barrel. And it would be surprising
to me that there is not some speculation there today. It just
stands to reason that when there are sharp movements, almost
invariably at least some of that is driven by speculation.
Mr. Kucinich. OK. Is speculation driven by being able to
trade with borrowed money?
Mr. Baker. Of course. You know, speculators tend to--the
way you make money as a speculator is you become heavily
leveraged. And if you could do so cheaply, then it makes it
easier to speculate.
Mr. Kucinich. Let me ask you--well, first of all, just to
preface, we can debate the causes of high oil and gas prices,
but I think that, you know, just in my own opinion, we have to
keep in mind that the U.S. ranks second in the world in fossil
fuel consumption. And energy-producing companies have used our
dependence on oil to enrich themselves and pollute the air and
the land.
It is clear to me what we are seeing is the result of a
monopoly. And by that, I mean, when it comes to individual
transportation, there is only one source--major source of fuel,
and that is oil. Americans depend on it every day to get to
work, get their kids to school, get groceries, conduct their
daily lives. Businesses are dependent on it, as has been
pointed out. So the demand for oil is fairly inelastic.
When demand is inelastic, if there is a monopoly in supply,
conditions are ripe for the kind of price manipulation that was
documented in the minority report issued on Monday. And that
led the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to charge five oil
speculators with illegal price manipulation yesterday.
Dr. Baker, can you talk a little bit about the effects of
monopoly of oil on our economy and about the possibility that
breaking that monopoly with alternative energy sources, what
that would mean for our economy?
Mr. Baker. Sure. I just realized, earlier I had made a
reference to the Securities and Exchange Commission. In fact,
it was the Commodity Futures Trading Commission that brought
those charges. So, just to correct my earlier statement.
Mr. Kucinich. Thank you.
Mr. Baker. Yeah, I see it as a situation as, in effect, we
are subsidizing oil consumption, part of that story being an
overvalued dollar. So, in a situation where we are running a
very large trade deficit, in effect what we are doing is
borrowing money to get oil and other imports cheaper than would
otherwise be the case if we had a dollar that was consistent
with more balanced trade.
And, obviously, when you have a situation where there is a
number of relatively small number of oil companies, they are in
a position to take advantage of shortages, temporary shortages.
It makes it a more volatile environment because, as you say
quite correctly, at least in the short term, demand is very
inelastic. When you have a relatively small number of
suppliers, supply can be very inelastic as well.
Mr. Kucinich. Let me ask you something. I have about a
half-minute. How would you explain to my constituents simply--I
mean, we are talking about some, you know, fairly high-level
extractions there, in terms of money supply, the role of the
Fed. How would you explain this, in layman's terms, to the
average motorist who is paying $4 to $5 a gallon about why is
this happening? Put it in layman's terms.
Mr. Baker. Well, I guess I would say there are two parts to
that story. One is, you know, certainly the short-term story,
where I think the price has gone up more than would be
justified by the fundamentals due to the fact that you have
speculators that are pushing up the price. So you have
speculators who are thinking prices will be higher in the
future or at least for a short period of time. They are hoping
to get in----
Mr. Kucinich. So speculators are driving up the price. That
is one factor.
Mr. Baker. That is one factor.
Mr. Kucinich. OK. And the other factor?
Mr. Baker. The other is simply the long-term story, that
oil is a commodity in relatively limited supply. Demand is
increasing very rapidly in the developing world, and it is
almost certainly going to outstrip the rate of growth of
supply. And the only way you can reconcile more demand and
relatively limited increase in supply is with a much higher
price.
Mr. Kucinich. So, even without speculation--thank you, Mr.
Chairman--even without speculation, based on the supply demands
that you are talking about, you are saying that the price of
oil--if nothing else changes in terms of alternative sources,
the price of oil is going to go up. Is that what you are
saying?
Mr. Baker. Exactly. I don't see any story where, if we look
out 5 years from now and let's say there are no speculators,
you know, we are just looking at what the world economy looks
like, possible projections of growth, I don't see any story in
which the price of oil is not considerably higher than it is
today.
Mr. Kucinich. OK.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your indulgence on that.
Mr. Jordan. No problem.
Mr. Baker, you said earlier about subsidizing oil
consumption. What was the statement you made earlier, that we
were--when we were doing that and what----
Mr. Baker. That, in effect, by having a large trade
deficit, which is associated with an overvalued dollar, we are
subsidizing our consumption of oil and all imports and paying
for that with money that we have borrowed from foreigners. That
corresponds to a trade deficit.
Mr. Jordan. Which, I think, raises the question. So do you
think rising fuel costs are a good thing?
Mr. Baker. I think that they are an inevitable thing. That
is part of the----
Mr. Jordan. I didn't ask you that. Do you think they are a
good thing, do you think they are a positive thing?
Mr. Baker. I think there are positive--I mean, I am not
trying to be evasive--there are positive aspects to it. I mean,
it will----
Mr. Jordan. In light of what we just heard from a small-
business owner?
Mr. Baker. There are negative aspects as well, of course.
None of us want to pay more for gas. Businesses are going to be
very harmed. Some businesses will go out of business.
On the other hand, exporters are going to do very well
because the dollar will fall. So we are going to get a lot of
jobs created in export industries. Also, in import competing
industries, because imports are now more expensive, there are
going to be more jobs there.
Mr. Jordan. Let me get back to Dr. Murphy.
You made a point earlier. You said, I believe, added to the
monetary base $1.6 trillion since September 2008 to today; from
1913 to 2008, $932 billion. So, in 3 short years, or less than
3 years, more than we did in--I didn't do the math, but what is
that? Almost 80-some years, or 90--80-some years.
And Mr. Baker, I think, called that ``timid'' in his
opening statement, that the Federal Reserve's approach to this
was timid. I assume you disagree with that.
Mr. Murphy. Right, I disagree strongly. And, I mean, it
probably is the difference in our perspective as to what the
appropriate policy response is. I believe that the problem was
that Chairman Alan Greenspan had interest rates too low after
the dot-com crash, and that fueled the housing bubble----
Mr. Jordan. Uh-huh.
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. And so that was the wrong thing to
do. That caused mal-investments. And so, to me, what Chairman
Bernanke has done is just doubled down on the wrong policies
that Chairman Greenspan put into place.
Mr. Jordan. Yeah.
Mr. Murphy. But I think Dr. Baker is coming from a
different perspective, obviously. And so, right, so they would
say it is timid because, look, it didn't work fully, so we need
to put more medicine in; whereas I am saying, no, that is
poison, just pumping in extra money that you are creating out
of thin air----
Mr. Jordan. Yeah.
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. To use a colloquialism.
Mr. Jordan. Do me this. Maybe you and Mr. Reinhart then
second. Rank order--I mean, look, because we got supply and
demand concerns, we got turmoil in the Middle East, we got
those who say speculators, and then we got the Fed and
quantitative easing and devaluing of the dollar.
So, rank order--and let's just, as a starter, say all have
some influence on the price of fuel and, ultimately, the price
of gasoline. But rank order them, which one has the biggest,
which is second, which is third, and which is fourth.
And I would also--well, I will get to that article in a
second. But do that first, and then we will go to Mr. Reinhart.
Mr. Murphy. Sure. I mean, I think we should just be humble
and say nobody knows for sure. We would have to turn back time
and do the alternate universe to see what actually happens. So
this is all speculative, no pun intended.
I personally think that the Fed has not fixed the problem.
OK? So it is true, as Dr. Baker was saying, you could argue,
well, no, the Fed averted a catastrophe, and so, therefore,
even though--we are, in a sense, both agreeing the Fed caused
oil prices to go up. And he is saying that is, you know,
arguably a good thing in one perspective. But I don't think we
are out of the woods yet. I think, you know, years from now we
are still going to look back and say, when is the economy going
to get better? So, in that sense, I think the Fed is--I
personally would say it is the Fed.
Now, in terms of speculators, again, that is sort of a
loaded term, but, I mean, if people are worried that the dollar
is going to depreciate strongly----
Mr. Jordan. Right, my first question to you.
Mr. Murphy. Yeah. That is partly what they are supposed to
do.
Mr. Jordan. Normal behavior, yes.
Mr. Murphy. A futures market is supposed to allow that.
Mr. Jordan. But you would say the Fed's actions are the
number-one reason that the price of gasoline for families and
business owners went up, more so than turmoil in the Middle
East, more so than rising demand from countries and rising
demand, period, you know, more so than supply and demand
concerns?
Mr. Murphy. From the fall of 2008 until now, yes. I think,
if you are saying--like, the last 6 months, the Middle East, I
think, is a far bigger influence of what is going on.
Mr. Jordan. But over the last 3 years.
Mr. Murphy. Right, if I had to pick one.
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Reinhart, could you comment, the rank order
in question?
Mr. Reinhart. So, one thing I do want to make clear is the
distinction between the relative price of oil and the nominal
price of oil and, similarly, the real exchange rate and the
nominal exchange rate.
We need real exchange rate depreciation to adjust the trade
accounts. Maybe we should think about a way of getting that
without as much domestic inflation. Global supply and demand is
such that the real price of oil is going to be going up over
time, but Fed policy will determine how much of that real price
increase turns into nominal price increases.
And I think, over the longer history of the Fed--that is,
over the last couple decades--the very high nominal price of
oil relates to the Federal Reserve's failure to achieve price
stability. And so, if you are looking for the big picture, why
are oil prices so high over the last two decades, it has to be
about Fed policy, because the Fed is responsible for the
nominal prices everywhere.
Mr. Jordan. Right.
Mr. Reinhart. OK. Now, if you are asking in the last year
or so, or over the whole profile of quantitative easing, I
would say that it is mostly something about the balance of real
supply and demand; the Fed comes second. And I would put third
speculation. There has been a bit of discussion about the
CFTC's----
Mr. Jordan. Right.
Mr. Reinhart [continuing]. Ongoing case. And it is not
appropriate to opine on an open case, but I think you would
have to remember three important points. And the first is, in
the futures market, almost nothing settles in a cash
transaction. That is, the futures market is very large relative
to the cash market. So trying to manipulate cash to affect the
futures market is the tail wagging the dog.
But second, in a very short period, the tail can wag the
dog. Even in the CFTC's press release of yesterday, they say it
was a strategy designed to first raise, then lower oil prices.
So, in the short run, speculation can matter. But the short
run, it can be, you know, relatively short.
But, third, we do have to worry about speculation in the
market because it raises volatility of prices, and that is just
a deadweight loss for everybody. It is just more expensive to
use those markets efficiently for hedging.
Mr. Jordan. OK. Thank you.
The gentleman from Cleveland.
Mr. Kucinich. I have heard the witnesses talk about the
role of the Fed here, and that is what has made this hearing
very instructive. Because all of--you know, including Dr.
Baker, all talk about the Fed has some role here. You know,
there might be some debate about what kind of role, about where
it falls in the hierarchy of economic effects on the price of
oil. You know, you talked about supply and demand, then the
Fed, and then speculation.
Mr. Reinhart, am I right in that? OK.
And we are talking about the Fed's policy since 2008, you
know, the role that has had on the price.
But what hasn't been discussed here and what I would like
to ask you to consider and maybe just give me some quick
response on is the fact that, in 1913, when the Federal Reserve
was created, it actually created the transition away from the
Article I, Section 8 responsibilities that were
constitutionally vested in Article I to Congress for the
purpose of coining money or controlling the money supply. That
was taken away. You know, the Fed ends up with the
responsibility.
So my question to you is, if we see that the variable
effect and sometimes the adverse effect which the Fed has in
the management of these things, the question becomes, what
about having the Fed being put back in the control of the
government, as the Founders intended? For example, being put
under Treasury.
Would you comment on that? You know, if we are really
talking about the Fed as something that we really have very
limited control over, what do you think of that?
Mr. Reinhart. So, I see the Federal Reserve Act as a
delegation of congressional authority given to it in the
Constitution to an independent agency, the Federal Reserve.
Fundamental to that was the implicit belief that independence
would lead to better monetary policy over the long run. Because
there are short-run and long-run considerations, something
decided in the Congress lends itself to a short-term gain and
not enough assessment of the long-term benefit. The idea was
giving the Fed independence so it can take account of the
longer-run benefits of price stability.
I think the record is not good for the Federal Reserve in
taking account of that longer-run responsibility.
Mr. Kucinich. Dr. Murphy, would you say the record is not
good over the long haul here, or what would you say?
Mr. Murphy. Well, right, I mean, the Fed was created to get
rid of the ups and downs, and then after they formed it there
was a Great Depression. So, I mean, the Fed has not had a great
track record over its history.
As far as your broader question--and I am speaking on my
own; this isn't an IER position on monetary policy, obviously--
but I don't think the issue is, well, should it be Ben Bernanke
right now making Fed policy or Treasury Secretary Geithner? I
don't--you know, I think if you are going to----
Mr. Kucinich. Well, I mean, there is some question about
the structures here of whether or not there is public
accountability, responsibility. If you can print, you can use
quantitative easing to print an unlimited amount of money and
basically, until recently, in a nontransparent way, give it to
banks who are too big to fail, they can park their money, gain
interest on it, and at the same time you got businesses
starving for cash in my area, there are some public policy
questions.
Go ahead.
Mr. Murphy. Well, right. My point was, a lot of people--and
I would subscribe to this view--would say that there should be
no such entity that can just create a trillion dollars out of
thin air and hand it to rich people. That, you don't need to
say, well, who should run this organization? There wasn't
always a Fed. So, you know, if you are going to start
questioning it, just go the full way.
Mr. Kucinich. Dr. Baker, do you have any comment on that?
Mr. Baker. Yeah, I mean, the Fed was set up almost a
hundred years ago, and I think its structure reflects both the
power of the financial sector and also the politics of 1913. I
mean, it is sort of striking, we have 12 regional Fed banks and
two of them are in Missouri. I don't think anyone would set it
up that way today.
The idea that you would give the financial industry, the
banking industry, a major, direct say in monetary policy--which
the structure of the Fed does. It is not just that they have
advice; they basically appoint 12 of the 19 people who sit on
the Fed's Open Market Committee, 5 of the voting members--I
think that is really hard to justify.
So I think having the entity that controls monetary policy,
whether it is the Fed or we give a different name to it, I
think having that directly answerable to Congress certainly
makes sense. And, you know, again, one could think of how best
to structure that.
I, for one, wouldn't say I necessarily want, as much
respect as I have for the members of the committee, I don't
want the Members of Congress directly setting interest rate
policy. But the analogy I would make is to the Food and Drug
Administration, that, you know, we expect that they are
answerable to Congress.
Mr. Kucinich. But I would tell you, back home, people have
skepticism and businesses have skepticism about letting the Fed
pass out, you know, free money to certain interest groups while
businesses on Main Street are starving. I mean, you know,
that--thanks. My time has run out. Thanks.
Mr. Jordan. I just have one more question, but then I will
give the ranking member another round if he would like.
But in yesterday's Wall Street Journal, Mr. Ronald McKinnon
from Stanford University, the Stanford Institute for Economic
Policy Research--are you guys familiar with Mr. McKinnon? Yeah.
He wrote what I thought was an interesting piece. I actually
read it last night. He thinks stagflation is coming, maybe
here. And he makes the comment, which I think strongly
reinforces what Dr. Murphy and Mr. Reinhart said, ``The Federal
Reserve is the prime contributor to the current bout with
stagflation.''
So I would just like your--we will go down the line here,
too--your thoughts on the piece Mr. McKinnon had in the Journal
yesterday. And do you think that is where we are--this
stagflation concept, do you think we are headed back there?
Mr. Reinhart. My wife Carmen and I wrote a paper in August
for the Fed Reserve-Kansas City's Jackson Hole Symposium
called, ``After the Fall.'' And what we documented was, after a
severe financial crisis, economies grow more slowly than before
for the entire decade--a point and a half slower in the decade
after a crisis than before the crisis.
So the real macroeconomy is going to probably be growing
only around the rate of growth of its potential. It is going to
take a long time for the unemployment rate to come down. In
that environment, we are probably in for a spell of subpar
economic performance.
Mr. Jordan. Uh-huh.
Mr. Reinhart. To the extent that we also lose the anchor of
price stability, then that would be a double dose of problems.
I don't think right now the Fed will--that will necessarily
happen. The Fed can be responsible for price stability. I think
it could have been more effective in its program of
quantitative easing, but I am not quite as pessimistic as
Professor McKinnon.
Mr. Jordan. Well, in Mr. McKinnon's article, he points to
the same thing Dr. Murphy mentioned in his testimony, the
tripling of the money base. And I don't see it offhand, but he
makes some of the same arguments.
Dr. Murphy, your comments on Mr. McKinnon's piece?
Mr. Murphy. I actually haven't read that particular piece
yet. But, yeah, I mean, I have been for a while very concerned
about stagflation, that the policies, both the Federal Reserve
and Federal Government policies, the last few years would slow
real economic growth and also add inflationary fuel.
One thing I should have said before about speculators, if I
could just say one thing very briefly, is, I just want to
remind people that it can go both ways. For example, when
President Bush, back in I think it was July 2008, announced
that he was going to end the executive branch's moratorium on
offshore drilling, apparently oil prices dropped $9 during the
speech itself. OK?
Mr. Jordan. Yeah.
Mr. Murphy. So that is what I mean, that when people think
that there are future events that are going to affect the
supply of oil, that can drive prices.
Mr. Jordan. And if the Congress of the United States would
pass legislation saying we are going to expand dramatically
drilling and exploration and get the resources out there, most
likely that would have an impact on the price of oil, not in
the 8 to 10 years that people say it takes to get the product
to market, but when it is actually done, when the bill is
passed.
Mr. Murphy. Right. And the way that happens, it is not that
there is a time machine, it is that--if U.S. policymakers
expedite and give the green light so people think that U.S.
production is going to be higher in the future----
Mr. Jordan. It sends a message.
Mr. Murphy [continuing]. Right, then current producers with
access capacity, like Saudi Arabia, they increase current
output.
Mr. Jordan. Just like if we would actually cut spending and
cap spending and send a message to the market, that might
actually help maybe PIMCO get back in the Treasury market and
Standard & Poor's change their outlook, right?
Mr. Murphy. Right. So, yeah.
Mr. Jordan. It sends a message. I mean, it is of critical
importance. Thank you, Dr. Murphy.
Mr. Baker, we have to get back to my first question, Mr.
McKinnon's analysis.
Mr. Baker. Yeah, I have to say, I haven't read the piece.
But I have to say, I am not very concerned about the prospect
of the inflation side of the stagflation. I mean, if you look
at the inflation data, it almost all shows very low inflation.
And in terms of market expectations, we actually know that
because we have futures, we have inflation-indexed Treasury
bonds. And those suggest that the markets are anticipating 1\1/
2\ to 2 percent inflation well into the future.
So I am not concerned on the inflation part. I am very
concerned about bad policy giving us slow growth. And in the
short term, I don't see any alternative to the deficits
boosting the economy, because the private sector is not about--
I certainly don't see any evidence----
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Baker, let me ask you a question. If big
government spending were going to get us out of this mess,
don't you think we would have been out of it a while ago? In
light of the fact that, for the last 3 years, that is all the
Congress, all the administration has done--more spending, more
spending, almost 25 percent of GDP, record levels, haven't been
there since World War II, quantitative easing policy, the
tripling of the Fed's balance sheet--don't you think it would
have done a little better job than it has, if that was the
answer?
Mr. Baker. Well, I think it has done a job. I think that,
if you look at the size of the----
Mr. Jordan. Yeah, the job it has done is that we still have
8 percent unemployment in Ohio.
Mr. Baker. And I think it would probably be 10 or 11
without those actions.
Mr. Jordan. It was.
Mr. Baker. Well, it would still be, absent those actions.
We lost on the order of $1.2 trillion in annual demand with
the collapse of the housing bubble, between construction and
the lost consumption due to the disappearance of equity, home
equity. So that is what we are trying to counter with that.
The other part of the story, of course, when you look at
trying to rebalance the economy, the only way I see to do that
in the long term is with net exports, which involves a falling
dollar. I don't know any other way to do that.
Mr. Jordan. I ran over my time three times in a row.
Mr. Ranking Member, this will be the last round, but you
can take as long as you need.
Mr. Kucinich. I want to----
Mr. Jordan. Can I interject?
Mr. Kucinich. No, go ahead.
Mr. Jordan. I need to enter the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform report, the majority report, for the record.
Thank you.
[The information referred to follows:]

Mr. Kucinich. I want to just begin by letting the chair
know how much appreciate the fact that you called this hearing,
because what I note is interesting is, you know, while the
witnesses may have some differences of opinion, the fact that
there is concurrence suggests that there may be the potential
for an alliance between conservatives in the House and those
who are not conservative, or even liberal, on some of these
economic issues, especially with respect to the role of the
Fed. That is not a small matter. And I appreciate that you
called this.
Dr. Baker, could you take a few minutes to explain the
relevance of price inflation here and explain to us the
relationship between the price Americans see at the gas pump
and the supply of money? Do you have any thoughts on that?
Mr. Baker. Well, in principle, what you can expect is that,
in ordinary circumstances, gas prices rise with other prices.
That is clearly not the sort of story that we are seeing today.
So a conventional story of inflation driven by the money supply
is that we throw out a lot of money, which we have done, and
then, in response--and this has not happened--you would see all
prices rising more or less at the same rate. You shouldn't
expect to see changes in relative prices.
So we see gas, depending what we want to use as our
starting point, but let's say we go back to $2.50 a gallon and
now we are at $4, we seeing an increase on the order of 50
percent in the price of gas. We don't see anything like that
almost anywhere else in the economy. We don't see that with
rents, we don't see that with medical services, we don't see
that with video equipment. I mean, pick whatever you want to
look at, we don't see that.
So that suggests that something qualitatively different,
something that has really very little to do with the supply of
money is affecting the price of gas.
Mr. Kucinich. Well, pull that out. So what does that
suggest to you, then? I mean, I know you have said this before,
but----
Mr. Baker. So what I am saying is that, on the one hand,
you have sort of the fundamentals of the market playing a very
important role; that you have had rapid growth in the
developing world that is increasing demand for oil. That is
going to continue.
The second issue is the instability, which has, to some
extent, affected the supply; it hasn't hugely affected it, but
to some extent affected the supply. The instability in the
Middle East, that could turn out to be a major factor in terms
of actually affecting the supply if it were the case, for
example, that Libya's oil were to come off world markets, that
we would lose the supply from there, or one of the other major
producers in the Middle East.
And then the third factor is simply that we clearly have
some speculation in the market. People are betting that prices
will be higher, and they are trying to take advantage of that
and pick up the gains. And that, at least temporarily, pulls
oil off the market, pushes up the price.
Mr. Kucinich. I want to thank the chair for--and thank the
witnesses for testifying. Those who represent trucking and
businesses, you know, we appreciate your presence here. I think
the chair has created a forum here for an important hearing.
And I look forward to working with you as we continue to
try to find ways of letting our constituents know exactly what
is going on and, you know, what we can do about it to try to
take a new direction.
And, you know, finally, one of the things that I have
advocated immediately with respect to the extraordinary profits
that these oil companies are getting in this climate--for
example, you know, Exxon, I think they had a $10.7 billion
profit in a single quarter--extraordinary--like, a 69 percent
increase over the previous year, which is already pretty high--
is to think about a windfall profits tax. You know, people have
to make money, I got that. But when you are gouging people, you
shouldn't get away with it.
So we should look for ways--and that wouldn't be at the
pump. It would be on the profits. That is the difference. To
try to find a way to try to discipline the oil companies so
they aren't stealing from our constituents.
So, I appreciate the chair's opportunity to be here, and I
look forward to continuing to work with you. Thank you.
Mr. Jordan. I appreciate the ranking member's comments and
input and help with the committee.
Just a quick response to the windfall profits suggestion.
Probably not going to go there, as you would expect. But I have
yet to figure out how raising taxes is going to lower gas
prices. I just don't see how that is going to help Mr.
Wannemacher in his business. I don't see how it is going to
help the small-business owners Ms. Kerrigan represents.
Mr. Kucinich. By not raising the price at the pump.
Mr. Jordan. I just don't see how that is going to help our
economy.
But I do want to thank our witnesses, particularly Mr.
Wannemacher and Ms. Kerrigan coming in and giving us the small-
business perspective, and our others on the Fed role and on the
broader economic concerns. Thank you for being with us. I
apologize again for having you have to stick around this late
in the afternoon. But thank you for being here today and giving
us this valuable testimony.
And we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:30 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


