- FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT, WORK FORCE, AND OPERATIONS AT THE SEC: WHO'S WATCHING WALL STREET'S WATCHDOG

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT, WORK FORCE, AND OPERATIONS AT THE SEC: WHO'S
WATCHING WALL STREET'S WATCHDOG

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TARP, FINANCIAL SERVICES
AND BAILOUTS OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROGRAMS

and the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION,
EFFICIENCY AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 10, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-11

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-368 PDF                    WASHINGTON: 2011
____________________________________________________________________________
For Sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
Internet: bookstore.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800); DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, D.C. 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services and Bailouts of Public and
Private Programs

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire,      MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Minority Member
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               PETER WELCH, Vermont
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JACKIE SPEIER, California
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida
Subcommittee on Government Organization, Efficiency and Financial
Management

TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania, Chairman
CONNIE MACK, Florida, Vice Chairman  EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York, Ranking
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma                 Minority Member
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire       ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas                  Columbia
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 10, 2011...................................     1
Statement of:
Schapiro, Mary, chairman, U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission, accompanied by Jeffrey Risinger, Director,
Office of Human Resources, U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission; Jonathan Katz, former Secretary, Securities and
Exchange Commission; Stephen J. Crimmins, K&L Gates, LLP;
and Helen Chaitman, esq., Becker & Poliakoff, LLP..........    11
Chaitman, Helen..........................................    59
Crimmins, Stephen J......................................    51
Katz, Jonathan...........................................    28
Risinger, Jeffrey........................................    28
Schapiro, Mary...........................................    11
Letters, statements, etc., submitted for the record by:
Chaitman, Helen, esq., Becker & Poliakoff, LLP, prepared
statement of...............................................    61
Crimmins, Stephen J., K&L Gates, LLP, prepared statement of..    53
Katz, Jonathan, former Secretary, Securities and Exchange
Commission, prepared statement of..........................    31
Quigley, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois, prepared statement of...................     6
Schapiro, Mary, chairman, U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission, prepared statement of..........................    14

FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT, WORK FORCE, AND OPERATIONS AT THE SEC: WHO'S
WATCHING WALL STREET'S WATCHDOG

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 10, 2011

House of Representatives, Subcommittee on TARP,
Financial Services and Bailouts of Public and
Private Programs, joint with the Subcommittee
on Government Organization, Efficiency and
Financial Management, Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 1:30 p.m. in
room 2157, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick T.
McHenry (chairman of the Subcommittee on TARP, Financial
Services and Bailouts of Public and Private Programs)
presiding.
Present from the Subcommittee on TARP, Financial Services
and Bailouts of Public and Private Programs: Representatives
McHenry, Guinta, Buerkle, Amash, Meehan, Walsh, Gowdy, Ross,
Quigley, Maloney, Welch, Yarmuth, and Speier.
Present from the Subcommittee on Government Organization,
Efficiency and Financial Management: Representatives Platts,
Mack, Lankford, Amash, Gosar, Guinta, Farenthold, Towns,
Cooper, Connolly, and Norton.
Also present: Representatives Issa and Cummings.
Staff present: Molly Boyl, parliamentarian; Larry Brady,
staff director; Sharon Casey, senior assistant clerk; Katelyn
E. Christ, research assistant; Benjamin Cole, policy advisor
and investigative analyst; Drew Colliatie, staff assistant;
Tyler Grimm, Ryan M. Hambleton, and Tabetha C. Mueller,
professional staff members; Peter G. Haller, senior counsel;
Frederick Hill, director of communications and senior policy
advisor; Christopher Hixon, deputy chief counsel, oversight;
Hudson Hollister, counsel; Justin LoFranco, press assistant;
Mark Marin, senior professional staff member; Tegan Noelle
Millspaw, research analyst; Laura L. Rush, deputy chief clerk;
Ronald Allen, minority staff assistant; Carla Hultberg,
minority chief clerk; Scott Lindsay, minority counsel; Jason
Powell and Steven Rangel, minority senior counsels; and Dave
Rapallo, minority staff director.
Mr. McHenry. The committee will now come to order.
I will start today's hearing by reading the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee's Mission Statement.
We exist to secure two fundamental principles. First,
Americans have the right to know that the money Washington
takes from them is well spent. Second, Americans deserve an
efficient, effective government that works for them.
Our duty on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee
is to protect these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to
hold government accountable to taxpayers because taxpayers have
a right to know what they get from their government.
We will work tirelessly in partnership with citizen
watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American people and bring
them genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy. This is the
mission of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee.
Today, we are here for a joint hearing between the
Oversight and Government Reform Subcommittee on TARP, Financial
Services and Bailouts of Public and Private Programs and the
Subcommittee on Government Organization, Efficiency and
Financial Management on ``SEC: Who's Watching Wall Street's
Watchdog.''
When we called this hearing originally, we were concerned
about capital formation and accountability at the SEC. A number
of management practices had come to light at that point that we
thought it would be important to discuss, but a lot has changed
just in the last 2 weeks in terms of disclosures of what is
happening at the SEC and larger issues of concern with
management that strike the agency's credibility. So there will
be a lot of questions to that regard in today's hearing.
I welcome the panel. I thank you for being here and with
that, I yield to the chairman of the full committee, my
customary 5 minutes as subcommittee Chair, for his opening
statement.
Chairman Issa. I thank the chairman and I thank him for his
generosity with the opening statement.
I, too, thought this hearing would be about slightly
different matters, but in recent days, the committee has become
aware of what could be the greatest challenge to the SEC's
credibility since Bernie Madoff managed to dup so many
Americans, steal so much money with his ponzi scheme, and
escape the proper scrutiny of the SEC for so long.
As we have learned, in 2009, the former general counsel,
Mr. Becker, came to the SEC and informed the chairman that he
had a potential conflict of interest. We hope to learn exactly
how that was expressed, but in fact, he had received, along
with his siblings, $2 million that came from the liquidation of
a Bernie Madoff fund in 2005. That would be serious enough that
anyone would normally consider that he should be recused from
any activity related to the Madoff after action.
Notwithstanding that, Mr. Becker, feeling that this was, as
we have understood it, a de minimis amount relative to his
estate, in fact, not only continued to be involved, but was
instrumental in having the SEC inserted into the process of
trying to change how the determination of how much money would
be considered to be eligible to be retained by those who got
their money out before the collapse versus how much would be
clawed back for the greater good of all those involved and
victimized by the ponzi scheme.
Had Mr. Becker's suggestions been taken, in fact, Mr.
Becker's mother's estate of $2 million would have benefited
well all those who were there to the end and lost so much would
have been victimized.
The problem we are going to be probing in this hearing, in
addition to others, is can we trust an SEC where the process
allows an individual to inform the chairwoman, to inform the
ethics individual who actually reports to the general counsel,
and get effectively a clean bill of health not to disclose and
not to recuse and even to be involved in an action that had it
been accepted, as our understanding is, by the trustees, would
have led to a distortion of process in favor of Mr. Becker's
family.
We take Mr. Becker at his word that, in fact, he intended
no wrong. We are willing to take factually in 25 minutes, the
ethics individual at SEC made a determination there was no
problem and stuck by it. We are willing to hear the Chairwoman
here today.
What we are not willing to do, as the committee that deals
in waste, fraud and abuse, and as a committee of Congress, all
of us being concerned a great deal about the confidence in what
the SEC represents in its oversight, its fairness and its
competence, we are not willing to accept that this can ever
happen again.
Mr. Chairman, I am not going to presume any facts not yet
in evidence. So far, we only have a limited amount of reports,
a clawback procedure against Mr. Becker and Mr. Becker's own
interview here with some of our investigators. Today, we have
an opportunity to listen to the Chairwoman, to realize that she
inherited an organization that had no flaws, but her
independent agency has, in fact, been the subject of the
President's attention, her attention.
We have not yet high confidence but high hope that the SEC
will live up to its mandate, not just of having a complex web
of rules that tell public companies that if their own child
works for a company, they cannot be outside or independent
officers or directors of the company, or, for example, what a
conflict is to the people who oversee, who can be on the
compensation committee, who cannot. It is a complex business
but it relies on a belief that the rules are necessary, they
are implemented in a sensible way, uniformly and that they are
for a purpose.
I believe as we look further into the Becker matter, we are
going to find the SEC failed to have the highest level of fear
so that public confidence could be maintained. I can find no
way out of this. I hope today we at least understand how this
mistake came to happen.
Mr. Chairman, once again, thank you for holding this
important hearing and I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
statement. With that, I recognize the distinguished Member from
Illinois, the chairman of the Subcommittee on TARP, Financial
Services and Bailouts of Public and Private Programs, Mr.
Quigley, for 5 minutes.
I am sorry, I just promoted you to chairman--ranking
member, Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I soon will
be joined by Chairman Platts, as well.
I thank our witnesses for their time today and their
contributions.
As we all know, in December 2008, Bernard Madoff was
arrested for running the largest ponzi scheme in American
history. Losses from Madoff's fraud have been estimated at $18
billion, devastating the savings of many Americans.
We all know the SEC missed Madoff despite being tipped off
on several occasions. Although no regulatory agency should be
expected to be perfect, a failure of this magnitude is clearly
unacceptable.
How did this happen? Many have blamed the SEC's outdated
technology, which is woefully behind what the financial firms
are using; many have blamed the SEC's silo problem which
prevents coordination among the SEC's many offices. Another
culprit that has been cited is the SEC's work force which some
argue includes too many lawyers and not enough industry
veterans. We have all heard about the SEC employees viewing
pornography instead of doing their jobs. These are reasonable
concerns and all merit oversight from these two subcommittees.
We have also heard about a potential conflict of interest
from David Becker, formerly senior counsel at the SEC. It is my
understanding that SEC IG David Katz is investigating this
matter. I look forward to his report.
Just a few years removed from Madoff and the worst
financial crisis since the Great Depression, we need the SEC to
do its job and do it well. The SEC is Wall Street's policeman.
It was estimated by the 1934 Security Exchange Act to prevent
fraud and abuse in the securities market. Creating the SEC was
essential to restoring investor trust in our country's economic
system. If our economic system is going to work, says Nobel
laureate, Joseph Stiglitz, then we have to make sure that what
people gain when they cheat is offset by a system of penalties.
Each year, the SEC brings hundreds of enforcement cases
against firms that have sold fraudulent financial products. In
2010, for example, the SEC brought 681 enforcement cases
against 1,800 defendants.
Just as all of us feel more comfortable in our
neighborhoods when they are well policed, investors feel more
comfortable buying financial products when the SEC is doing its
job and prosecuting white collar crime. The SEC is more
important today than ever before. Trust in our financial system
is at its lowest ebb and this lack of trust is impeding our
economic recovery.
The financial regulatory reform law passed here was a step
in the right direction, but it alone is insufficient. Laws have
to be enforced and the SEC needs to be a strong enforcer.
Unfortunately, the House-passed budget would reduce SEC
funding from its current $1.1 billion. For comparison's sake,
City Bank spent $1.6 billion on marketing alone in 2010. How is
the SEC expected to police Wall Street when its entire budget
is less than the marketing budget of one Wall Street Bank?
In a May 2010 report, the minority staff of the Oversight
Committee found that the Commission security disclosure
procedures are technologically backward. Yet, under the House-
passed cuts, the SEC won't be able to continue any improvement
of its IT systems. If the SEC's budget is reduced to 2008
levels, as some have proposed, the SEC would have to layoff 600
workers.
My point is this. Just a few years after the Madoff
incident and the worst financial crisis in recent history,
should we really be talking about taking 600 cops off Wall
Street? Let us strengthen the SEC, not weaken it. Let us also
ensure that the SEC undertakes common sense report to avoid
past mistakes.
Put another way, after 9/11, despite our intelligence
failures, we did not cut the intelligence budget, we doubled
it. It is my understanding that the SEC has already
reorganized, brought in a COO and designed a new tips referral
system. These are all commendable steps.
In the end, our country will be safer from another
financial crisis if the SEC is well organized and well funded.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses who I hope
will provide some constructive ideas on how to improve the
SEC's oversight of financial markets.
Thank you. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Mike Quigley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. McHenry. I thank the ranking member.
With prior agreement on our side, Dr. Gosar from Arizona
will have 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me preface my comments with the following. I am not a
financial analyst, I am not an accountant and I am not a
lawyer, but I do have skin in the game, as do most Americans.
Most Americans are compelled to invest in the markets through
their employer-sponsored retirement plans whether they are
401(k) plans or public or union pension plans. The money
largely goes to Wall Street.
The public needs assurances that those who handle our money
and our retirement futures are playing by the rules and are
being fair and are honoring their fiduciary responsibilities
and obligations.
The public assurances come from the Securities Exchange
Commission. The SEC is supposed to be guarding the hen house.
This hearing raises troubling questions. Who is watching the
hen house--the fox or the guard?
Mr. Chairman, recent news reports have focused on David
Becker's conflict of interest, but this hearing is not about a
single incident. This problem is actually far deeper and goes
to the very heart of management practices at the SEC.
Every organization needs a set of mechanisms to prevent or
detect fraud, waste or mismanagement. These are commonly known
as internal controls. It would appear that internal controls at
the SEC are not functioning properly.
One, the Government Accounting Office tells us that the SEC
is unable to reliably track its finances because it cannot
control its own financial reporting. Two, the SEC's inspector
general tells us that 30 employees, including an assistant
regional director, viewed sexually explicit materials at work
and only one was actually fired. Was anyone else ever
disciplined? Three, now the news media tells us that the SEC's
general counsel was allowed to advise the Commissioners on the
Madoff case when he had a personal, financial interest.
All these matters represent a breakdown in oversight and
management, a failure of internal controls. The sad irony is
that the SEC is the Federal agency in charge of making sure
publicly traded companies have effective internal controls and
public governance structures. In fact, Mr. Chairman, if these
events happened at a publicly traded company, the SEC would be
investigating itself and what would be the penalties?
Federal agencies are subject to the Federal Managers
Financial Integrity Act which dictates that they provide annual
assurances to Congress that their internal controls are
adequate. This law has been in effect since 1982 and governs
not just financial management, but program management as well.
The Federal Managers Financial Integrity Act is within this
committee's jurisdiction. Therefore, this hearing has an
important legislative and oversight purpose in the Commission's
compliance with the law and others. Mr. Chairman, the anecdotal
example of internal breakdowns are symptoms of a much larger
systemic breakdown. Since there is no SEC to investigate the
SEC, today I challenge my colleagues.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield the balance of my time.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the ranking member of the Subcommittee on
Government Organization, Efficiency and Financial Management,
Mr. Towns, former chairman of the full committee, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for holding this hearing today.
The SEC is at an important crossroad. It is successfully
emerging from a troublesome period leading up to collapse of
the country's financial system. It is paused to take the lead
in reforming Wall Street and preventing another financial
meltdown through its enforcement of the Dodd-Frank Act.
This hearing will examine financial management, the work
force and internal operations at the SEC. It is encouraging to
see all the new initiatives Chairman Schapiro has put in place
in the last 2 years. The SEC hired its first chief operating
officer to oversee the accounting functions, financial
reporting and internal controls, and we salute you for that,
Madam Chair.
The SEC has also hired a new chief information officer to
oversee its information technology functions. The Chairperson
has restructured the entire Enforcement Division, recruited
experts and has put a new governing structure in place. This is
commendable as well.
As with any organization, lapses can, do and will occur. I
understand the SEC has taken disciplinary action against those
who have been accused of misconduct at the Commission and that
greater accountability has been integrated into the
disciplinary process.
The SEC is responsible for safeguarding the confidence of
American investors in the financial markets and I hope our
hearing today will help our financial watchdog fulfill its
mission.
I now yield the balance of my time to the ranking member of
the full committee.
Mr. Cummings. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
This committee is responsible for ensuring that our
government operates effectively and efficiently. That means
holding public officials to the highest standards, demanding
excellence at every turn and eliminating even the appearance of
impropriety.
Today, the committee intends to examine against David
Becker, the former general counsel of the SEC. I do not know
Mr. Becker, I have never met him, never talked to him, and the
minority was excluded from Mr. Becker's interview when Chairman
Issa's staff interviewed him, but I do want to make sure that
everyone who comes before this committee is treated fairly,
including Mr. Becker, Chairwoman Schapiro and others.
If I understand the facts correctly, Mr. Becker's parents
invested about $500,000 with Bernie Madoff in 2000. Mr.
Becker's mother died in 2004 and when her funds were divided
among Mr. Becker and his two brothers in 2006, they had
increased to about $2 million.
Mr. Becker joined the SEC in 2009, he notified the SEC
officials about his inheritance and when issues arose relating
to his inheritance, he sought advice from SEC ethics officials
and received clearance to proceed. Some have suggested that Mr.
Becker may have benefited financially from the SEC's later
decisions, but it appears that the opposite may be true.
The basic question the SEC faced was whether to support an
asset valuation method used by the trustee representing the
Madoff victims, called the cash-in-cash-out method, or a
different valuation method proposed by several law firms called
the last statement method.
Under the first, Mr. Becker's inheritance would be subject
to litigation to recover or clawback assets on behalf of the
Madoff victims. Under the second, it appears that it would not.
Based on the court filings, the SEC chose to support the first
method. This meant that the trustee could sue Mr. Becker and
his brothers to recover some of his mother's inheritance which
is exactly what happened.
Mr. Chairman, in your briefing memo for today's hearing,
you acknowledged that the SEC's decision was ``actually
detrimental to Mr. Becker's interest.'' Nevertheless, I have
serious questions about the conclusions of the SEC's Ethics
Office, Chairman Schapiro, that these issues had no effect on
Mr. Becker's financial interest. Someone else of questionable
character might have tried to take advantage of this situation.
I also have questions about whether Mr. Becker's interests
should have been disclosed more widely within the SEC and I
hope we can learn more about this process today.
I also invite my Republican colleagues to join us in making
sure that the SEC has all the resources it needs. There is a
proposed cutting of $148 million from their budget and we do
need a robust SEC.
Chairwoman Schapiro, I read what you have done and what you
have accomplished. You inherited a mess. You inherited an
agency that Senator McCain said the former Chair should resign,
so we understand that.
Again, I am looking for a fair hearing and one where we can
get to the bottom of all of this.
I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the ranking member.
All Members may have 7 days to submit opening statements
for the record.
I will now recognize the panel. We have the Honorable Mary
Schapiro, Chairman, Securities and Exchange Commission; Mr.
Jeffrey Risinger, Director, SEC Office of Human Resources; Mr.
Jonathan Jack Katz, the former Secretary of the Securities and
Exchange Commission for 20 years; Mr. Stephen Crimmins, a
securities attorney with K&L Gates--he served as deputy chief
litigation counsel of the SEC's Enforcement Division from 1993-
2001; and Ms. Helen Chaitman, the attorney representing
approximately 350 investors in Mr. Bernard L. Madoff's
investment securities firm.
It is the policy of the committee that all witnesses be
sworn before they testify. Please rise and raise your right
hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. McHenry. The record will reflect that all the witnesses
answered in the affirmative. With that, I thank you.
We will begin at this time with Chairman Schapiro. I think
you heard the Members' opening statements and we would love to
hear your comments, especially about this conflict that has
been discussed. Ms. Schapiro.

STATEMENTS OF MARY SCHAPIRO, CHAIRMAN, U.S. SECURITIES AND
EXCHANGE COMMISSION, ACCOMPANIED BY JEFFREY RISINGER, DIRECTOR,
OFFICE OF HUMAN RESOURCES, U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION; JONATHAN KATZ; STEPHEN J. CRIMMINS, K&L GATES, LLP;
AND HELEN CHAITMAN, ESQ., BECKER & POLIAKOFF, LLP

STATEMENT OF MARY SCHAPIRO

Ms. Schapiro. Thank you very much, Chairman McHenry,
Ranking Members Quigley and Towns, members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for inviting me to testify today regarding the
financial management, work force management and internal
operations of the Securities and Exchange Commission. As you
know, I am joined by Jeff Risinger, Director of our Office of
Human Resources.
When I arrived at the SEC 2 years ago, the agency was
reeling from a variety of economic events and mission failures
and in need of across the board reform. We needed more experts,
better training, improved communication among our divisions and
offices and an effective strategy for handling tips and
complaints. These challenges were exacerbated by inadequate
infrastructure, material weaknesses in financial management and
a culture that had failed to keep up with an increasingly
complex financial marketplace. We immediately and
comprehensively set out to change the way the Commission
worked. My written testimony details the reforms of the last 2
years, but I would like to highlight a few.
We brought new leadership and senior management to
virtually ever office and hired the Commission's first chief
operating officer. We revitalized and restructured our
enforcement and examination operations and revamped our
handling of tips and complaints. We broke down internal silos
and created a culture of collaboration. We recruited more staff
with specialized expertise and real world experience and
expanded our training. We enhanced safeguards for investors'
assets through new rules and the leveraging of public
accounting firms.
Although we have made significant progress, we continue to
seek ways to improve our operations. After all, our core
responsibility is pursuing fraud, reviewing corporate
disclosures, overseeing the largest capital markets in the
world and inspecting the activities of thousands of financial
intermediaries are essential to restoring investor confidence
in the wake of the financial crisis.
Our funding has presented challenges. From 2005 to 2007,
the SEC experienced 3 years of frozen or reduced budgets,
forcing a 10 percent reduction in the agency staff. Similarly,
the agency's investment in new or advanced systems declined
approximately 50 percent between 2005 and 2009.
While SEC staffing levels are just now returning to 2005
levels, the securities markets have undergone tremendous growth
since then. Indeed, during the past decade, trading volume has
more than doubled, the number of investment advisors grew by 50
percent and the funds they manage increased to $38 trillion.
Operating under the continuing resolution only exacerbates the
imbalance between our resources and the magnitude of our
mission.
At the same time, the Dodd-Frank is significantly expanding
the SEC's responsibilities for the derivates market, hedge fund
advisors and union support advisors. In addition, we are also
charged with enhanced supervision of rating agencies,
heightened regulation of asset-backed securities and the
creation of a new whistleblower program.
For these reasons, I am concerned that without additional
resources, we will not be able to fulfill these
responsibilities in the manner in which Congress intends and
the American people deserve.
Finally, I would like to address the issue of former
Counsel David Becker's role in light of his mother's ownership
of an account at Madoff that was closed years before the fraud
was revealed.
Mr. Becker informed me, I believe shortly after he arrived
in 2009, that his mother had an account with Madoff before she
died and that it had been closed a number of years before he
returned to the agency. It did not strike me that his mother's
account closed years ago would present a financial conflict of
interest.
Mr. Becker was, and is, an experienced attorney who had
served as general counsel under three chairmen. I relied on him
to present any ethics related issues to the ethics counsel and
follow the ethics counsel's advice. I understand that is what
he did.
When I returned to the agency in 2009 having served there
in the late 1980's and early 1990's, appointed by President
Reagan and President Bush, I read many letters from Madoff's
victims, people who have lost everything. My entire focus was
on how to fix the SEC to ensure that another tragedy like
Madoff could never happen again, and how to make sure within
the contours of the Securities Investors Protection Act that we
could get the most money to people who were literally losing
their homes.
I am proud of how much we have accomplished in the past 2
years working tirelessly with an extraordinary staff to improve
the operation of the Commission and enhance the public's
perception of the integrity of our work and the fairness of our
decisions.
While Mr. Becker did solicit and follow advice from the
ethic's counsel, I realize in light of this incident that as
chairman, I have to ensure that we go beyond what may be
required in any particular situation. On matters like these, I
have to be looking around the next corner, looking beyond the
horizon and thinking above and beyond what may be appropriate
advice from the ethics counsel to make sure nothing occurs that
could raise questions about the Commission's mission or
processes.
To ensure that this matter is fully reviewed, I requested
that the SEC inspector general conduct an independent review
and analysis of all of the relevant facts. In addition, under
the leadership of our new ethics counsel, we have been
performing a top to bottom review of our ethics program.
In the meantime, I look forward to answering questions
about this matter to the best of my recollection, but I can say
to this committee with assuredness, we will learn from this
experience and we will take all actions necessary to earn the
trust the public places in us.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schapiro follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Chairman.
I would counsel the committee that the lights before you,
at 1 minute to go, it will turn yellow and red means stop. With
that, if you could keep your comments to 5 minutes we would
certainly appreciate it.
Mr. Risinger.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY RISINGER

Mr. Risinger. Mr. Chairman, I am happy to be before the
committee today. I look forward to taking your questions. I
don't have any further statements.
Mr. McHenry. Five seconds. That might be a record. Thank
you and congratulations.
Mr. Katz.

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN KATZ

Mr. Katz. Good afternoon, Chairman McHenry, Chairman Platz,
Ranking Member Quigley, Ranking Member Towns, members of the
two subcommittees. It really is an honor to be invited to
testify on the operations of the Securities and Exchange
Commission today.
It is a matter of great interest and importance to me
personally because for most of my career, I was an employee of
the SEC. For 20 of those years, I served as the Commission's
Secretary, which was one of those unusual positions that
afforded me a rare opportunity to participate firsthand in
virtually every aspect of the Commission's responsibilities.
I retired from the Commission in January 2006. In the five
intervening years, I have really been fortunate. I have served
as a technical advisor to a variety of securities commissions
in governments in emerging market countries and have also had
the opportunity to speak and write about financial regulation
in the United States.
In 2008, the Center for Capital Market Competitiveness at
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce invited me to conduct a study and
to write a report on how to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of the SEC. I wrote this study based upon
interviews with more than 50 current and former SEC staff
persons and Commissioners who agreed to be interviewed and gave
me their ideas, insights and criticisms, the best of which I
shamelessly stole.
In addition to this report, in 2009, I wrote a second
article for the Pittsburgh Law Review. This article focused
primarily on the Enforcement Division of the SEC, a subject
that I did not discuss in the Chamber report. Unlike the
Chamber report which reflected the collective views of a wide
range of people, this article was really my own personal views.
In both documents, I attempted to constructively identify what
could be done to make the agency a more effective capital
market regulator.
Today, I am aware that one of the focal points is, of
course, the SEC's budget and question of resources. I have to
answer that I, like most people, agree that the SEC does need
more staff to carry out its responsibilities, but why more
money and more staff is necessary, I don't think it is
sufficient. To do the job well, the agency has to reexamine how
it does that job and I think it has to make changes. I think it
is time to critically self examine the core functions and
recognize that most of them just haven't been very effective.
My concern is that just having more people do more of the
same thing in the same way is not the best solution. I think we
need fundamental changes in organization and management and
mission definition. Chairman Schapiro has identified a number
of the initiatives she has undertaken and I commend her on
them.
I worked for seven chairmen and four acting chairmen and I
will tell you that with the possible exception of John Schad,
the first chairman I worked with, Chairman Schapiro has
probably focused more of her attention on management and
organization than any of the other intervening Chairmen, but
again, these are first steps and I think more needs to be done.
I want to highlight five points that are contained in my
witness statement. I don't have time to go through all of them
but if people have questions, I would be happy to do it.
I think the agency needs a partial reorganization. I
advocate what is referred to internationally as the Twin Peaks
approach, one division that deals with all aspects of retail
financial services regulation and another division that handles
all credential functions, the so-called safety soundness and
stability functions.
I think the agency needs a chief operating officer. I
applaud Chairman Schapiro for appointing one, but I think you
have to go further. You need a chief operating officer who
really is that and has more than the title. The way I
distinguish it is when you try and build a house, the architect
and owner design the house, but you need a general contractor
to actually get it done, to build it well, to keep you on
budget and on time.
I see my time is almost up, so I will quickly identify two
other things. I think there needs to be substantial changes in
enforcement. When you look at Madoff, you understand, in my
opinion, this was not a question of culpability, a few bad
people doing bad things.
Madoff is similar to other failures of the Commission in
the past. These are structural issues that go with how the
Division of Enforcement frames its responsibilities and
conducts those responsibilities. It has to be proactive, not
reactive, and its results have to be aimed at remediation, not
penalties. Penalties are the function of the Justice
Department. In that respect, I would advocate very strongly for
beefing up a Criminal Securities Office in the Department of
Justice so that the agency doesn't have to rely upon the
Southern District of New York which has limited jurisdiction.
Just in closing, I want to mention what I think is the most
important recommendation of all, the need for a special study
of the securities markets. In 1961, the SEC was similarly
troubled, the markets were in similar upheaval.
Congress appropriated funds to create a special study of
the securities market. A group of technocrats, experienced
people in government and from industry spent 18 months studying
the markets and studying how the SEC functioned. They issued a
five volume report that literally for 25 years was the
touchstone for everything the SEC did. I think we need another
one.
Thank you very much for the time. I am happy to answer
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Katz follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Mr. Katz.
Mr. Crimmings, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN J. CRIMMINS

Mr. Crimmins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry, Chairman Platts, Ranking Member Quigley
and Ranking Member Cummings, thank you for hearing us today.
Over the last decade, we have seen an explosion and the
size and complexity of our capital markets, exponential
increases in trading volume, workers doing thousands of trades
in a few seconds instead of maybe a hundred trades a day, high
speed, computer driven trading strategies, fragmentation of
trading away from the exchanges and into dark pools and ECNs
and 24/7 globalized stock trading.
We have seen investment products become so complex that the
sophisticated traders that trade them don't always fully
understand what they are and scary systemic risk that threatens
recurring crises.
Now after the crash, we see many investors pulling out and
staying out of stocks and mutual funds. Investors are still
scared and sidelined with their decimated 401(k)'s. Investor
perceptions are critical. These people will be unwilling to
continue to risk their capital or risk their capital again if
Wall Street's cop on the beat becomes the cop on furlough.
Last summer, in the depths of the worst financial crisis in
80 years, Congress recognized that the Securities and Exchange
Commission needed twice the budget to be relevant in today's
huge, complex and hyper-charged markets. Whatever issues anyone
in Congress has with the SEC, I would respectfully suggest that
the answer is not to starve in the wake of the crash, the
answer is not to create an environment where it will be easier
for the frauds just to prey on investors.
Instead, the answer is for all of us, here and now, to
commit firmly to do whatever it takes to make the SEC the
strong and smart overseer that our capital markets deserve to
recover and grow.
One thing is of paramount importance. Nobody is asking the
taxpayer for one dime to fund the SEC. What is often forgotten
in the discussion is that American taxpayers pay absolutely
nothing to run the SEC each year. Under 1996 legislation
adopted by a Republican Congress and a Democratic President,
the money to run the SEC comes entirely from Wall Street
transaction fees and assessments designed to cover the entire
cost of the SEC's budget.
Because of this a substantially increased SEC appropriation
paid for with this successful 15-year old funding mechanism
would require no tax dollars whatsoever and would add nothing
to the deficit. In short, the Wall Street user fee money is
already there. Congress just has to let the SEC use it to
police Wall Street.
Madoff was a tragedy. The SEC missed Madoff and Chairman
Schapiro and others have not tried to evade or run away from
that fact, but so did FINRA whose predecessor installed Madoff
as its vice chairman, and so did the Justice Department, and so
did the New York attorney general with Madoff right in his own
backyard, and so did how many others, including the
sophisticated financial services firms that regularly
interacted with him. Madoff was an industry icon and idol and
nobody knew that he was really a crook.
Yet, through thick and thin, the SEC was out there bringing
almost 700 complex cases for enforcement every year against
almost 2,000 defendants every year and with greater funding,
could have brought far more.
We hear criticism of the SEC's recently departed general
counsel, David Becker. His power, I suggest, is misunderstood.
He was not the Secretary of some Cabinet level department.
Instead, he was the general counsel, one of multiple senior
advisors at a five member, bipartisan commission, composed of
two Republicans, two Democrats and one independent.
Whatever his power, the point is that he did not use it to
benefit himself. The month after he left the agency still to
this day, it remains unclear exactly how any of the Madoff
related claims are ultimately going to be calculated. In any
event, the Madoff Trustee, Irving Packard reports to the court,
not to the SEC, and he will make his own decisions on what he
wants to claim.
Finally, we need some perspective. What we are talking
about is whether the Dorothy Becker estate will get to keep the
$500,000 that Dorothy originally invested or whether it will
also get to keep some small amount on top, the inflation
adjustment. That seems to be where this is all breaking down
and being discussed.
The senior ethics official with whom Becker consulted ruled
that whatever theoretical conflict this may actually have
presented, it did not create such a conflict that he needed to
recuse himself, based on what was known at that time. The
possibility of a claim against this estate of a particular type
at some future date was at that time speculative. Now we know
more, of course.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Crimmins follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. McHenry. Thank you for your testimony.
Ms. Chaitman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HELEN CHAITMAN

Ms. Chaitman. Thank you so much for giving me this
opportunity to speak to you. I speak on behalf of approximately
500 Madoff investors whom I represent and I speak, as well, on
behalf of every American who hopes to save enough money in his
lifetime to retire on that money. I speak on behalf of every
American who relies upon the brass plaque on his broker's desk,
SIPC. We are told when we invest that every account is insured
up to $500,000 and yet, SIPC has taken the position in the
Madoff case that the law doesn't apply to it.
If I had to grade the SEC's performance with respect to its
essential function of protecting investors with respect to the
Madoff case, I would give the SEC an ``F.'' The SEC, instead of
enforcing the law against SIPC, which it is charged by Congress
with the obligation to do, instead of enforcing the law, we now
know that in January 2009, the SEC agreed with SIPC that for
the first time in its history, it would not pay SIPC insurance
to each Madoff victim based upon the investor's last statement.
SIPC is an insurance entity established by Congress which
has the power to assess the Wall Street firms who raised the
funds to protect investors. The statute doesn't give SIPC the
right to define how it is going to allow a claim. The statute
mandates that a claim is based upon the customer's last
statement. Yet, the SEC joined in SIPC's violation of the
statute.
This is not just my opinion, this is the opinion of
Chairman Garrett who has proposed H.R. 757 and in proposing
H.R. 757, which is simply a clarification of the law, one could
view H.R. 757 as a statement to the SEC, you cannot avoid the
law and SIPC cannot avoid the law. Mr. Garrett made a statement
when he introduced this bill that SIPC has violated the law and
the trustee in the Madoff case has violated the law.
If you recall, in 1970 when SIPC was enacted, investors
were encouraged to relinquish the protection of having
certificated securities. That was something that Wall Street
wanted. In exchange for relinquishment of that protection,
investors were promised SIPC insurance. SIPC insurance was
raised to $500,000 in 1978; it was never raised thereafter.
In the Madoff case, SIPC decided that was going to be too
expensive for its Wall Street members and so it was going to
try to come with an entirely new basis for insuring accounts.
For the first time in SIPC's history, it decided it didn't
insure the balance on the last statement, it only insured the
net investment over the life of the account which might have
been 20 years, 30 years, 40 years.
There is no evidence that any investor in today's stock
market has or what he owns other than the statements he
receives from his broker. We don't have the luxury of going
back to certificated securities. The Internal Revenue Service
relies upon those statements, every investor relies upon those
statements for planning their retirement, for their estate
plans for their children. There is no basis in law for what the
SEC did in this case.
This is not a question of insufficient funding for the SEC.
This is a question of doing its mission which is to protect the
investor.
I am not here to opine on whether or not Mr. Becker had a
conflict of interest. I don't think there can be any doubt
about it. Whether he advocated the constant dollar adjustment,
which obviously reduced his own exposure, or whether he said to
the SEC when he came onboard in February 2009, you have made an
illegal agreement with SIPC which would have worked to his
advantage, his judgment was clouded because everyone in the SEC
forgot the law.
There is one way to remedy this and to restore confidence
in the capital markets for the average American. That is to
enact H.R. 757.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Chaitman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. McHenry. Thank you for your testimony. I thank the
panel for its testimony. With that, we will begin questioning
on our side by Dr. Gosar of Arizona. He is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gosar. Chairman Schapiro, when David Becker, your brand
new general counsel, first came to you in February 2009 and
said, my mother had an account with Bernie Madoff, why didn't
you ask him any questions about it? Why didn't you even ask
simple questions like, how much money?
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman, to the best of my recollection,
and just so I can be clear, I haven't looked at any emails or
whether there might be any contemporaneous notes or anything
like that in this period of time, so I am recalling back
because our inspector general is looking at all that, so I am
recalling 2 years ago.
The best of my recollection was that Mr. Becker told me
that his mother, who had passed away years ago, had an account
at Madoff. Because the account was closed years before, I did
not think that the account of a long deceased relative would
raise an issue of a conflict of interest in Mr. Becker's work.
I did expect that he would go to the ethics counsel, an
experienced government official, a government lawyer who served
under three Chairmen at the SEC, and we use our ethics counsel
all the time for their advice. I expected him to run it by the
ethics counsel and to follow their advice and that is the way
it went forward.
Mr. Gosar. It seems that if the same situation existed in a
publicly trade company that you were investigating, would you
have such a cavalier approach to that?
Ms. Schapiro. It is hard for me to imagine this situation.
These are the government ethics rules.
Mr. Gosar. An ethics rule nonetheless.
Ms. Schapiro. It is very hard to answer in the abstract. It
would depend on the rule.
Mr. Gosar. It just seems there is a very different aspect
that what is good in the private sector and publicly trade
situations is not going well for the government.
Let us go to my next question. Ms. Chaitman, do you believe
the account valuation method that David Becker recommended to
the Commission as its attorney would have befitted his personal
financial interest?
Ms. Chaitman. There is no question that the constant dollar
approach, which apparently Mr. Becker invented, would benefit
him personally and reduce his clawback exposure, but the more
significant problem with the conflict of interest Mr. Becker
had is that it clouded his judgment. The law is absolutely
clear that every investor is entitled to SIPC insurance based
on his last statement. Mr. Becker had an obligation, as general
counsel of the SEC, to make sure that the SEC complied with the
law and enforced it against SIPC. That is the great failure
which has caused devastation to all of my clients.
Mr. Gosar. Chairman Schapiro, your agency's inspector
general compiled a 457-page report about the SEC's failure to
uncover Madoff's ponzi scheme. That report devotes 2 sections
out of 11 to describing in great detail every possible
connection between SEC employees and Madoff.
Do you think that your general counsel's receiving funds
from a Madoff account would have been appropriate material, the
inspector general or not?
Ms. Schapiro. That would be a much better question for the
inspector general. I have a pretty high level of confidence
that he did quite a thorough report on the agency's failures
with respect to Madoff.
Mr. Gosar. The Inspector General's Madoff report mentions
on page 382, that two family members of an employee in the
Office of Internet Enforcement invested $1\1/2\ million and
$500,000 respectively with Madoff. The inspector general found
it necessary to make sure that this employee had no involvement
in any Madoff examination.
Do you think that the inspector general would have been
interested in a similar situation involving your chief lawyer,
a senior SEC official who served as general counsel from 2000
to 2002 while the SEC was ignoring whistleblower complaints
about Madoff?
Ms. Schapiro. I can't predict. I can imagine that he might
have been and of course he is looking at all of these issues
now. I expect that he will thoroughly explore that.
Mr. Gosar. I understand that you inherited a horrific
problem but it always starts with top down. Private sector,
businesses always look at accountability within the hierarchy.
It seems like we have a two-edge sword here that we should have
demanded better accountability. Would you agree?
Ms. Schapiro. Congressman, I would agree that from where I
sit now and understanding all the things that I understand now
that I didn't understand in 2009, having arrived at the SEC and
discovered that I had an agency in absolute ruin in some
regards on my hands to manage and not knowing obviously all the
steps that would be taken by the Trustee or the decisions the
Commission would make down the road, but knowing those things
now, I wish that Mr. Becker had recused himself, absolutely.
Mr. McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Quigley, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam chairman, the New York Times reported on March 5th of
this year that the SEC has declined to enforce the requirement
from Dodd-Frank that would make rating agencies subject to
expert liability under the securities law. This would make
rating agencies liable for faulty ratings. Could you comment on
the timeline for implementing this measure?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, I would be happy to. The way the rule
works is that if a rating is included in a registration
statement for securities, then the rating agency must consent
to having liability. That is the Dodd-Frank requirement.
We had preexisting SEC rules that require for AXA-backed
securities registration statements, that if a rating was used
to sell the securities, the rating needed to be included in the
registration statement. Rating agencies have absolutely,
unequivocally--at least the ones that are in existence now--
refused to consent. That made public offerings of AXA-backed
securities impossible because they couldn't get the consent of
the rating agencies to include the ratings, but they used the
ratings to sell the securities.
We temporarily set aside our rule, our requirement that the
AXA backed issuers disclose the ratings in the registration
statements because we didn't want to be holding up all public
offerings of AXA-backed securities and pushing them into the
private markets which we felt were not as good for investors.
Right now, our staff is working through reconsideration of
our disclosure requirements. I believe they will recommend that
we eliminate our preexisting requirement for including the
ratings and therefore, the liability provisions can go forward.
We are also hopeful that some of the newer rating agencies
that have indicated an interest in becoming registered with us
will actually be willing to consent, which is I think how
Congress hoped the law would work.
Mr. Quigley. Can you guess on the timeframe for that?
Ms. Schapiro. I can't but I would be more than happy to. I
would say over the next couple of months, but I would be happy
to get you a more definitive answer right away.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. You talked about the agency that
you inherited and you talked to a certain extent about the
reforms necessary and those you have implemented. As to Mr.
Katz's point, whether or not more assets, and I think you need
the assets to do your job, help more than the need for in a
sense restructuring, reforming and reinventing yourself.
Are you looking at the agency from that perspective and the
broader picture? If you were to start over, what would you do
and how would you do it?
Ms. Schapiro. Absolutely. I actually would do again many of
the things we have already done. This has been an agency that
has been sort of taken upside down and shaken pretty hard over
the last 2 years--new leadership across the board in every
major office and division, a new chief operating officer, a new
chief ethics counsel, our first ever chief compliance officer.
We also restructured our Enforcement Division and put
people into specialized groups where they could get deep
expertise to bring enforcement cases more quickly in particular
areas like structured products or the Foreign Corrupt Practices
Act or insider trading.
We have also restructured our examination program, both of
those, enforcement and examination, largely in response to the
failures that were so vividly demonstrated in the inspector
general's report on Madoff.
We have also brought new technology, which is going to be
critical to us. We have too many people doing low value work
because we don't have the technology.
Mr. Quigley. What do you mean low value work?
Ms. Schapiro. For example, when we bring enforcement cases,
we bring in massive amounts of electronic data so that we can
look at trading records or we can look at email transmissions
between parties who might be sharing non-public information.
We need to be able to use analytics to find the important
information and all of that, not have people plowing through
all that information. When the markets fell so dramatically on
May 6th, it took us 5 months to reconstruct trading data
because we don't have the capacity in the SEC.
Mr. Quigley. That was the final question we have limited
time. Are you a technological match for those that you are
regulating?
Ms. Schapiro. Not at the moment, we aren't. We have a
phenomenal new chief information officer who is making real
progress, I think, but we are a long way from the people that
we are regulating in terms of our technical capability, but I
think we can get there. I think we can put up a good fight
anyway.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
Vice Chair of the TARP, Financial Services and Bailouts
Subcommittee, Mr. Guinta of New Hampshire, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katz, thank you and thank all of the witnesses for
being here today. wanted to direct my first question to you,
sir.
In your testimony, you talked about the size, structure and
complexity of the U.S. capital markets and financial companies
that have grown substantially in the past 30 years. I think
your position is that you are comparing the SEC over that same
period of time and the fact that it has not grown, changed or
modified substantially. I wanted to get a little clarification
on that first, if you would.
Mr. Katz. Obviously I think everyone would agree that the
capital markets of today are exponentially greater, but my
point was more directed to the way the SEC is structured. It is
not just a question of size; it is a question of a structure
that corresponds to the entities you are regulating. The point
I was making is that in the early 1970's when basically the
current organizational structure of the SEC was last reformed,
you had market regulation that focused on stock exchanges and
broke dealers. You had a Division of Investment Management
Regulation which focused on mutual funds and investment
advisors. They were two very separate components of the
industry and there really was very little overlap.
That no longer exists. Because of consolidation in the
industry and the blending of the roles, the fundamental
distinction between a stock broker who is a commission-based
seller of securities and an investment advisor, who is an under
management advisor on a comprehensive portfolio, is a
historical artifact. It doesn't exist.
Because you have two divisions upon two different laws,
according to a model that no longer exists, you get these
anomalies. The fight over fiduciary duty differential was
embedded in the laws but more importantly, you had two
different divisions who had different ways of thinking about it
and neither of them wanted to compromise. They both wanted to
maintain their piece of it.
Mr. Guinta. Does that speak a little bit to the silo effect
that you have been referring to?
Mr. Katz. Absolutely. I used to joke that the silos at the
SEC were so real that in fact, that they had locked doors and
that because all the paper in the agency used to have to come
through my office, I actually had a skeleton key that
occasionally allowed me to unlock each of the silo doors and
get inside. Most people don't. Turf is a real issue in any
organization, no matter what the size. It is compounded because
remember you have different securities laws that were written
at different points of time for different segments of the
industry. Each division sort of jealousy guards the law that it
controls. The market has changed.
Mr. Guinta. I listened to what Chairman Schapiro mentioned
in her earlier comments about some of the improvements,
modifications and changes that she has made and they sound
laudable and responsible. That being said, I wonder what type
of congressional action may or may not be necessary given the
systemic problem that we have seen within the SEC. I don't want
to get into the specifics, but the things we have been talking
about here. We have to prevent these from happening again.
People in our Nation need to have confidence, not just in the
SEC, but in the markets as well. I wonder what you could say
about the type of intervention you feel Congress should be
considering?
Mr. Katz. That is a very difficult question for me to
answer. The reason is I spent virtually my entire career at the
SEC and I think it is very different for Congress to
micromanage the internal organization and operations of a
government agency. You can set policy, you can give direction,
but I think it is dangerous when Congress tells the agency this
is how you get it done. I think the agency really has to take
this responsibility on. Chairman Schapiro has brought in an
entirely new team of senior people. I don't know most of them.
They seem very competent.
My hesitation is this. If you rely exclusively on a team of
people coming in to effect change, when those people walk out
the door, the change walks out with them. You need to change
the structure, you need to change the culture and most
importantly, you need the agency to define what it is it is
trying to do and how do you measure whether it has gotten it
done. You need that discipline, but that is for the agency to
do.
Mr. Guinta. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Schapiro, I only have a few seconds left, but what
assurance can you give us that new management team is
effectively managing and maintaining the necessary changes?
Ms. Schapiro. I have to say I think change starts with
leadership absolutely and having a whole new leadership team
makes an enormous difference. They are very committed to
working together and institutionalizing cooperation and
collaboration among all of the divisions.
For example, we now have the College of Regulators for the
largest financial institutions. It is no longer just the
Trading and Markets Division that looks at them, it is no
longer just the examination group. There is a group of people
drawn from all over the agency who could have potential
interest in the health of that financial institution who meet
regularly to talk about what is going on in that company, to
look at the financials, to meet with the staff of that
financial institution. So the College of Regulators is just one
example. We have task forces across the agency. We are merging,
in some of our offices and will eventually in all of them, our
examination programs for investment advisors and broker dealers
which Mr. Katz mentioned.
Finally, I should say that we have just commissioned, and I
believe it is going to be released today, Dodd-Frank required
us to hire an independent consultant to do a very in-depth
study of the SEC's organizational structure. That will be
released today. I fully expect that there will be some really
helpful ideas there for us to further improve how we operate.
Mr. McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. With that, I
recognize the ranking member, Mr. Towns.
Mr. Towns. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me thank all of you for being here. I really appreciate
you taking the time to come.
Chairman Schapiro, the SEC plays a critical role in
protecting investors and ensuring that our financial markets
operate effectively. You have stated that freezing the SEC
budget impedes the agency's ability to meet its mission, which
is to protect investors, to maintain fair, orderly and
efficient markets, and facilitate capital information. Can you
put that in concrete terms for us?
If the SEC does not have the budget to properly oversee
capital markets, how would this effect your staffing?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, sir, I would be happy to. I think the
two things that are most severely impacted by a limited budget
at the SEC are capability to hire the new kinds of talent and
expertise we need, economists, people who worked in hedge funds
on trading desks, financial analysts, the new expertise that
will help us keep up with what is going on in the marketplace.
The second is the fact that it will slow down and really
hurt our efforts at reforming our technology and bringing it up
to speed and giving us the capacity to do the things we need to
do in order to keep up with Wall Street. I know we will never
meet their budgets. I understand that. I have no expectation
and don't believe the American public should pay for us to have
a $3 billion a year technology budget, but we have to do much
better than we have been able to do.
I think those are the two primary things that are really
impacted. It plays out in lots of other ways. When we don't
have a sufficient travel budget, examiners can't travel to go
into that mutual fund where most Americans hold their investing
wealth, and examine the mutual fund's books and records. They
can't go to the investment advisor or to the broker dealer.
In little ways, the lack of resources plays out but the
real fundamental ways are bringing in those people that we need
to really reform and transform the agency so people know that
we have at least a fighting chance at staying on top of what is
happening on Wall Street so we can also respond when the
emergencies come along as we saw on May 6th when the market
absolutely fell apart, scared people very badly in the retail
investing public and in the institutional investing public as
well. We need the capability to respond to those things very,
very quickly.
Mr. Towns. What about the flexibility? Do you have that?
For instance, if there is a crisis situation and you need a
specific type of person and in order to get that person, you
might need additional resources to be able to track who you
need to do the job at that particular time, do you have that
kind of flexibility?
Ms. Schapiro. We have had some flexibility over the last 2
years because Congress has been generous in our budget, but if
we continue with the CR level or are cut, the answer to that is
no. May 6th required us to go out and bring in experts to help
us analyze and go through all the trading data so we could
reconstruct for the public to see what was happening every
second in the marketplace when the Dow dropped 500 points in a
matter of a few minutes.
Responding to emergencies is one of the things I do worry
about. That is where we lose flexibility if we don't have a
sufficient appropriation.
Mr. Towns. Thank you, very much. On that note, I yield
back.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. With that, I recognize Mr. Mack
from Florida for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also want to thank the
panel for being here today to give us an opportunity to get
your insights and to ask a few questions on a very serious
topic.
I would like to start with Chairman Schapiro, if I might.
Do you feel as Chair of the agency that ultimately it is your
responsibility to ensure that all of the employees are acting
in accordance with SEC employee conduct standards?
Ms. Schapiro. I have responsibility for the agency in that
sense. I cannot tell you that with 3,800 employees, I can take
individual responsibility for each and every one to ensure that
they are following the requirements the way they should be.
Mr. Mack. Ultimately, it is your responsibility as the
Chair of the SEC?
Ms. Schapiro. Ultimately, I am responsible for the agency's
conduct.
Mr. Mack. If I could direct your attention to slide No. 4,
Chairman Schapiro, are you familiar with the rule that is being
presented on the screen?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mr. Mack. After reading through my material and hearing
your testimony, it seems to me that you weren't completely
knowledgeable of this rule at the time you hired David Becker.
Please allow me to read it so everyone in the room can
understand the entire rule.
``The Securities and Exchange Commission has been entrusted
by Congress with the protection of the public interest in a
highly significant area of our national economy. In view of the
effect which Commission action frequently has on the general
public, it is important that members, employees and special
government employees maintain unusually high standards of
honesty, integrity, impartiality and conduct. They must be
constantly aware of the need to avoid situations which might
result either in actual or apparent misconduct or conflicts of
interest and to conduct themselves in the official
relationships in a manner which commands the respect and
confidence of their fellow citizens.''
Chairman Schapiro, were you familiar with this rule at the
time that you received David Becker as your general counsel?
Ms. Schapiro. I can't tell you whether I had read it. I
have been in and out of government most of my career, so I am
generally aware of the ethics rules.
Mr. Mack. I only have a little bit of time. A moment ago,
you said you were familiar with the rule.
Ms. Schapiro. I am but you just asked me was I aware of it
at the time that David Becker arrived at the Commission. I am
telling you I can't recall whether I had reread the rule
recently at that point or not.
Mr. Mack. Throughout your time in the 1980's and 1990's,
you were familiar with this rule?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, I am generally aware of the ethics rules
and that it is each employee's obligation.
Mr. Mack. Regarding David Becker's work with the Madoff
case, do you believe that Mr. Becker was sufficiently aware of
the need to avoid actual or apparent conflicts of interest?
Ms. Schapiro. I want to be very careful. I believe he did
what he thought was appropriate and what was required of him,
going to the ethics counsel and seeking advice, getting that
advice and following it. Do I wish now that he had been more
sensitive to the potential for this issue to raise an
appearance of a conflict? Yes, I wish that had happened.
Mr. Mack. A few more questions. Do you think that you were
sufficiently aware of the need to avoid actual or apparent
conflicts of interest?
Ms. Schapiro. On my part, yes. I believe I am.
Mr. Mack. You said now a couple times, I think, that you
wished Mr. Becker would have recused himself. Is that because
of the fallout or do you really believe he should have recused
himself?
Ms. Schapiro. I believe, as I said, at the time from my
perspective, a close account from a long since deceased
relative didn't appear to me to raise a conflict of interest,
but I believe now, knowing what we know now, not because of the
fallout, though that is very real, but because if we could
connect the dots and look ahead and see what all the steps
would have been, yes, it would have been appropriate to have
recused.
Mr. Mack. Let me say this. Also earlier, you kind of
referred to the budget as kind of the reason why some of these
mistakes happened. How much does it cost to follow that rule?
Ms. Schapiro. That is a personal initiative. It doesn't
really cost anything.
Mr. Mack. So the argument about the budget as it pertains
to this rule, doesn't hold water? The argument about the budget
in your opening statement that you talked about really doesn't
pertain to this rule?
Ms. Schapiro. No, and I didn't mean to suggest in any way
that it did.
Mr. Mack. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. With that, I
recognize the ranking member of the full committee.
Mr. Cummings. I don't want that to be left hanging. I never
heard you, and I heard all of your testimony and I have read
your testimony, Ms. Schapiro, you never made that allegation. I
want to make that clear. I haven't heard it. I think it is a
very unfair statement.
Let me go on. Chairman Schapiro, I must tell you that when
I was talking to my staff--as a matter of fact, when we were
emailing back and forth at 4 a.m. this morning about this case,
because it does trouble me to a degree with regard to the
appearance of a conflict of interest.
I think when we hear what Ms. Chaitman had to say, that
shows you why, and I am sure you see it, we have to make sure
that we don't even have the appearance because what happens is
that every decision made by Mr. Becker then becomes suspect. It
is my favorite author, Covey who in the book, ``The Speed of
Trust,'' says that ``Once trust is lost, everything moves more
slowly.'' So I cannot begin to tell you how pleased I was when
you walked in here today and said we will go beyond what may be
required. That is so very, very important.
In my office, I have five people that whenever there is an
ethics question, they all have to agree and if one vetoes, it
is out the door. Why? Because the public is looking over our
shoulders, we want to do the right thing and we want to make
sure that it is right.
This has been a major wake up call, hasn't it. Here in this
committee, it is so easy for us to get into a gotcha mode, but
I must tell you, after I read about what you had done at the
SEC since you have been there, and having sat on this committee
and watched Mr. Cox and what he did with this organization and
how it went down under him, to see you come and try to sweep up
the mess, I must commend you.
The sad part about it is that one of these little incidents
basically can almost destroy that trust. Do you understand what
I am saying?
So I want you to commit to this committee, if you will.
Tell me, if these incidents come up again, tell us the
difference in how you might approach it. I understand what you
did. A fellow comes to you, he tells you, years ago, I got an
inheritance and he wants to know about a conflict. You listened
to it for a while. You have 3,800 employees to deal with, you
hear him and then you say, you know what, the expert on this is
the ethics guy. Make sure you check with him and he got an
opinion.
How would you deal with this differently now, looking
backward?
Ms. Schapiro. We have a new ethics counsel, first of all,
who is doing sort of a top to bottom review of our program, but
I think I need to work with all of our employees and
communicate with all of our employees about a heightened
sensitivity to issues like this.
I have worked so hard in the last 2 years to try to put
this agency back on the right path and to earn the trust of the
public. You are right, a small thing like this, not so small
thing like this, can really set us back. It is not fair to
3,800 hardworking employees.
It is just like when somebody mentioned in their opening
statement that employees had viewed pornography at the SEC. It
infuriates me because most people there are working their
hearts out day and night to try to do the right thing. It hurts
the reputation of every single one of us.
I have to work with our employees to make sure that we
increase their sensitivity to issues like this. I think with
our new ethics counsel and their review of the program and how
it might be strengthened, we will get some good advice. I think
the inspector general is likely to have some recommendations
that will be very helpful too.
Mr. Cummings. I read in your testimony where you talked
about technology and trying to keep up with these ever changing
transactions and how complicated they have become. I want to
make sure you have all the resources you need to address this
because so many of our constituents on both sides lost a lot of
money. Like Mr. Crimmins said, they need confidence to reenter
this system of stocks.
Ms. Schapiro. I agree.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the ranking member. With that, we
yield for 5 minutes to Mr. Ross of Florida.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As a kid, I always wanted to be a lawyer and fortunately I
found a law school that would take me. I went to law school and
I always had a deep seated respect for the sanctity of the law,
so much so that I was gratified that the American Bar
Association and my state bar association required not only a
course but an examination on the Code of Professional
Responsibility.
Ms. Schapiro, I understand that you too are a lawyer and
that even though you inherited quite a mess at a time of great
disarray at the SEC, my question is as a lawyer, when Mr.
Becker came to you, did you not think that a further
investigation should be made? As a lawyer, we do conflicts
checks, we make sure of that and it just seems to me that if
further inquiries had been made at that time, this might have
been avoided.
Ms. Schapiro. I don't disagree with you that if further
inquiries had been made, this might have been avoided. I can
only say what I said at the beginning, that when he raised it
with me, that he had a closed account, I didn't know if it had
been a net winner account, a net loser account or anything
else, from a deceased relative, it didn't raise for me a
conflict of interest question.
Mr. Ross. The fact that he asked for a waiver from his
subordinate is indicative of a problem, an inherent internal
problem there from an ethical standpoint.
Ms. Schapiro. I don't know that he asked for a waiver and I
again, I have no access to any contemporaneous documents of any
sort. He asked whether or not he had a conflict and was advised
that he did not have a conflict.
Mr. Ross. Did you know who was advising him that there was
no conflict?
Ms. Schapiro. It was the ethics counsel of the SEC at that
time who is no longer the ethics counsel.
Mr. Ross. As general counsel, that would be under him,
would it not?
Ms. Schapiro. I believe that is the case in most agencies.
Mr. Ross. Do you feel this would be avoided again in the
future?
Ms. Schapiro. I would love to say absolutely without a
doubt, but it would be my very strong hope that with a very
strong new ethics counsel that we hired from the Treasury
Department with long government experience, with a revamping of
our programs and with some additional education and training
for our people, I would hope and expect that we could avoid
this.
Mr. Ross. I think the American public needs that assurance
that credibility is going to be there.
Mr. Risinger, with regard to human resources, are your
employees all part of the general schedule in terms of
compensation?
Mr. Risinger. Congressman, actually we have a separate pay
schedule that we received from legislation of Congress back in
2001, 2002.
Mr. Ross. Were you subject to the pay freeze that the
President issued?
Mr. Risinger. Yes, we are.
Mr. Ross. That just really affected the cost of living
increases, didn't it?
Mr. Risinger. It does affect the cost of living increases.
Mr. Ross. What about within pay grade or step increases?
Did it affect that?
Mr. Risinger. We have a merit pay process that is the
equivalent of step increases for the rest of the government, so
that is technically affected by the pay freeze.
Mr. Ross. In your disciplinary procedures, let me ask you
this. What is the probationary period for any employee?
Mr. Risinger. It is generally a year.
Mr. Ross. One year. After 1 year, if there is a
disciplinary situation, is a presumption in favor of the
employee if they have been found in violation or alleged
violation of any personnel policies?
Mr. Risinger. The Federal laws that we have to follow in
terms of disciplining employees set out a number of standards
that we have to go through. There are actually 12 factors that
you have to look at when you are issuing discipline and one of
them is a factor that says, is this the level of discipline
that is necessary to stop the behavior and not more than that.
So there is a presumption that you are taking a preventive or
corrective step, not necessarily a punitive step.
Mr. Ross. These would have been the same procedures
employed in those involved in the viewing of pornography,
correct?
Mr. Risinger. That is correct.
Mr. Ross. Only one person was fired as a result of that?
Mr. Risinger. Of the cases we have had since 2005, 50
percent or 51 percent have either resigned, retired or have
proposed removals in place. We have had a number of suspensions
and reprimands as well.
Mr. Ross. What is the attrition rate in your agency?
Mr. Risinger. In the agency, in normal years, it is 7 to 8
percent. In the last couple of years because of the economy, it
has been in the 3\1/2\ to 4 percent range.
Mr. Ross. How does that compare with Federal agencies
overall?
Mr. Risinger. If we are talking just attrition in general,
I think that is pretty equivalent with other agencies.
Mr. Ross. Last question. Ms. Chaitman, with regard to the
Madoff situation specifically, I saw where you put them on
notice, what was going on. What action do you think would have
requested be done in order to avoid this conflict?
Ms. Chaitman. Under the statute, Congress mandated that the
SEC go into court and enforce the law against SIPC. That is
precisely what I asked Ms. Schapiro to do in my April 2, 2009
letter. In fact, when Ms. Schapiro testified on July 14th
before the Subcommittee on Capital Markets that she was going
to do everything in her power to provide the maximum SIPC
coverage for all investors, I assumed that she was, in fact,
going to follow my request. Now I have learned that in January
2009, the SEC had already agreed with denial of SIPC insurance
to more than half of the victims.
Mr. Ross. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you. Mr. Yarmoth of Kentucky for 5
minutes.
Mr. Yarmoth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks to all the witnesses for your testimony.
Over the last couple weeks I have been plowing my way
through the Financial Crisis Inquiry Report which is anything
but bedtime reading. It will not put you to sleep, I guarantee
you that--as a matter of fact, quite the contrary.
I am sure, Chairman Schapiro, that you are aware of what
the report concluded, particularly with regard to the SEC. I
was interested in an assessment of where you think you still
need to go to make sure that the failings in the system as it
concerned your agency won't recur?
Ms. Schapiro. As I have not looked at the report recently,
it obviously focused a lot on the failures of the SEC's
Consolidated Supervision Program for the five largest
investment banks, all of which during the financial crisis
essentially disappeared or converted to bank holding companies
under the regulation of the Fed. I think there are a lot of
lessons. I testified before the FCIC about the failures of the
agency with respect to that program.
There are a couple of things. One is that it was a
voluntary program, a voluntary regulatory program which, in my
view, doesn't work very well. We had insufficient resources
devoted to the regulation of the five largest investment banks.
We didn't have people with the right kind of expertise and I
think in some ways perhaps the most important thing is it
required a very different kind of supervision than the SEC has
traditionally done. It required prudential supervision as
opposed to the SEC's going onsite, doing an examination,
leaving and then perhaps bringing an enforcement case.
We didn't have the right mindset within the agency I think
for that kind of constant prudential oversight approach that
was really necessary. There was a lack of management focus, I
think, with respect to the program. There was a willingness to
believe what our people were being told by some of the leaders
in some of those financial institutions that failed, a lack of
skepticism which I think really hurt us as well. That program
was discontinued by my predecessor, Chairman Cox.
Mr. Yarmoth. With regard to the present situation, because
most people who observe the situation now, agree I think that
the situation in terms of too big to fail, the largest
investment banks have, in fact, gotten larger and that the wild
west atmosphere in terms of risk taking and so forth may not
have been curtailed at all. Is this a concern that you share?
Anyone else on the panel is welcome to respond as well.
Looking at the Wall Street profit picture and so forth, it
looks like there hasn't been a whole lot of change in behavior.
Ms. Schapiro. I do think I can speak perhaps most
particularly to the over-the-counter derivatives market where
we have a very direct responsibility, although much progress is
being made internationally with respect to accounting standards
and other prudential measures.
Getting the over-the-counter derivatives market into a
transparent marketplace so that regulators can understand the
buildup and concentration of risk in financial institutions I
think is going to be a very, very important piece of this. We
are working through those rules as is the Commodities Futures
Trading Commission. About half of them or so have been proposed
and I would expect while we are going to miss for some of them
the July 21st deadline, we will get them over the finish line
over the course of the rest of this year. Then there will be
implementation and phasing periods to go through. I think that
will make a difference.
I think the work the FDIC is doing with the Fed and others
on living wills and plans for financial institutions to wind
down their business appropriately will also make a very big
difference and then, of course, the capital requirements.
Mr. Yarmoth. A final question on that subject. We talked
about the problem potentially with resources and the dangers
that would ensue if your budget was cut. Are you confident that
the legislative action that was taken, Dodd-Frank, is
sufficient or that there are things that we yet need to do to
make sure that we don't have a situation recur as it did 2
years ago?
Ms. Schapiro. I think it makes large strides toward filling
the gaps that existed in the regulatory regime. I will say that
one of my concerns about the budget is that we don't have the
capacity to operationalize the rules that we are putting into
place--getting swap markets participants registered and the
swap data analyzed and market surveillance taken care of. Those
are things that we will have to put off, but I think it is
incumbent upon all of us as regulators who see these markets
close up to continue to tell Congress where we think the issues
are, where perhaps Dodd-Frank wasn't the right approach and
where we think there are still gaps.
Mr. Yarmoth. Thank you very much.
Mr. McHenry. I thank the gentleman. With that, I yield 5
minutes to the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Chair, I just went over to the Business Roundtable
and back, so I had the opportunity to see about one-third of
corporate America's profits in that room, almost all public
companies, probably all public companies except one, all
regulated by the SEC. I was there talking about impediments to
job creation.
I am going to give you a little relief from the question de
jour for a moment and ask, Dodd-Frank is not perfect and it was
not what you might call a low cost, low budget way to get
better performance with less cost. You have asked for 28
percent budget increase. In fact, if you had only the budget
increase necessary to do the work you were not doing as well as
you wanted to without all the new losses, what would that
budget increase be in your estimation? In other words, what
would it cost to do it right without piling on new regulations
when there is no question there have been problems properly
enforcing your existing portfolio?
Ms. Schapiro. Mr. Chairman, I would have to actually do the
math but maybe this helps.
When we did our 2012 request, we viewed 40 percent of the
positions and it was a total of 780 positions or 584 full-time
equivalents. We viewed 40 percent of those as going to our
ongoing programs--that is 312 positions--and 60 percent going
to Dodd-Frank in limitations, so hedge funds, oversight, over
the counter derivatives, municipal advisors, whistleblower
programs, clearing agencies and so forth.
Mr. Issa. To followup on that quickly, the transparency
elements that were asked for and agreed on by SEC and other
agencies never got into Dodd-Frank, so you don't have a common
mandate for reporting for transparency that had been worked out
in the conference and then didn't happen.
From this committee's standpoint we are interested, and you
can answer for the record if you are not completely ready
today, how much savings could you get if, in fact, there was
transparent interoperability both inward and whenever possible,
out to the public for oversight?
Ms. Schapiro. That is a great question and I would like to
answer it for the record because I do think it is important,
particularly when you have a market like the over-the-counter
derivatives market with two regulators in the same space, that
we try to be as consistent as we possibly can and leverage each
other as effectively as we can. If I can come back to you on
that, I would like to.
Mr. Issa. I appreciate that and I want to give you an
opportunity to be thoughtful because that is a major initiative
of this committee on a bipartisan basis in the last Congress
that didn't happen and we would like to renew it but would
certainly take your input.
In the remaining 2 minutes, I do want to ask, Mr. Becker's
conduct in retrospect was not a good idea. It certainly has not
led to confidence in the independence, transparency and non-
biased behavior of the SEC when we look through the tail light.
How can we know that the changes you are asking to be
reviewed are going to clearly eliminate anything like this in
the future? Where do we get the confidence in that?
Ms. Schapiro. Mr. Chairman, I think it is a fair question.
You and I have had many conversations and I try to be very
transparent and up front. We will obviously be public about
what our inspector general finds and what recommendations he
makes, what our new ethics counsel finds as she reviews our
program and recommendations she makes. We will be happy to come
back and talk to Congress about those findings and those
recommendations and see if we can develop some metrics that
would actually help us figure out whether we are getting it
right.
Mr. Issa. Your ethics counsel served under the general
counsel, a career position but under the general counsel,
correct?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mr. Issa. Would you consider moving that to be independent
direct report so that there would only be one person, a
political appointee like yourself, that would be between the
public and ethics questions rather than having a general
counsel who has a number of jobs?
You don't have to answer that today but I would like you to
consider that. In so many different HR situations in the
private sector, there is a clear independence of HR which is a
lot of the questions. A question of conflict was more than a
legal question, particularly when it included somebody who was
the boss of the person they went to for this 25 minute session
and clearance, so give that some thought. I won't ask for an
answer today.
Ms. Schapiro. I will do that.
Mr. Issa. Finally, as the time runs out, we on the
committee want to work to try to be helpful. We realize we only
have a portion of the portfolio that you see; you see much more
of the regulatory and financial oversight of another committee,
but the question I have for you is, in our conduct of this
investigation, as we look at Mr. Becker's total portfolio of
money, other things he may have done and how this might have
affected or not affected the Madoff Trust, will you promise
your cooperation to this committee today?
Ms. Schapiro. I will promise my cooperation to the fullest
extent I can. I don't know that I can compel him in any way to
do anything.
Mr. Issa. He has already come in voluntarily. We have the
ability to compel him but it is really making sure that we can
have a quick and transparent. Your IG would normally be willing
to share any information that was not directly related to a
criminal referral and so on. Anything you can do to pledge to
help us will allow us to move from where we are as quickly as
possible onto something else. That is why I ask today.
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, of course I will help.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. I thank you all for your indulgence
and I yield back.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly of Virginia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Schapiro, aren't you the chairman who appointed
the inspector general who, in fact, is charged with
investigating Mr. Becker?
Ms. Schapiro. No, sir. He was appointed by my predecessor.
Mr. Connolly. By your predecessor. That investigation
continues?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes. I requested the investigation.
Mr. Connolly. You requested the investigation?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. We just heard a line of questioning asking
you to look at a budget without additional regulation that was
burdensome and so forth. The Dodd-Frank legislation added some
regulation in areas that heretofore had not been regulated at
all, is that correct, Chairman Schapiro?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, that is absolutely correct.
Mr. Connolly. For examples, take derivates. How big are
derivates? What is the value of the derivatives market?
Ms. Schapiro. The last number I saw was $600 trillion, I
believe.
Mr. Connolly. I am sorry, did you say trillion?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. It is entirely unregulated until Dodd-Frank
passed, is that correct?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, it is largely unregulated.
Mr. Connolly. Whatever could go wrong with an entirely
unregulated $600 trillion market?
Ms. Schapiro. We saw some things that went wrong and
presumably that is what motivated the Dodd-Frank Act.
Mr. Connolly. So maybe that is one of those burdensome
additional pieces of regulation we are just going to have to
put up with. That burdensome additional regulation requires SEC
to staff up and to acquire the requisite expertise to enforce
the regulation you are now charged with, is that correct?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, we believe so. We are able to do the
rule writing that has been ongoing this year but to
operationalize those rules, we need additional staff.
Mr. Connolly. We heard Mr. Katz in his testimony say that
simply having more SEC staffers do the same thing would not
protect investors or promote capital formation. How many areas
of additional or new regulation are requiring you to ramp up in
terms of expert staffing?
Ms. Schapiro. We obviously have derivatives, hedge fund
regulation, we are creating a new whistleblower office although
that is work that we need more help with but it is not unknown
to us. We have to increase our oversight of credit rating
agencies under the act and we have to register a whole new
category of registrant in the municipal securities markets
called municipal advisors, so there are half a dozen or so new
areas for us to undertake regulation.
Mr. Connolly. Just listening to you tick off that list,
none of those sound like frivolous burdensome additional pieces
of regulation. They sound like thoughtful additions to the
regulatory framework in light of the biggest meltdown on Wall
Street in 80 years. Would you share that view?
Ms. Schapiro. I do think all of these areas are ones that
needed to be addressed. As we write the rules, we are working
very hard in collaboration with other regulators, but also with
the public, with investors and the industry to make sure that
we write as sensible rules as we possibly can.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Katz, would you share that view or is
this just another example of having simply ``more SEC staffers
doing the same thing?''
Mr. Katz. There is a quantitative nuance difference in what
I said and the way I think you characterized it. The agency has
an enormously large number of new areas of regulatory
authority. The question is, when you go about regulating hedge
funds, or regulating municipal securities markets, are you
going to regulate hedge funds exactly the way you regulate
investment advisors, which is arguably what they are, or
investment companies, which is sort of a close cousin?
My point is that if you look at the way the Commission has
regulated advisors, and regulated mutual funds, it hasn't been
terribly effective. If you take the same approach for hedge
funds, yes, that would be doing the same thing in those
approaches, even if it is a new substantive responsibility with
a new category of registrant.
Mr. Connolly. Would you say, Mr. Katz, that some of the
problem preceding the Wall Street meltdown in September 2008,
for example, had to do frankly with the quality of the
appointees, namely a whole bunch of people who didn't believe
in regulation in the first place and therefore, didn't do it?
Mr. Katz. I have to tell you that there is an old saying at
the SEC that the Commissioners decide the policy, but
ultimately, it is the staff that decides what it means and how
it gets done. One of the interesting things about the SEC, the
relationship between Commissioners and the staff is that it is
a close relationship. Because the Commission is a bipartisan
body, you are always going to get five people with diverging
points of view, some of whom will support the staff, some of
whom will disagree with the staff.
I can't think of an occasion where you had five
Commissioners on one side of the table and the staff on the
other side at loggerheads. That doesn't happen. You invariably
get some supportive of Commissioners, some Commissioners who
are critical and you also get that divergence of view among the
staff.
Financial regulation is never a question of identifying a
single right answer.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Katz. Unfortunately, my time
is up but I would love to pursue this further, but I certainly
believe that the narrative that somehow SEC is treading into
waters it has no business treading into is fallacious. If
anything, we needed more people guarding the hen house. If we
are going to talk about the fox guarding the hen house, that
may have been true in the 2008 period of time but is not true
today.
I thank the Chair.
Mr. Katz. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, if you might indulge me?
There is one very quick point I wanted to make that Mr. Yarmoth
brought up.
Mr. McHenry. Please.
Mr. Katz. That was the question of the consolidated
supervised entities regulatory process at the SEC. There is a
lot of confusion about that. There was a voluntary process. The
reason it was a voluntary process is not because of a
deregulatory attitude at the SEC; it is because the Commission
sought from Congress the authority to make it a mandatory
process as part of the Gramwich Bill, which eliminated glass
eagle.
Congress explicitly prohibited the Commission from making
it a mandatory process. The Commission had a weak hand, it
played the weak hand as best it could.
Mr. Platts. Thank the gentleman.
I will yield 5 minutes to myself.
I chair the Subcommittee on Government Organization,
Efficiency and Financial Management, so I am going to focus on
a related but slightly different area that relates to our
jurisdiction. I had the privilege of chairing the same
subcommittee from 2003 to 2007.
We had a subcommittee hearing July 2003 about the SEC,
about financial management at the SEC, about internal controls
and we heard testimony at that point they had just put in a new
financial management system in 2002. In the testimony of the
Executive Director, James McConnor at the time in July 2003, he
said we have this new system and we are going to be certified
basically in January 2004 for audited financial statements.
Here we are 7 years later, plus, and we are now talking about
the same thing, a new system using DOT Enterprise system to put
in place a new system.
Chairman Schapiro, I appreciate the changes you have made,
the COO, the new chief operating officer and other leadership
changes and systemic changes within the SEC. Why should the
American people believe when we were told 7 years ago we got it
right and we were going to be able to go forward; how is it
different today?
Ms. Schapiro. Thank you. My understanding is that was the
Momentum system, I believe, and it was deployed 9 or 10 years
ago and in the beginning, it did meet the agency's needs, but
then over time, the agency deferred upgrading over many years
and as a result, it began to lack the functionality that was
necessary to do the job. Gaps were created, work arounds were
developed and as a result, the SEC ended up with two material
weaknesses in its controls over financial reporting in our
audit which is a disgraceful position for the Securities and
Exchange Commission to be in.
With our new chief operating officer, our new chief
financial officer and our new information officer, we made the
decision that rather than incur the risks of developing a new
system at the SEC, perhaps not really a core competency for us,
that we would be better served by outsourcing financial
management.
We went through a process and identified the Department of
Transportation, which is an authorized Federal Share Service
provider used by the GAO for their financial management system,
and made the decision that the best way for us to remediate our
material weaknesses, generate the kind of reporting that we
need, minimize all these manual workarounds and all of this
would be to outsource to them. I think it is the right decision
for the taxpayer, I think it is the right decision for the SEC.
Mr. Platts. The followup related to that is, in the audit
that was done at the end of this past year, a clean opinion,
but failure to sign off on the internal controls, two related
questions.
First, how would you describe the internal effort to get
the clean opinion other than the internal controls and I ask in
the sense of in July 2003, SEC said it was a heroic end of the
year effort, it wasn't because we had a system in place, here
is the data, we are ready to go. Was there again a heroic end
of the year effort to be able to have that audit?
Ms. Schapiro. I think there were some heroics involved. I
can't compare to 2003 but I think we did put together a senior
team of people to really shepherd the process through. They
were diligent and they stuck with it, but they are also very
much onboard for this decision to outsource.
Mr. Platts. Interim controls, not until last year in Dodd-
Frank did it require the auditor to sign off on the internal
controls. For almost 20 years under the Federal Managers
Financial Integrity Act adopted in 1982, actually over 20
years, that we have to have strong internal controls. Although
that wasn't required to be signed off, I assume you are really
conscious of the fact that it wasn't a new requirement that you
have good internal controls, it was just a new requirement that
it be signed off by the auditor and whoever has been overseeing
those internal control systems, clearly were not fulfilling
their responsibilities?
Ms. Schapiro. Absolutely, and under our chief operating
officer, we will deal both with the audit issues with respect
to internal controls, but also the attendant business
processes, so it is not just a technology answer for us. It is
going to have to be business process, free engineering process
as well.
Mr. Platts. I am going to try to squeeze in two more
questions in 20 seconds.
In your testimony, you talk about the follow-on person that
you have for the audit recommendations of your IG and GAO. In
your testimony, you state that you appointed an audit followup
official and empowered her to ensure that agency managers are
held accountable for timely and appropriate followup.
How are they being held accountable? One thing that
frustrates me is when we find something that went wrong and I
have asked for many years now, was anyone disciplined, was
anyone fired for not doing what they were supposed to do? In
what way are they being held accountable?
Ms. Schapiro. We are very closely tracking audit
recommendations, both from GAO and from our inspector general.
I can tell you that in my 2 years as chairman, we have
successfully closed 350 inspector general recommendations
compared to 190 in the prior 2 years. We are aggressive about
doing it and I will tell you that in the inspector general's
semiannual report, he also talks about our progress with
respect to closing recommendations and whether there has been
any management disagreement with his recommendations. He is
quite on top of it and quite transparent.
Mr. Platts. I think that is critical going forward. My
subcommittee is especially going to look at staying on top of
those recommendations and special internal controls. It goes to
the broader issue discussed here about ethics and if you don't
have internal controls, that is the foundation for not just
good financial management, but for a good ethics environment.
Ms. Schapiro. I agree completely.
Mr. Platts. We, as a subcommittee, and partner with
Chairman McHenry here today, that is what we are going to be
looking at.
I will yield back and yield now to Ms. Speier from
California for 5 minutes.
Ms. Speier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank you all for your participation in this hearing. I
was particularly impressed by the testimony of Mr. Katz and Mr.
Crimmins.
I am somewhat surprised because I am looking at the title
of the hearing and the sign above the chairman's head that
reads, ``Can American Taxpayers Trust Today's SEC to Manage
Itself and Do Its Job.'' I thought it might be interesting to
substitute Congress and ask the same question and see if we
would fare as well.
Chairman Schapiro, having served over 2 years on the
Financial Services Committee, I have watched you and I think
you are truly committed to doing the right thing. Before you
came back as Chair, under Chairman Cox, the number of actual
enforcement actions at the SEC was reduced by 80 percent and
the number of disgorgement actions were reduced by 60 percent--
a stunning failure at a time when all the mischief was going on
with Wall Street.
We look back at the savings and loan crisis and we
recognize that referrals from various regulators, there were
10,000 of them, and of those 10,000, there were 1,000 that
turned into convictions and 500 people went to jail. These were
CEO level folks that went to jail.
The American people are looking at us, looking at Congress,
looking at you and saying, who is going to jail? Who is being
charged? The truth is there hasn't been a lot. My first
question is, have you made any referrals to the Justice
Department, to the U.S. attorney, as a result of the Wall
Street meltdown?
Ms. Schapiro. I am confident that we have. I guess I would
like to supplement the record, if I might, on that. I just
don't know the numbers or the details about it because, as you
know, we don't have criminal prosecution authority, although we
have continued to bring a relatively high number of cases and
some very large impact cases coming out of the financial crisis
in the past year.
Ms. Speier. So you will get back to the committee and
actually tell us how many referrals you have made?
Ms. Schapiro. I would be happy to.
Ms. Speier. The CEO of Galian is being tried now. Mr. Kupta
who is a director of a significant Wall Street firm, evidently
is being looked at as having shared insider information,
although he didn't appear to have acted on it. Have any actions
by the SEC been taken against those two individuals?
Ms. Schapiro. We filed a proceeding against Mr. Kupta last
week and we have filed multiple proceedings coming out of the
Galian investigation over the course of the last 6 months or
so.
Ms. Speier. In 2004 and 2005, the GAO said to the SEC that
it should take a look at and close its revolving door. The SEC
then reported back to the GAO that it had done that, although
the GAO now says that never happened. The reverse situation of
Mr. Becker is the fact that you have staff that work within the
SEC and then they are lured away by lucrative salaries outside
and oftentimes, the people that are lured away are lured away
by the companies that they were actually investigating.
We need to do something about the lack of a revolving door
and I want to know, first of all, have you made any policy
changes in an attempt to deter these revolving door practices?
Ms. Schapiro. We have instituted requirements that senior
employees seek ethics counseling before they leave the agency.
We require all employees to have a post employment briefing so
they don't violate ethics rules when they are leaving. Of
course we are subject to the governmentwide restrictions and we
have some unique to the SEC restrictions, but our inspector
general in looking at a specific revolving door incident has
given us last week some additional recommendations for
tightening up our rules. We are going to look at those very
seriously and I hope to go forward with them.
Ms. Speier. What about a cooling off period? Why not
require that persons within the Commission that have the
authority to make determinations and were investigating are not
allowed to be hired by those who they have investigated for a
period of 2 years?
Ms. Schapiro. I think there is a lot of appeal to that. The
only hesitation I have is that we are so dependent on getting
people to come to us, even if it is just for a few years just
to bring us current industry expertise, we have to get the
balance right.
Ms. Speier. I don't disagree, because that is precisely the
problem.
Mr. McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Chairman Schapiro, I want to get this out of the way. I
know there have been a number of questions about the David
Becker conflict of interest question. I just have a couple of
questions, yes or no. I want to proceed with it because I have
some other issues I do want to touch on beyond this.
After David Becker told you that he received proceeds of a
closed Madoff account, did you suggest that he recuse himself
from the Madoff case, yes or no?
Ms. Schapiro. I am sorry, the premise isn't exactly right.
My recollection is that he told me that his mother had a Madoff
account before she died and that it had been closed. I don't
honestly recall whether he told me he had received proceeds or
not. He may well have, I just can't recall. As you know, I
haven't been able to look at anything.
Mr. McHenry. But he brought this up that he received
proceeds from a Madoff account?
Ms. Schapiro. He brought up that his mother had had a
Madoff account.
Mr. McHenry. In light of that, did you suggest he recuse
himself?
Ms. Schapiro. No, I didn't.
Mr. McHenry. Did you suggest that he settle with the
Trustee as other Madoff investors were doing at the time?
Ms. Schapiro. No.
Mr. McHenry. Did you suggest that Mr. Becker disclose his
interest to other SEC staff or Commissioners who relied on his
advice?
Ms. Schapiro. I did not. I expected him to go to the Ethics
Office and get ethics counsel and follow their advice.
Mr. McHenry. You are aware that the ethics counsel of the
SEC reported to the general counsel?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, although the Ethics Officer is a career
employee.
Mr. McHenry. But his direct report.
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mr. McHenry. Did you suggest that Becker do any research to
determine the amount or the character of interest that he had?
Ms. Schapiro. No.
Mr. McHenry. Later when Becker was providing advice about
the net equity evaluation method, did you direct Mr. Becker to
take any actions with respect to this potential conflict of
interest?
Ms. Schapiro. No, because it didn't occur to me that this
long ago closed account would be in any way impacted, it just
didn't occur to me.
Mr. McHenry. So he didn't disclose to you that he was, in
fact, the trustee who closed the account?
Ms. Schapiro. I don't recall.
Mr. McHenry. I understand. I am just trying to get to the
heart of this. This raises major questions and I think you can
understand the public's interest and the investors' interest.
To that same degree, when Mr. Becker was filing briefs in
court that took recommendations in terms of the net equity
position valuation method, you didn't direct Mr. Becker to
recuse himself?
Ms. Schapiro. No.
Mr. McHenry. OK. I just wanted to get those out of the way.
Obviously we care deeply about transparency and disclosure both
here in Congress and with regulators.
Chairman Schapiro, Mr. Risinger, thank you for your public
service, but we need to get to the heart of this issue. I think
that is why we are asking these questions today and why I am.
Ms. Schapiro. I agree, Mr. Chairman. It is why I have asked
the inspector general to do a review, so we can get all the
information.
Mr. McHenry. The point is you said you wish you had known
then what you know now and had you asked any of these
questions, you would have known it then. That is at the heart
of this issue. That is what is disappointing and of great
concern in terms of public policy.
Ms. Chaitman, in dealing with this Madoff valuation
question, I understand the insurance piece, I do, would it have
changed your dealings with SEC's legal counsel had you known
that Mr. Becker was the trustee of a Madoff account?
Ms. Chaitman. If I had known that, I would have, myself,
demanded that he recuse himself and that the SEC take steps to
clarify its position because as I say, both Congressman Garrett
and I believe that the SEC has taken an illegal position in
supporting SIPC. If I had know that Mr. Becker had a personal
interest, I certainly would have asked Ms. Schapiro to do
something about it.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
Mr. Katz, this raises a larger management issue. We are
talking about capital formation, we are trying to be the
world's markets, which we have been. When you have a
dysfunctional agency like this with these management problems
that you described, you said the SEC has never engaged in
serious self examination of its performance or used appropriate
measures of performance. Is that still the case?
Mr. Katz. Not having seen this Boston consulting group
report that is apparently due out, I think yes, that is the
case. It has been a long time since the agency took a hard look
at itself in the mirror.
Mr. McHenry. My time has expired. With that, I recognize
Ms. Maloney for 5 minutes.
Votes have been called on the floor, we have 11 minutes
remaining in the votes, so I would defer to my colleagues on
that side of the aisle if they want to work something out in
terms of time.
The gentlelady is recognized now for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. First of all, I would like to welcome all the
panelists and thank the chairman for this important hearing.
Certainly honesty and transparency is very important in
government.
I would like to get further clarification from Chairman
Schapiro. As I understand, the controversy around Mr. Becker's
alleged conflict of interest is about an SEC decision that
appears to be against his financial interest. As I understand
it, prior to Mr. Becker's return to the SEC, he was working at
a private law firm, correct?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, he was.
Mrs. Maloney. When he arrived at the SEC, you testified he
took steps to notify both you and the SEC's ethics counsel of
his inheritance from his mother which had been liquidated long
before Madoff's ponzi scheme had been discovered, correct?
Ms. Schapiro. That is my understanding.
Mrs. Maloney. The ethics official said it was OK for him to
work on Madoff-related issues. That is what is in the memo and
information that I read, that the Ethics Committee is there to
be consulted, he consulted them and they said there was no
conflict, that is fine, go to work. Is that your recollection?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes, I believe.
Mrs. Maloney. Your memory is the same as the Ethics
Committee. Chairman Schapiro, it appears that the basic
question the SEC faced was whether to support an asset
valuation method used by the Madoff Trustee called the cash-in,
cash-out method, or a different evaluation method used by
several law firms called the last statement method. Is that
correct?
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mrs. Maloney. Under the first method, Mr. Becker's
inheritance would be subject to clawback litigation and under
the second method, his inheritance would not have been subject
to clawback. The SEC choose to support the first, the decision
was against the financial interest of Mr. Becker. This meant
that the Trustee could sue Mr. Becker and his brothers to
recover some of his mother's inheritance which is exactly what
happened, correct?
Ms. Schapiro. That is right. The SEC did take the position
that was cash-in, cash-out in constant dollars to reflect that
some very elderly people who had long held Madoff accounts
would be able to get some more money from SIPC under that
formulation, but it was not the final statement approach that
you mentioned that would have potentially prevented the
clawback.
Mrs. Maloney. But the decision was to allow the clawback,
so I assume he participated in a decision allowing the clawback
that was against his financial interest?
Ms. Schapiro. The decision to clawback is one of the
Trustee, not of the SEC.
Mrs. Maloney. The SEC did not make that decision, the
Trustee made that decision?
Ms. Schapiro. The Trustee makes that decision.
Mrs. Maloney. The Trustee makes that decision, but it was a
decision that affected Mr. Becker.
Ms. Schapiro. Yes.
Mrs. Maloney. I would like either you or Mr. Crimmins to
answer. Basically, Mr. Becker or the SEC sided with the Madoff
Trustee. The SEC actually took action that was potentially
detrimental to Mr. Becker's financial interest and it exposed
him to a potential litigation worth roughly $1\1/2\ million
because that was the proceeds, correct, in addition to the
$500,000. Everybody seems to be criticizing Mr. Becker, but Mr.
Becker and the SEC's decision appears to have been completely
against his financial interest.
I understand you have an IG report coming out and that
eventually will clarify things more, but in first reading the
information, it appears that the decision made was against him
and against his financial interest and what he or the SEC
thought was the right way to go.
If the SEC had supported the banks' interpretation or the
law firm's interpretation instead of the Trustee's
interpretation, Mr. Becker might not have had any exposure at
all, is that correct? Mr. Crimmins.
Mr. Crimmins. The point is that the $500,000 that Dorothy
Becker invested was going to come back. The $1\1/2\ million, as
you indicated, was the Madoff fictitious profit was going to
Picard's claim as the Trustee, independent reporting to the
court, not to the SEC, that dealt with a little bit of
difference is whether there should be some modest rate of
return, whether there should be some adjustment for inflation.
That is still not finally determined. A month after Becker
has left the agency, it is a small amount and to an individual
who was compensated at $3 million a year, roughly, and gave
that up to go work in the public service, it is totally
inconsequential and I would respectfully submit to the
subcommittee, be a distraction.
Mrs. Maloney. May just complete with one observation for 2
seconds.
Basically, if someone in Mr. Becker's position wanted to
help himself financially, he would have taken the opposite
point of view than the one that he took or the one that the SEC
took.
Mr. McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired. We have
votes on the floor, Madam.
Mrs. Maloney. I look forward to the IG's report.
Mr. McHenry. I think we all do. I appreciate the gentlelady
wrapping up. We do have votes on the floor.
I want to thank the panel.
Ms. Schapiro. Mr. Chairman, I am so sorry, I wanted to just
say one thing. I want to make it very clear, I don't recall
specifically whether Mr. Becker told me he had inheritance from
the account or whether his mother had had an account and I made
that assumption. Because it is 2 years ago, I just don't
recall. I want to be so clear about that.
Mr. McHenry. We will let the record reflect that.
Ms. Schapiro. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. Certainly. I think it is important the record
accurately reflect what happened. The findings of this hearing
are very important. We are interested in management issues. The
Members certainly took a specific direction today dealing with
this conflict of interest of Mr. Becker, the general counsel
for the SEC because of the fact he was a trustee of a Madoff
account a few years before, and the decision, as Ms. Chaitman
mentions, that was a very different valuation than was existent
under law and the decision he made that in some ways benefited
him disproportionately than the other two methods.
In terms of the budget, I think it is appropriate that SEC
have a sufficient budget and we have strong management
practices to make sure there is transparency and disclosure,
safety and soundness in investing in our markets.
In the wake of the Enron scandal, in February 2003, the SEC
was given the largest spending increase in its history. The GAO
said in testimony before this subcommittee in 2003, it was a 45
percent increase at that time. This was supposed to prevent a
future crisis, yet Madoff still occurred and the excuses cannot
always be based on money. We would ask that we tighten up
management practices, do what is appropriate in terms of
bringing technology to the fore and do the best possible of any
regular.
It isn't wrong to use a crisis to request more. It is wrong
to use a crisis just to request more money. So with that, the
committee stands adjourned. Thank you for your testimony.
[Whereupon, at 3:40 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


