- EUROPE'S SOVEREIGN DEBT CRISIS: CAUSES, CONSEQUENCES FOR THE UNITED STATES AND LESSONS LEARNED

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EUROPE'S SOVEREIGN DEBT CRISIS: CAUSES, CONSEQUENCES FOR THE UNITED
STATES AND LESSONS LEARNED

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 21, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-158

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

75-302 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 21, 2012...................................     1

WITNESSES

The Honorable Timothy F. Geithner, Secretary of The Treasury
Oral Statement...............................................     7
Written Statement............................................    10
The Honorable Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman Board of Governors of The
Federal Reserve System
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    18

APPENDIX

The Honorable Darrell Issa, A Member of Congress from the State
of California, Hearing Preview Statement.......................    63
The Honorable Elijah E. Cummings, A Member of Congress from the
State of Maryland, Opening Statement...........................    64
The Honorable Dan Burton, A Member of Congress from the State of
Indiana, Opening Statement.....................................    66
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, A Member of Congress from the
State Virginia, Opening Statement..............................    68
Responses to the Questions submitted for the record..............    70

EUROPE'S SOVEREIGN DEBT CRISIS: CAUSES, CONSEQUENCES FOR THE UNITED
STATES AND LESSONS LEARNED

----------

Wednesday, March 21, 2012,

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:30 a.m. in room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Darrell E. Issa
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, Burton, Turner, McHenry,
Jordan, Lankford, DesJarlais, Gowdy, Farenthold, Kelly,
Cummings, Maloney, Norton, Kucinich, Connolly, Quigley and
Welch.
Staff Present: Kurt Bardella, Majority Senior Policy
Advisor; Brian Blase, Majority Professional Staff Member;
Robert Borden, Majority General Counsel; Molly Boyl, Majority
Parliamentarian; Lawrence J. Brady, Majority Staff Director;
John Cuaderes, Majority Deputy Staff Director; Gwen D'Luzansky,
Majority Assistant Clerk; Linda Good, Majority Chief Clerk;
Tyler Grimm, Majority Professional Staff Member; Peter Haller,
Majority Senior Counsel; Ryan M. Hambleton, Majority
Professional Staff Member; Christopher Hixon, Majority Deputy
Chief Counsel; Mark D. Marin, Majority Director of Oversight;
Rafael Maryahin, Majority Counsel; Kristin L. Nelson, Majority
Professional Staff Member; Laura L. Rush, Majority Deputy Chief
Clerk; Jeff Solsby, Majority Senior Communications Advisor;
Noelle Turbitt, Majority Staff Assistant; Rebecca Watkins,
Majority Press Secretary; Jaron Bourke, Minority Director of
Administration; Kevin Corbin, Minority Deputy Clerk; Carla
Hultberg, Minority Chief Clerk; Adam Koshkin, Minority Staff
Assistant; Lucinda Lessley, Minority Policy Director; Leah
Perry, Minority Chief Oversight Counsel; Jason Powell, Minority
Senior Counsel; Steven Rangel, Minority Senior Counsel; Dave
Rapallo, Minority Staff Director; and Mark Stephenson, Minority
Director of Legislation.
The Chairman. The Committee will come to order.
The Oversight Committee mission statement is that we exist
to secure two fundamental principles. First, Americans have the
right to know the money Washington takes from them is well
spent. Second, Americans deserve an efficient, effective
government that works for them. Our duty on the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee is to protect these rights. Our
solemn responsibility is to hold Government, I repeat,
Government, accountable to taxpayers because they have a right
to know what they get from their Government. Our job is to work
tirelessly in partnership with citizen watchdogs to deliver the
facts to the American people and genuine reform to the Federal
bureaucracy.
Today's hearing is most important because, in fact, since
2009 Europe has been struggling to emerge from a severe
sovereign debt crisis brought about by massive government
spending and a weak economy. America could say the same: that
we, in fact, have been struggling since 2009 to emerge from a
severe sovereign debt crisis brought about by massive
Government debt and, in fact, a weak economy.
But that is not the issue today. The issue is not America's
economy or sovereign debt; the issue is if the European Union
in international monetary funds spends hundreds of billions of
Euros to aid Greek, Ireland, Portugal, the E.U. and, with IMF
assistance, if, in fact, America will be drawn into this
problem. Can America afford one sovereign debt crisis such as
Greece?
I believe, after over a year of watching the Greece on-
again, off-again crisis, there is a certain assumption that
eventually it will be solved, a certain assumption that we know
what we are doing, a certain assumption that, in fact, it will,
in time, be solved.
Clearly, this hearing, which builds on the good work of
Chairman Patrick McHenry, is, in fact, to ask a greater
question. The greater question is: what if we could go beyond
Greece. Assumptions are that, between hedging and, in fact,
other means, that the problem is manageable. Our obligation is
to say what if it is not.
Our witnesses today are the two most important individuals
at the center of this. Our Federal chairman certainly has a
good understanding of our economy, what the Federal's
capabilities are, and ultimately what he can do if, in fact,
things go wrong.
Secretary Geithner, who has been a loyal servant of the
American people both at the Federal Reserve in New York and now
in his current position, also has been intimately involved in
both the U.S. crisis and in matters of Europe.
So today our primary question will be, in fact, on what
U.S. exposure truly is, what the impact to taxpayers could be.
We will try not to look to the past; we will try to look to the
future. But let us understand that, while we have a budget
deficit of more than a trillion dollars, while our debt in the
United States is 100 percent of GDP, while, in fact, we are
still remembering the good and the very bad of TARP, we are
still remembering both of the individuals before us today came
and were involved in saying what TARP would be spent for, none
of which came to pass. Ultimately, as Secretary Geithner has
recently said, he does not plan on needing a bailout. He does
not anticipate it.
Our obligation on this Committee is to anticipate and to
plan; therefore, the questions today for our two esteemed
witnesses will be: what is plan B? I repeat, what is plan B if
what you are managing is not manageable?
With that I would like to recognize the Ranking Member for
his opening statement.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
calling this hearing.
I want to say to you, Secretary Geithner and Chairman
Bernanke, I thank you for your service to our Country, and I
thank you on behalf of a grateful Congress and a grateful
Nation.
Mr. Chairman, this is a very important issue, addressing
the financial crisis in Europe and the lessons that can be
learned here at home from it.
Since the last hearing we held on this topic in December,
the European officials have taken decisive action to
reestablish financial stability in the Eurozone. American
officials have helped diplomatically through consultation,
through our participation in the IMF, and through the Central
Bank support. No one is declaring mission accomplished, but the
signs of improvement are impossible to miss.
Unfortunately, it appears that some in the majority see the
Euro crisis as a justification for imposing extreme austerity
measures here at home. Yesterday the House Republicans released
a budget proposal to cut $5.3 trillion over the next ten years
to end Medicare as we know it and shift costs to seniors and
give further tax rates to corporations.
Today the majority will seek to draw parallels between
Greece's financial troubles and those of the United States. In
our last meeting, a majority witness called Greece a ``wake-up
call'', arguing that the United States should shred our
Nation's safety net and cut taxes to avoid Greece's fate.
Don't believe it. While strong medicine is needed, it is
the banks that caused the financial crisis who should be taking
the hit.
What we have learned from Greece is that austerity measures
imposed during an economic downturn have very real negative
consequences for working people, hard-working people, while
they leave economic elite unscathed. Nevertheless, some
Republicans believe we should implement similar extreme
austerity measures here at home in the form of deep across-the-
board spending cuts.
Secretary Geithner, on past occasions you warned against
such actions. For example, you said this, ``We need to stay
intensely focused on straightening our economy in the short
term. We can't cut our way to growth. Severe austerity now
would be very damaging.''
But how Republicans have ignored this key point. Different
problems require different solutions. In the case of the United
States, economists largely agree that the housing bubble and
risky investment products created by Wall Street were the key
causes of our economic collapse. As Mark Zandi, chief economist
of the Moody's Analytics Link, stated: Housing is ground zero
for the economy's problems, high unemployment, and lost jobs.
Although the recent $25 billion settlement with five of
these banks is commendable, the sad truth is that millions of
borrowers will not receive the relief they so desperately need
because one important entity refuses to cooperate. The Federal
Housing Finance Agency, the FHFA, Fannie Mae's and Freddie
Mac's regulator, will not allow them to participate in the
settlement, reportedly because much of the relief would be in
the form of principal reduction.
If we want to ensure that our economy at home is strong
enough to weather the Euro crisis, turbulence from slowdowns in
other foreign economies, we must end the housing crisis here at
home. We must have principal reduction as one tool for
borrowers who are underwater and who owe more than their homes
are worth--in many cases through no fault of their own, by the
way. FHFA's own data shows that principal reduction would save
taxpayers billions of dollars. But Edward DeMarco, the agency's
acting director, maintains what happens to be an ideological
opposition. It is my hope, as we examine the Euro crisis, we
keep in mind what should be our ultimate goal: rebuilding and
protecting a strong economy for the millions of middle class
Americans here in the United States.
Mr. Chairman, with that I ask unanimous consent to enter
the March 20th Washington Post article entitled: The Man
Blocking America's Recovery into the record.
The Chairman. How is this germane to today's hearing?
Mr. Cummings. It addresses this issue.
The Chairman. We can include it as extraneous material, but
it was really germane to the hearing we had in New York and
would also suggest it be placed in the record for that hearing.
Mr. Cummings Thank you very much.
The Chairman. You are welcome.
We now go to the chairman of the Subcommittee, Mr. Patrick
McHenry, for his opening statement.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
calling this hearing today.
Nearly four years ago Americans witnessed domestic and
global markets deteriorate, resulting in millions of job losses
and unprecedented measures by Government and central banks to
prop up financial institutions. As the United States economy
remains vulnerable in the midst of a very shaky recovery, just
across the Atlantic our European friends fight to fend off a
second wave of economic and financial turmoil. Their lesson is
one for the world, as well as the United States.
In December my Subcommittee invited officials from the
Federal Reserve and the United States Treasury to explain the
economic unrest facing Europe and what actions they would
consider in reaction to it and what measures remain at their
disposal as events change day by day.
At the time the Federal Reserve had just authorized foreign
currency liquidity swap lines with five central banks to bide
time for a political solution in Europe and for
recapitalization purposes, as well. Daily headlines read of
liquidity injections to the tune of billions and trillions of
Euros swaying stock markets wildly.
In December the ECB had a second auction known as a long-
term refinancing operation to provide European banks with over
500 million Euros in cheap loans and a credit event was
declared in Greece. The credit event in Greece is one of
particular concern to markets around the world.
As we look ahead, the European story is far from over.
European leaders continue to strengthen the weak framework of
the E.U. to substantiate their rescue efforts, and financial
markets become more dependent on the continued willingness of
the central banks to use their balance sheets to rescue the
global economy.
My understanding is that the economic storm facing Europe
influences U.S. markets. I commend Chairman Issa for inviting
Chairman Bernanke and Treasury Secretary Geithner here to
Congress to address this critical issue.
I am interested to hear how our Nation's foremost economic
experts and authorities view the Euro's own crisis, the impact
it can have on the United States' economy, and our pension
funds and market participants, as well.
With that, I would like to yield the balance of my time to
the former Chair, Mr. Burton.
Mr. Burton. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
The Chairman said in his opening remarks that he wanted to
find out if the United States possibly could be drawn into the
Euro crisis. I have been to Europe. I have been all over the
place over there, including Brussels. I am convinced that we
are already drawn in. So I would like to find out today how
deeply we are drawn in and how severe the problem could be,
especially if the Euro is devalued. And I want to find out if
we are underwriting or bailing out the Europeans, and to what
extent.
When I was in Brussels I found out that the invitation to
us printing money with QE1 and QE2, the European central banks
are doing that over there, as well, so they are inflating their
money supply.
Let me first say, according to the Congressional Research
Office, our exposure to Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal,
Spain, and France and Germany is $641 billion for those, and
for France and Germany it is $1.2 trillion, so there is that
exposure already.
Regarding the currency swaps with the European central
banks, including Canada, Switzerland, Japan, and the United
Kingdom, we have as of February 15 $109 billion is outstanding
on those lines. As I said before, if there is a devaluation of
the Euro, what does that do to our exposure and how much is
that going to cost the United States?
In addition to that, Treasury Secretary Geithner has
dismissed reports that we might participate in a special IMF
European aid fund, and I would like to know if that is accurate
and if that is going to be true in the future. And the Obama
Administration increased our contribution to the IMF, which is
currently 17 percent of the IMF's overall budget, and the IMF
has indicated it is going to need another $500 billion.
So what I want to find out is: how much exposure are we
facing right now? And how much exposure are we likely to have
added on to us? And are we going to be underwriting the
European financial crisis, and what impact that is going to
have on the United States of America?
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. I thank both the
Subcommittee chairman on TARP and Financial Services and our
former full Committee chairman.
With that, we go to the Ranking Member of the Financial
Services and TARP Subcommittee, Mr. Quigley, for five minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing, as we know, builds on the two previous
hearings we held before the TARP Subcommittee, of which I am
honored to be the Ranking Member.
As in December, today's hearing will examine the European
debt crisis and what it means to U.S. taxpayers in our economy.
As Mr. Douglas Elliott of the Brookings Institute testified
in December, in 2010 our exports to the E.U. totaled $400
billion. We have over $1 trillion of foreign direct investments
in the E.U. The global market is not what it was ten years ago,
or, for that matter, five years ago. The complexity of the
market is such that there can be no question a healthy European
economy is in the best interest of the United States and the
American taxpayer.
The plain truth is: when the earthquake of a financial
crisis hits, every nation feels its aftershocks, including here
at home. That is why I am encouraged by the work Secretary
Geithner and Chairman Bernanke have done to engage the E.U. I
am also cautiously optimistic by the steps taken by Europe's
political and financial leaders since our Subcommittee hearing
in an effort to add stability to the European financial system.
European leaders created a fiscal compact under which 25 nation
states agreed to new rules aimed at controlling deficits. And
Greece recently restructured its debt. The European Central
Bank has also worked to contain a crisis by purchasing bonds
and providing loans.
These recent actions have lessened the pressure on our
financial market here at home; however, it is important to
recognize that the Eurozone has a long and challenging road
ahead. Countries like Greece, Italy, and others need to
implement a balanced approach to their short-term and long-term
financial challenges.
Some have likened our economy to Greece's, but I believe
that the U.S., unlike Greece, controls its own destiny. We need
a balanced approach to get our own fiscal house in order. We
have to put everything on the table, but we also have to ensure
that in reducing the deficit we don't torpedo our recovery.
The truth is that the mission of government matters, but
reckless decisions have made it harder to fulfill that mission.
We cannot allow politics to get in the way of what is right. We
need to take a balanced approach both in spending and revenue-
generating measures.
Reality is that now is not the time to pull the rug from
those who need the help most, but a long-term deficit reduction
plan is not incompatible with economic growth.
We also must not forget politics, not economics, nearly saw
the U.S. Government default on its debt in early August. We
cannot allow politics to stand in the way of addressing the
home foreclosure crisis, ensuring our Nation's seniors have
health care, and low-income children have food to eat.
As Ranking Member Cummings addressed in his statement,
strengthening our economy must be our number one priority, but
we cannot forget about the essential links between our economic
and Europe's.
I look forward to hearing the testimony of the Secretary
and the Chairman on this important issue.
Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
Before I introduce the witnesses, I want to caution the
Committee. It is our policy when we invite guests, I joked with
them both beforehand, to tell them what the Committee hearing
is about, to expect that they will have answers for our
questions, not just answers irrelevant of our questions. But,
at the same time, we have an expectation that today's hearing
is primarily and technically exclusively about the European
debt crisis and how it might affect America.
So although by definition there is a ripple effect and you
may want to ask broader questions, if you ask questions that
are not germane to the subject for which we have invited our
guests, it will be their option whether to say they were
prepared or not prepared to answer them. We want our witnesses
to be fully prepared. We only asked them here under that fairly
narrow set of circumstances.
Now, Mr. Secretary and Mr. Chairman, you are very good
beyond that, so I won't be surprised if you may choose to
answer questions, but I am cautioning all of our people that
you are our guests. We do not intend to have you asked
questions and expected to answer them if they are well outside
the scope of today's hearing.
With that, pursuant to our Committee rules, all witnesses
must be sworn. Would you please rise and take the oath.
Please raise your right hands. Do you solemnly swear or
affirm that the testimony you are about to give will be the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
Secretary Geithner. I do.
Mr. Bernanke. I do.
The Chairman. Let the record reflect all witnesses answered
in the affirmative.
Please take your seats.
A little bit like yesterday, with Secretary Chu, we would
like you to stay as close to five minutes as possible. We would
like you to know that your opening statements, of course, are
placed in the record in their entirety, along with extraneous
material you may choose to enter after the hearing.
With that, I am not sure we did a coin toss, but I will go
from left to right.
Mr. Secretary, you are recognized for five minutes.

WITNESSES STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF TIMOTHY F. GEITHNER

Secretary Geithner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Cummings and members of the Committee. Thanks for giving
me a chance to come talk to you today about the crisis in
Europe and its risks and implications for the United States.
This has been going on for more than two years, of course, and
we welcome the attention you are bringing to this important
question.
Europe is a key strategic and economic partner of this
Country, and we have an enormous stake in the success of
Europe's efforts to avert a catastrophic financial crisis.
Our economy is gradually getting stronger, but, of course,
we still face a lot of tough challenges here in the United
States. Among those challenges, of course, unemployment is
still very high, the housing market is still very weak. We
still have a long way to go to repair the damage caused by our
crisis, but we also face a challenging and uncertain global
economic environment with the risks around Iran adding to the
pressure on oil prices and Europe facing a long and difficult
crisis.
Europe accounts for about 18 percent of global GDP. It is
the major source of financing for many emerging economies and
accounts for about 15 percent of U.S. exports of goods and
services, with a larger portion of the exports of many of our
trading partners. When growth slows in Europe, it affects
growth around the world. And when the fears of a broader
European crisis have been most acute, as they were in the
summer and fall of 2011, and earlier in the spring and summer
of 2010, then financial markets fell around the world, damaging
confidence and slowing the momentum of recovery here in the
United States and around the world.
Now, over the past few months, with our active
encouragement and support, Europe's leaders have put in place a
more comprehensive strategy to address the crisis. This
strategy has the following key elements:
First, it involves economic reforms, very tough reforms in
the member states to restore fiscal sustainability to
restructure recapitalized banking systems to improve the
competitiveness and growth prospects of their economies.
Second, it includes broader reforms to the institutions of
Europe, including the Fiscal Compact that establishes stronger
disciplines on the fiscal policies of the member states to
limit future deficits and debt as a share of GDP. It involves a
coordinated strategy to recapitalize, as I said, the European
financial system with government backstop for funding. And it
involves a firewall, a financial firewall of funds to provide
financial support to governments that are undertaking reforms
so they can help retain access to financing on sustainable
terms.
These reforms have been aided by a number of actions by the
European Central Bank, and together these efforts have helped
calm financial tensions somewhat, but Europe is still at the
initial stages of what will be a long and difficult path of
reforms. And for these reforms to work, policy makers in the
Euro area are going to have to carefully calibrate the mix of
financial support and the pace of consolidation, fiscal
consolidation, ahead.
These reforms, these tough economic reforms, are not going
to work without financial support that enables governments to
borrow at affordable rates. And if every time economic growth
comes in a little weaker than expected governments are forced
to cut spending or raise taxes to compensate for the impact on
deficits, this would risk a self-reinforcing negative spiral of
growth-killing austerity.
The most important unfinished business of this broader
financial strategy in Europe is to build a stronger financial
firewall. European leaders are now reviewing options for how to
expand the combined financial capacity of their two funds so
they can make it clear to markets that they have the resources
available on a scale that is commensurate with the needs they
might face were the crisis to intensify in the future.
As you know, the IMF has played an important role in
Europe. IMF has provided advice on the design and reforms, a
framework for public monitoring of progress, and financial
support for programs in Greece, Ireland, and Portugal. The
financial support has come alongside a much larger amount of
financial support from the European nations, themselves, as is
appropriate.
It is in the interest of the United States that the IMF
continue its efforts in Europe, but the IMF resources cannot
substitute for a strong and credible European firewall. The IMF
has played a major role in every major post-war financial
crisis, while consistently returning to the United States any
resources with interest that it has temporarily drawn upon. Our
premise for the IMF are backed by very strong financial
safeguards, and in more than 60 years of experience dealing
with financial crises we have never lost a penny.
Over the past 18 months the crisis in Europe has taken some
of the wind out of our recovery. We are encouraged by the
progress that our European colleagues have been making. We hope
they are able to build on these efforts in the coming weeks to
put in place a more durable foundation for economic growth and
a stronger financial firewall. We do not want to see Europe
weakened by a protracted crisis, so we are going to continue to
work very closely with them and with the IMF to encourage
further progress.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Secretary Geithner follows:]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Chairman Bernanke?

STATEMENT OF BEN S. BERNANKE

Mr. Bernanke. Thank you, Chairman Issa and Ranking Member
Cummings, for inviting me. As you know, for about two years
developments in Europe have had an important influence on
global financial markets and the global economy. High debt,
large deficits, and poor growth prospects have led to big
increases in sovereign borrowing costs, concerns about fiscal
sustainability, first for Greece but subsequently for other
countries, as well.
Pessimism about countries' fiscal and economic situations
has, in turn, undermined confidence in the strength of European
financial institutions.
This has had an impact on the U.S. economic. The European
Union accounts for about one-fifth of U.S. exports of goods and
services, and we have seen those exports under-perform. Of
course, Europe also affects the rest of the world.
Financial strains have been evident. During times when
financial conditions in Europe were the most turbulent, we saw
a global retreat from riskier assets. In the United States
those pullbacks from risks decreased stock prices, increased
the cost of issuing corporate debt, and affected consumer
business confidence. We have also seen our own financial
institutions thought to have substantial exposures to Europe
see their stock prices fall and their credit spreads widen.
We have seen some improvement. Financial stresses in Europe
have lessened in recent months, which has helped improve the
tone of financial markets around the world, including the
United States. Several actions by European policy makers have
contributed.
First, the actions by the European Central Bank to
undertake two longer-term refinancing operations that have
helped European banks lock in their funding. The European
banks, in turn, have increased their holdings of sovereign
debt, which has lowered borrowing costs for some countries.
Secondly, Euro area leaders, including the Greek government
and private sector holders of Greek debt, have been taking
steps to put Greece on a more sustainable fiscal path. With its
sovereign debt significantly reduced, the Greek authorities are
intensifying their efforts to implement fiscal and structural
reforms and the E.U. and IMF have pledged a considerable amount
of new funds as part of a second assistance package. However,
the Greek economy remains in a deep recession.
The third positive step has been the approval of a new
fiscal compact treaty among the members of the E.U. This treaty
is an important step toward resolving the fundamental tension
inherent in having a monetary union without a fiscal union, and
that should help bolster the viability of the Euro area economy
in the longer run.
Although progress has been made, more needs to be done.
Secretary Geithner discussed some of these issues: further
strengthening of the European banking system, an expansion of
financial backstops or firewalls to guard against contagion in
sovereign debt markets, and critically we need to continue
efforts to increase economic growth and competitiveness and to
reduce external imbalances in troubled European countries.
The Federal Reserve has been following these developments
closely. We have been in frequent contact with key European
policy makers. Our focus, of course, is to protect U.S.
financial institutions, businesses, and consumers from any
adverse developments occurring in Europe.
To help calm dollar funding markets and to support the flow
of credit to U.S. households and businesses, the Federal
Reserve acted in concert with major foreign central banks to
enhance the U.S. dollar swap facilities, as has been testified
to before this Committee. Use of our reestablished lines was
limited until late last year; however, in late November we
agreed with the ECB and the Central Banks of Canada, Japan,
Switzerland, and the U.K. to extend the swap lines to February
2013 and to reduce their pricing.
The lower cost to the ECB and other foreign central banks
has, in turn, allowed them to reduce the cost of short-term
dollar loans they provide to financial institutions in their
jurisdictions. As was noted, the swap line increased
considerably and peaked at $109 billion in mid-February. This
has had a very beneficial effect on easing dollar funding
pressures in European and other foreign banks, which has, in
turn, lowered tension in U.S. money markets, alleviated
pressures on foreign banks to reduce their lending in the
United States, and has boosted confidence at a time of
considerable strain in international financial markets.
As market conditions have improved notably, usage of the
swap lines has fallen back to currently about $65 billion.
I would add that the swaps are very safe from the
perspective of the Federal Reserve and the U.S. taxpayer. They
present no exchange rate or interest rate risk. Each drawing
has a short maturity and must be approved individually by the
Federal Reserve. They are collateralized by the foreign
currencies for which the dollars are swapped and our
counterparties are the foreign central banks, not the
commercial banks who are receiving the dollar loans.
Fed has also worked with the FSOC and other agencies who
monitor our financial institutions. Notably, U.S. financial
institutions have very limited direct credit exposure to the
most vulnerable Euro area countries, and U.S. money market
funds have almost no exposure to those countries.
There are some exposures arising from the sale of credit
default swaps and sovereign debt, but our assessment is that
those are broadly edged with the CDS in the other direction,
and that the counterparties to those CDS are broadly dispersed
and are strong banks in Europe.
Although U.S. banks have limited exposure to peripheral
European countries, their exposures to European banks and to
the larger core countries is much more material. Moreover,
European holdings represent 35 percent of the assets of prime
U.S. money market funds in February, and those funds remain
structurally vulnerable despite some constructive steps taken
since the recent financial crisis.
So the risk of contagion does remain a concern for both
those institutions and their supervisors and regulators. In
particular, were the situation in Europe to take a severe turn
for the worse, the U.S. financial sector likely would have to
contend not only with problems stemming from its direct
European exposures, but also with an array of broader market
movements, including declines in global equity prices,
increased credit costs, and reduced availability of funding.
Most recently, the Fed released on March 13th the results
from our Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, or CCAR,
which is essentially a stress test of the largest banks or bank
holding companies. We imposed a hypothetical stress scenario on
the banks that involved a deep recession in the United States,
with unemployment reaching 13 percent, a decline in activity
abroad, combined with sharp decreases in both domestic and
global asset prices.
This exercise was designed to capture both direct and
indirect exposures and vulnerabilities of U.S. financial
institutions to the economic and financial stresses that might
arise from a severe crisis in Europe. The results show that a
significant majority of the largest U.S. banks would continue
to meet supervisory expectations for capital adequacy, despite
large projected losses in an extremely adverse hypothetical
scenario.
So, in conclusion, the recent reduction in financial stress
in Europe is welcome, given our important trade and financial
linkages. The situation, however, remains difficult and it is
critical that European leaders follow through on their policy
commitments to ensure a lasting stabilization.
I believe that our European counterparts understand the
challenges and risks they face, and they are committed to take
the necessary steps to address those issues.
For our part, the Fed will continue to monitor the
situation, work with our financial institutions and foreign
counterparts to strengthen our financial system, and be ready
to use the tools at our disposal to help stabilize U.S. markets
should the situation require such action.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Bernanke follows:]

The Chairman. Thank you.
I will now recognize myself for five minutes.
Chairman Bernanke, in that stress test you, I presume,
assume that the Fed systems, including the credit default swaps
that are back nation to nation, would work; is that correct?
You weren't assuming a collapse of all of the $1.4 trillion
exposure?
Mr. Bernanke. We didn't assume they would work. We checked
to make sure we were comfortable with the counterparties.
The Chairman. But that means you graded yourself as that
part working, correct?
Mr. Bernanke. I am not quite sure what you are asking. We
looked at the CDS positions of the banks and we verified first
that they are largely hedged against sovereign default in
Europe first. And then secondly we looked at the counterparties
of those credit default swaps and assured ourselves that they
are widely dispersed and represent the strongest financial
institutions.
The Chairman. Like AIG did a couple years ago?
Mr. Bernanke. AIG is an example of what we don't see now.
AIG was not appropriately regulated. It was not appropriately
hedged. It didn't have sufficient capital behind those CDS. We
know there is nothing like that----
The Chairman. So you are comfortable today that there are
no AIGs hiding in the woods, no FP sitting in some small
company in London that essentially is at the bank without us
knowing it?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, our stress test has covered all the
largest bankholding companies in the U.S. We have looked also
at other large banks, with a somewhat less stressful but
somewhat different approach, but within that whole range of
U.S. bank institutions we don't see any similar problems.
The Chairman. Thank you. One of the most important parts of
today is to ask the questions that weren't asked in earlier
times before what couldn't happened occurred.
The Eurozone has an economy we will call nominally our
size. It has a depth, if I am roughly right in the Euro
conversion, of about $14 trillion of sovereign debt. Some
countries actually have positive, but we will just look at
their sovereign debt across the board.
So it is fair for the American people, not being talented
economists, but for the American people to say same size
entity, similar debt to ours, not exact but similar. If that is
the case, why is it that they are not being treated, and this
is a question for the American taxpayer, if you will, being
treated much more like we treat our States? California doesn't
look to Greece or Germany for a bailout. They could look to the
United States Federal Government. In other words, we are
internal.
What is the justification for the American people to
understand of a zone similar size to ours, similar wealth to
ours, similar debt to ours, looking around at the rest of the
world and saying, what part will the United States put into a
European Union member such as Greece's problem?
Mr. Bernanke. Your question highlights the difference
between Europe and the United States which is we have a fiscal
union as well as a monetary union, and, as you point out
correctly, the reason that we don't see the same kind of
stresses at the State level is because implicitly there is
support from the Federal Government for the rest of the
Country.
The Chairman. But for the taxpayer, and I want to get to
Secretary Geithner, too, for the taxpayer, if they are very
similar to us in the positive side, human beings move freely
within the Eurozone. Money moves freely. Most of the Eurozone
is a single currency and, in fact, they basically act, from a
winning standpoint, as a protective trade partner. They treat
each other in a way they do not treat us. Period. We simply do
not enjoy the advantages of selling into the Eurozone, that the
Eurozone enjoys throughout the European Union.
So the question is, for the American people, and by the
way, this is not a question of why are we doing it in our own
self-interest. I understand we are doing it in our own self-
interest, too. But the question is, why is it that the Eurozone
isn't being asked by our Government to step up much more and
take more responsibility? Why is it that it comes to the
American people at all?
Not why is it in our best interest, but why does it come to
the American people when, in fact, they have the same
wherewithal, and when they are trading with each other they
trade like States, but when they have a problem with a rogue
nation or two or three or four they turn to the IMF and other
external forces in which we participate?
Mr. Bernanke. It is a good question. Our position, and
perhaps the Secretary can speak to this from the
Administration's point of view, the position of the United
States has generally been that Europe needs to really step up
and do a lot more. We have been encouraging them to strengthen
their firewalls, strengthen their fiscal compacts, and
essentially to move in the same direction as the United States
is currently structured.
The Chairman. And Mr. Secretary, as I go to you I want to
say this because, as you said in your statement, we have never
lost a penny to the IMF. We have been fully repaid. Some might
say that the interest has not always been what we would hope it
to be, but, in fact, it has been a good bet overall for the
world economy. But the American people are wondering what I
asked, and I hope you can give it to us in a way.
The follow-up question I will give you in advance, which
is, doesn't it strengthen Europe's hand when we make it clear
that the American people are essentially saying no, and you are
going to have to convince us if you need large amounts of
money. You are going to have to convince us to go against what
is, in fact, a populist feeling within Mr. Cummings' community
and mine, as well.
Secretary Geithner. We have a very similar view to the view
you expressed. Europe is a very rich continent. Absolutely has
the means to solve this on their own. And you are right to
point out that because they are a monetary union without a
fiscal union they don't have the mechanisms we have in the
United States, not just the discipline, the borrowing behavior
of our States which we have, but we have a set of fiscal
transfers that are very powerful in the United States to soften
the downturns that individual States might face.
The IMF is an institution where its members have a right to
request assistance, and if they are prepared to meet the
conditions that the IMF establishes, then they have the right
to request that assistance. And our judgment has been that it
has been in the interest of the United States, and fully
consistent with its institution, and certainly better for us as
a Country for the IMF to play a modest supplemental role
alongside the much more dominant financial role of the European
authorities going forward, and where they have asked us the IMF
to take more of the burden we have said no, we don't think that
is appropriate.
So we are taking very much, I think, the course you would
take and most Americans would say which is they are a rich
country, and, in fact, nations around the world are taking a
similar view, which is let's make sure people understand for
their strategy to work the world needs to see Europe, that very
rich continent of Europe, demonstrate that they are prepared to
do what it takes to make this work. And we can help with advice
and some support in the margin. We are not going to do that in
a way that puts the American taxpayer at risk, and we are not
going to do it in a way that shifts the burden of solving their
crisis to the American taxpayer.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Cummings?
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Geithner, Europe has a housing crisis, does it
not?
Secretary Geithner. Parts of Europe do.
Mr. Cummings. And so to restore our economy you would agree
that housing has to be addressed. Do you believe that, the
foreclosure situation that we are going through right now?
Secretary Geithner. I do think that obviously our economy,
as I said, is still suffering from a lot of damage, collateral
damage fallout from our crisis. You see that in housing, not
just in high unemployment. And our judgment is that we should
do everything we can to help repair that damage, and that would
make the economy stronger over time. That is what we are trying
to do.
Mr. Cummings. Now, the House Republicans released a budget
proposal this week that would lay a course that would cut more
than $5 trillion in Medicare as we know it, shift the cost of
health care to seniors, slash education, research, and
infrastructure funding. Chairman Bernanke, you and I have
talked about this a number of times. You gave a speech back in
2008 in which you said principal reductions that restore some
equity for the homeowner may be a relatively more effective
means of avoiding delinquency and foreclosure; is that right?
Mr. Bernanke. Our research shows that sometimes it can be
effective. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. And Secretary Geithner, you also agree that
principal reduction can be a critical tool if it is well
designed; is that right?
Secretary Geithner. Yes, in some cases. That is why you see
private investors and private banks on their own, in many
cases, offering principal reduction to their borrowers.
Mr. Cummings. How does Europe deal with this foreclosure
situation?
Secretary Geithner. There is actually a very limited number
of countries in Europe with quite that same mix. They are
taking somewhat different approaches, but where they are
different it is different because the nature of the problem is
different in those cases. You can't see a common approach
across the continent on the housing front yet. And I think it
is fair to say they have not been as aggressive as we were in
trying to move early to try to repair the damage in the housing
market.
Mr. Cummings. Mortgage banks across the Country already are
doing principal reduction because they count their bottom line.
They want to keep people in their homes paying lower mortgages
instead of foreclosing and getting nothing at all. This helps
the homeowners and shareholders.
The only official who does not share this view appears to
be Ed DeMarco, the acting director of FHFA. Chairman Bernanke,
his opposition is strange because his own data which he
provided to us earlier this year shows that principal
reductions would save the United States taxpayers billions of
dollars compared to foreclosures. His data also shows that
principal reductions would help the homeowners.
So based on his own data and based on the law Congress
passed to create FHFA, Mr. DeMarco should be doing principal
reductions now but he has refused.
Now, Secretary Geithner, I know that you are in
negotiations with Mr. DeMarco and the Treasury has now offered
triple incentives for principal reductions. Can you tell us why
Treasury is doing that and why are these incentives important?
Secretary Geithner. I should point out that under the law
the Treasury did not have any authority to compel the FHFA to
undertake the activities. Under the conservatorship mandate
they have to make sure they meet a very tough test,
appropriately so, to make sure the things that they are doing
are in the interest of reducing losses to the taxpayer,
maximizing overall returns to the taxpayer.
But there are certain cases where we think there is a
pretty strong economic case for principal reduction as part of
a strategy to limit the future losses to the GSE. So we have
been having some discussions with him about how to narrow the
differences between us. But he will have to make these choices,
and I think maybe on this question it would be better for me to
come back and talk to you in more detail about it separately.
Maybe in a couple of weeks we could give you a better sense of
where he is going to come out.
Mr. Cummings. Very well. In his letter to us he has said,
so that you will have this when you talk to him, he said
administrative costs would be too high to address his IT
systems. Then he went on to say, and he has made that argument
to you, I assume, has he not?
Secretary Geithner. He has, but again, I think he is in the
process of looking again at those questions, as are we.
Mr. Cummings. Yes. And so your response was look further?
Secretary Geithner. Yes. Again, we both have the same basic
interest, which is we want to make sure that those institutions
are doing things to not just help repair the damage in the
housing market, but are doing so consist with their obligation
established by Congress to make sure they are doing things that
would limit the risk of future losses to the taxpayer.
Mr. Cummings. Finally, Secretary Geithner, let me ask about
the stakes here. Mr. DeMarco controls all of the loans
guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. How many families
would be affected by his decision? Hundreds of thousands, I
would think, or millions potentially.
Secretary Geithner. No, not millions. It is hard to tell. I
know it is not part of the popular wisdom, but the GSEs were
actually more conservative and more careful in their
underwriting standards in the loans they took, and so the
broader quality of their loans is actually better than the
broader market in this context. But again, our job is to try to
make sure that we are doing everything that we can to reach as
many people as we can, where we think there is a good, strong
case for the Country on the merits, not just for the taxpayer.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman's time
has expired.
Mr. Secretary, we will also send you a copy of the field
hearing information from Brooklyn, which actually has Fed and
other representatives' testimony to that point so that you are
briefed before you come back to the Ranking Member.
With that we go to the chairman of the full Committee,
emeritus, Mr. Burton, for five minutes.
Mr. Burton. Is that what you call me?
The Chairman. Emeritus is a forever term, as is chairman
around here.
Mr. Burton. I got it.
The Chairman. Please, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Burton. According to CRS, the exposure that the United
States has in Portugal as of September of last year was $54
billion, Ireland was $111 billion, Italy $310 billion, Greece
$48 billion, Spain $244 billion, Germany $635 billion, and
France $685 billion, for a total of $2.08 trillion.
I am concerned about what happens if the Euro starts to
devalue and how it is going to affect the United States'
ability to collect on the indebtedness that we are having with
Europe.
My first question is, and I will combine some of these
questions so you have more time to answer, we are printing
money, have been printing money with QE1 and QE2 and I presume
this may be continuing. Is there a mid-or long-term cost to
loaning money that we have printed to Europe? And how much will
that be?
The Federal Reserve has created this foreign currency swap
mechanism and it has outstanding loans, as I said earlier, as
high as 1.2 trillion. I understand you say now it is only 65
billion. But nevertheless, that is a considerable amount of
money.
I would still like to ask what happens if you do have some
defaulting over there and they can't repay those loans. I know
the European Central Bank is printing money right now. That
will cause some kind of inflationary pressures, as well. What
will that do to the indebtedness that we have?
The foreign currency swaps takes our money and exchanges it
for Euros. I presume we are getting the money from the money we
are printing. I would like to have the answer to that.
And it appears as though we are providing dollars that are
loaned to or swapped with Europe, and then it is used to buy
European Central Bank bonds that are then lent to commercial
banks. I believe that is correct. If that is the process, it
sounds like we are cooking the books to make this all look
legitimate.
Finally, I have been to a number of these countries, and
the unrest is very apparent. Some of our European neighbors
have not passed austerity measures, and even when they had
passed some of these reforms you still have an awful lot of
dissention in the countries. They have had changes in those
governments. I think there is still a big question whether or
not Greece can survive and maybe Italy, Spain, Portugal and so
forth.
So to what extent are we exposed if this so-called European
recovery does not take place? And can you give us the figures
or at least roughly the figures, both directly and indirectly,
as far as the exposure is concerned? And do your numbers
include foreign currency swaps or other assistance from the
Federal Reserve or the Treasury?
I know that is a lot, but if you could kind of run through
that I would appreciate it.
Mr. Bernanke. May I respond?
Mr. Burton. Sure.
Mr. Bernanke. On the swaps, as you said, the maximum was
$109 billion. It is down to $65 because it has been very
constructive and it has helped improve the market. It has been
beneficial to the United States, as well as to Europe.
If the Euro devalues or depreciates, it has no affect
whatsoever in our value of our liability because we get paid
back in dollars, so the European Central Bank takes any foreign
exchange risk. If the banks that they lend the money to don't
repay, we still get paid back in full because the ECB also
takes all the credit risk. So we are not taking any credit
risk, we are not taking any foreign exchange risk. The chances
of losing any money is very, very low and the benefits are
quite significant.
On exposure, you mentioned some numbers. I wasn't clear
whose exposure you were talking about, but let me just say
briefly that obviously our banking system is exposed to Europe.
They are a major trading partner and we have many investments
there. But it was exactly what we tried to do in our stress
test scenario that we just released the results last week. We
considered a very severe scenario that included a sharp new
recession in the United States, a sharp decline in activity in
Europe, major financial stress, including 50 percent drop in
stock prices, so all of this is sort of an attempt, at least in
part, to measure the impact in our banking system of a new
crisis in Europe.
Of course, there would be significant losses, but what we
found was that all the banks essentially were able to meet a
reasonable level of capital, even following the losses
associated with such an event. The losses would be large, of
course.
Mr. Burton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, I guess the academic question is that balance
that I talked about in my opening statement about austerity
measures and how they impact recovery. Your view in general on
that issue, and how the European plan seems to strike that
balance, or how effectively it might do that? Either or both of
you, please.
Mr. Bernanke. Well, I think the answer to your question
depends on which country you are talking about. I mean, there
are countries like Greece, Ireland, and Portugal which are
currently under European Union, Eurozone, and IMF support,
which have essentially no alternative but to do whatever they
can to reduce their fiscal deficits, and they have been trying
to do that, although the slowing in growth has made it more
difficult.
More broadly, there are some countries that have some
fiscal space, as it is called, and there they might consider a
balanced approach which leaves some flexibility in the short-
term to deal with the fact that Europe is slowing, their
economy is slowing, at the same time addressing longer-term
fiscal issues in a comprehensive, long-term plan which, for
example, they are trying to do through their fiscal compact. So
that is analogous to an approach the United States might take,
which is a comprehensive plan that has both a short-term and a
long-term component to it.
Mr. Quigley. Okay.
Secretary Geithner. I think the chairman said it exactly
right. You have to distinguish the countries that lost the
ability to borrow on their own without support from those that
still have that capacity. In general, for the countries not
still in the acute stage of crisis, you want there to be a
medium-term plan to gradually phase in the reductions and
deficits that have to come, and you want that to be balanced
and complemented by reforms that are focused on trying to
improve the growth performance of the economy, make it easier
to start a business, things like that. It is very important to
get that balance right.
As I said, it is going to take a bunch of financial support
to make sure those reforms have time to work, and you want to
make sure they are phased on gradually over tim, and you want
to avoid the risk that, again, every time growth disappoints
and therefore the short-term effects in the deficit or increase
the deficit, you want to avoid the risk that that has to be
matched by immediate cuts in spending or tax cuts or tax
increases, because if you do that the risk is you add to the
challenge on growth and harder to dig you out of this problem.
So that is the balance I think you want to have.
Mr. Quigley. And how did they do? I mean, how are they
doing? If you want to talk about the countries that are more
acute, like Greece and Italy and others, how did they do
striking this balance? How optimistic are you? The concern is
if we are so dependent on their recovery, and perhaps we can
learn some lessons there, did they go too far with these
countries that are really hurting and stymie the opportunity
for recovery?
Secretary Geithner. I don't believe you can say that in
Greece and Ireland and Portugal because, again, once you get to
that point there is really no choice, no alternative available
to them except to do this mix of very tough reforms across the
board.
The other countries in Europe are in a different position.
They have a bit more time and space to bring a bit more care
and balance to the path.
Of course, Greece and Ireland and Portugal are very small
economies, even aggregate, in that context. What hurts the
United States is the risk of a longer period of weak economic
growth in the major economies in Europe, and that is why it is
so important that, as they calm the financial tensions across
Europe, that they are able to shift some of the attention, some
of the focus in Europe to broader strategies that would make
growth stronger across the continent.
Mr. Quigley. And your overall assessment, their chances for
recovery, why are they perhaps less optimistic, or you are less
optimistic or more optimistic about what Europe faces versus
the U.S.?
Secretary Geithner. I think the fundamental reality of
Europe is that this is going to take a very long time for them
to work through, and I think just realistically looking at the
prospects ahead, even if Europe is able to be successful in
avoiding a catastrophic financial crisis and they have the
means to do that, even if they are successful in avoiding that,
then the risks are that Europe is still growing, on average, at
very weak levels, and that will mean that growth in the United
States is weaker than it otherwise would be.
Again, this process has a lot of risk in it, very fragile,
lot of political challenges in this, as your colleagues have
said. That is why it is so important that they are doing
everything they can, not just to restore some financial
stability, but help lay a foundation for stronger growth, and
it is why we have such a compelling economic interest in trying
to work with them to help make that happen.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. My time has expired.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Quigley. A very good line of
questioning.
With that, we go from the chairman of the Subcommittee to
the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee, Mr. McHenry, for five
minutes.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you both, Secretary Geithner and Chairman Bernanke,
for your service to our Government. You certainly have both
served in some challenging times, not just in the last three
years but over the longer run, as well.
Chairman Bernanke, I just want to ask about your legal
authority, the Fed's legal authority. So the Fed can purchase
sovereign debt of the United States, and has. Does the Fed have
legal authority to purchase other countries' sovereign debt?
Mr. Bernanke. It does for the purposes of reserve holdings,
and we currently hold a relatively small amount of debt of very
high quality. I think it is France, Germany, and Japan. But we
are not engaging in purchasing debt of troubled countries.
Mr. McHenry. But that could be considered?
Mr. Bernanke. We are not considering it.
Mr. McHenry. Okay.
Mr. Bernanke. Congress made clear in earlier discussions
some decades ago when this issue came up that the purpose of
this authority was to maintain foreign exchange reserves. I
don't think that it was the intent of Congress that we get
involved in sovereign debt issues. It is not our intent to do
so.
Mr. McHenry. But beyond that, does the Fed accept as
collateral for foreign debt sovereign debt of foreign
countries?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, some of the debt we simply own as part
of our foreign exchange reserves. In other cases we have
various kinds of short-term repurchase agreements and other
kinds of arrangements where we do take collateral for a short
period. Again, we are making sure that we have sufficient hair
cuts and so on to make sure that we are comfortable with the
safety of those short-term arrangements.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Thank you.
Secretary Geithner, I have a few questions about the
International Monetary Fund. Within Treasury you have a
designee who serves on the 24-member executive committee of the
IMF. In terms of the actions taken with the recent IMF loan to
Greece, were you involved in that process? Was that a
discussion you were engaged in?
Secretary Geithner. Absolutely. We are the largest
shareholder in the IMF, and so we pay a lot of attention to any
decision, any meaningful decision the IMF makes in that
context.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Now, looking at that, is the Treasury, I
know you have mentioned this before, but I just want to raise
the issue again. Are you considering additional contributions
to the special IMF European bailout fund?
Secretary Geithner. No, we are not. Our judgment is that
the IMF already has $400 billion of available resources it can
use if necessary to help support the needs of its members.
Europe, of course, has very substantial financial capacity to
put behind their strategy to resolve this crisis, and therefore
we do not see the case for coming to Congress and asking for
more authority in this context.
Mr. McHenry. Okay. Now, is the Treasury considering being
involved in the IMF's NAB, the new arrangement to borrow
facility?
Secretary Geithner. We are in that already. Congress has
authorized us to participate in that, so yes, when the IMF
draws on the new arrangements to borrow, which is like a
supplemental pool of resources, then yes, like when the IMF
draws on its quota resources, we do participate in those
drawings. As I said, we have 60 years of experience with how
the IMF acquits itself in that context, and the record supports
our judgment that there is very substantial strong financial
safeguards that protect the interests of the U.S. taxpayers in
that context.
Mr. McHenry. Under Dodd Frank, and I know you have been
support of this, a number of provisions in there, one in
particular dealing with the IMF. When our designee, your
designee and our Country's designee to the IMF, engages in a
decision to the IMF to loan money to a country that has greater
than 100 percent debt-to-GDP ratio, they have to present
Congress with the understanding of why they made this decision
and what the credit risk is. Is that being done?
Secretary Geithner. Absolutely. Of course, there is a rich
history, a long history of Congressional mandates on the votes
we can cast in the institution. That is one of the more recent
ones, and we will meet the test to that provision.
Mr. McHenry. And it is a 30-day provision, so we would
expect that within the next three or four weeks in front of
Congress, the decision-making there.
Secretary Geithner. And the way that provision is
structured, as you said, in some circumstances where the
existing level of debt in the country is high, there is a
higher burden on all of us to make sure that the reforms that
come with this assistance give us a reasonable prospect that it
is going to be improving the path to sustainability.
Mr. McHenry. Well, we look forward to that report. Thank
you.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
Just to clarify for the record, if I heard correctly, the
IMF doesn't maintain a whole pile of money. They maintain the
ability to draw by the members, based on an allocation. So for
the American people to understand, you are not coming to us for
new money, but there will be distributions at times within the
current limit that just occur as a result, a trigger so that
they don't sit there with all our money, but the fact is they
will be taking our money; is that correct?
Secretary Geithner. You are exactly right. The way the law
of the land is structured, we can't lend money to the IMF
without the authorization of the Congress of the United States.
Congress authorizes the scale of the financial commitments we
can make. What happens is, as members ask the IMF for
resources, they meet the IMF's conditions and can draw on those
resources, then we provide a part of those resources. But
again, the exposure we take is backed by not just a substantial
amount of IMF gold, but a set of other financial safeguards so
our interests are protected.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome to both of our guests this morning.
Mr. Geithner, you noted in your testimony that Ireland and
Spain actually ran large fiscal surpluses, yet they were
victims of financial crisis contagion. You also noted that
Spain reduced its structural deficit through austerity measures
since the onset of the crisis.
Do you believe that there is some lesson in that? I would
have guessed that, in order to have this kind of crisis, both
Ireland and Spain would actually be deeply in the hole of debt.
How did that work?
Secretary Geithner. Well, you are right. I think the
popular perception is that the crisis in Europe is
overwhelmingly the result of decades of fiscal profligacy, and
that is not really quite right. It was certainly true in Greece
where, following the advent of European Monetary Union, Greece
did substantially expand how much it borrowed, and the
government grew as the size of the economy to unsustainable
levels.
Mr. Connolly. I am going to come back to Greece.
Secretary Geithner. In those other countries what you saw
was a very large rise in private borrowing in the banking
system and by the private sector, huge rise in private debt as
a share of the economy, and a damaging loss in the relative
competitiveness of their businesses relative to Germany in that
context. And when the crisis hit and confidence eroded, their
fiscal positions did deteriorate dramatically, as always
happens in that context. But the fundamental cause of the
crisis was not a long period of extreme fiscal profligacy.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Bernanke, one of the medicines
recommended here obviously is draconian fiscal austerity
measures. We have a new budget out yesterday that certainly
subscribes to that philosophy. Many European countries actually
adopted that policy in terms of austerity measures. Did those
economies grow faster or slower than the United States since
2009?
Secretary Geithner. Well, the economies of Europe, with the
exception of Germany, to some extent, have grown significantly
slower than the United States over this period of time, partly
for the reasons you said. Their crisis was more acute than
ours. They are in the earlier stage of adjusting to it. They
reacted more tentatively and with less overall force than we
did in the United States. And for those reasons and the scale
of the challenges they faced beforehand, growth has been weaker
in that context.
I think the basic lesson in this context is yes, you want
to be very careful to try to balance the imperatives of
restoring fiscal sustainability with the recognition that
ultimately both long-term fiscal sustainability, not just the
immediate health of your economy, depends on your ability to
get the economy growing again.
Mr. Connolly. One of the comparisons that often is cited by
some even here in this body is that the United States, if it is
not careful, given its debt posture and its lack of fiscal
discipline, is going to look alarmingly like Greece. I
personally find the comparison invidious, and upon any
examination lacking in any serious comparison, given the fact,
I refer, for example, to Michael Lewis' book on the European
crisis, it is shocking what went on in Greece. They did not
have macro economic data that was reliable. They actually
engaged in outright deception when E.U. officials came to
examine the books. They didn't know how much debt they had.
They didn't have any kind of central control over their own
economy at all, unlike the United States.
But I would like each of you, if you would care, to comment
on that comparison. Is the United States headed toward going
down the road of Greece?
Mr. Bernanke. Congressman, it is certainly true that
situations are not directly comparable. First, Greece's debt
trajectory looks a lot worse than ours or that of other
industrial countries. Secondly, the economy is a small, less-
diversified, less-strong economy in general, less competitive.
And their short-term issues cannot be ameliorated by an
independent monetary policy since they are part of the
Eurozone. So there are some very important differences.
That being said, I think we all understand that there are
long-term fiscal sustainability issues in the United States,
and what we need to do is find a strategy that will credibly
and convincingly put us on a path towards long-term
sustainability without doing undo damage to the recovery.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Bernanke.
Secretary Geithner?
Secretary Geithner. Yes. No basis for comparisons with
Greece. It is important for people to recognize that our fiscal
position, long-term fiscal position, is actually we are in a
much stronger position than the continent as a whole, and it is
partly because our economy will grow faster than Europe's over
time. It is partly because we are a younger country. It is
partly because the commitments we have made to health care and
retirement security, even if unsustainable, are much less
generous than is true in Europe, as a whole. And those factors
and the ones that the chairman mentioned mean that we are in a
fundamentally different position, a more comfortable position.
But of course, in the United States, as well, we have made
unsustainable commitments. Our deficits are unsustainable over
the long run. We have a little bit more time and substantially
more room for maneuver in how we address those. And very
important as we address them, and we need to address them. We
can't put them off indefinitely, we do so in a way that
achieves the necessary balance between helping the economy
repair the damage from a terrible crisis, making sure we can
invest in things we need to grow, but still restoring us some
gravity to our long-term fiscal positions.
Mr. McHenry. [Presiding] The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. Mr. Gowdy from South Carolina is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Gowdy. I thank the gentleman, Mr. Chairman, from North
Carolina.
Mr. Chairman, is there an interconnectivity between cost of
energy and economic recovery?
Mr. Bernanke. Yes, there is, particularly when there is a
supply side element, which there appears to be, given some
reductions in available supply and tensions in Iran and so on.
Higher energy prices create at least short-term inflation
pressures. Moreover, they act as a tax on household purchasing
power and reduce consumption spending, and that also is a drag
on the economy. So yes, higher oil prices, higher energy
prices, are a concern.
Mr. Gowdy. And I think the price per gallon in Europe is
about double, if not more, than what it is in the United
States.
Mr. Bernanke. Yes, because of much higher taxes.
Mr. Gowdy. So can you imagine any scenario under which
someone would advocate for boosting our price per gallon to
European levels?
Mr. Bernanke. There are a lot of policy issues relating to
that.
Mr. Gowdy. I mean an economic reason, not environmental,
economic.
Mr. Bernanke. Well, the question is whether or not there
are other goals that are served: environmental goals,
congestion goals, and the like.
Mr. Gowdy. I am just asking from an economic standpoint.
Mr. Bernanke. From a purely GDP growth perspective, I think
higher energy prices would probably slow growth, at least in
the short run.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, what word would you use to describe it if
our price per gallon talismatically doubled?
Mr. Bernanke. That would have a----
Mr. Gowdy. Catastrophic?
Mr. Bernanke. I wouldn't say catastrophic, but it would
have obviously a very negative effect on consumers, consumer
confidence, consumer real incomes, at the same time that it
would push up inflation.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, what is our debt as a percentage of GDP
currently?
Secretary Geithner. I can give you the precise numbers in
writing, but as we measure it, which is----
Mr. Gowdy. I am not going to hold you to a precise number.
Just something round that a lawyer can understand.
Secretary Geithner. As we measure it, which is debt held by
the public, and we try to measure it net of financial assets,
which is the appropriate way to do it financially, our debt-to-
GDP ratio is somewhere between 60 and 70 percent of GDP today.
Mr. Gowdy. All right. Since I have been here there has been
one request for an increase in the debt ceiling. I understand
there is another one coming. I don't know whether it will come
before the first Tuesday in November or after the first Tuesday
in November. I want you to assume, and, again, I am not going
to hold you to the number. You don't need to go research it.
You are smart enough. I have seen you testify before enough to
know that you probably will be able to answer this question off
the top of your head.
If this were the last debt ceiling increase you could ask
for, the final one, and you had to make it large enough for all
current and future obligations, what would the request need to
be?
Secretary Geithner. I don't know how to answer that
question. Let me answer it slightly differently. It makes no
sense for the Country, since Congress controls how much we can
borrow every year, we have no independent authority to spend
beyond what Congress authorizes, for Congress to put itself and
its Members in the position every six months or every year to
hold a separate vote, politically difficult vote, on whether
they should continue to authorize us to do things they have
already authorized us to do. But I don't know how to answer
that question, because you are talking about the future. The
best way to----
Mr. Gowdy. Well, the last debt ceiling increase was for how
long and for how much?
Secretary Geithner. Well, under the deal we reached last
August, we set up a mechanism, I believe, where Congress
imposed on itself three votes over a 15-month period.
Mr. Gowdy. What will be the amount of the increase in
November or December?
Secretary Geithner. Well, it depends. Congress makes this
choice, and Congress has to make the choice based on how much
time they want to give themselves.
Mr. Gowdy. Right. But you have seen the numbers. In fact, I
made a note. You used the exact same word that Chairman Ryan
uses. And I hope they don't run any ad showing you pushing a
senior citizen off a cliff in a wheelchair for using that word,
but you just used the word unsustainable.
Secretary Geithner. Right.
Mr. Gowdy. So my question to you is: if we had one more
chance to borrow all the money that we need, assuming current
variables, how big would that number have to be?
Secretary Geithner. I don't know how to answer that. I
think that if you--let me try this a little differently. You
will have to decide, as a Member of Congress, how much time you
want to give Congress before you have to vote on it again, and
you can choose that amount of time. The larger the number you
create, but again, the debt limit doesn't decide how much we
can borrow. You decide how much we can borrow, because every
year you decide what you can authorize.
Mr. Gowdy. How much debt would we need to meet current and
future obligations, assuming the status quo indefinitely?
Secretary Geithner. I would be happy to give you that in
writing. I can't do it in my head.
Mr. Gowdy. How about a round number?
Secretary Geithner. No idea. But if your question is if
Congress authorized no additional increase in spending or
revenues----
Mr. Gowdy. Right.
Secretary Geithner.--forever, how much we would have to
borrow? I can do that question in math, but I have to----
Mr. Gowdy. Twenty trillion?
Secretary Geithner. I just can't do it in my head.
Mr. Gowdy. Fifty trillion?
Secretary Geithner. I don't know.
Mr. Gowdy. I have seen you work before. You are smart. You
are quick.
Secretary Geithner. I am not smart enough to answer that
question.
Mr. Gowdy. A lot? Can we agree it would be a lot?
Secretary Geithner. It would be a lot. It would make you
uncomfortable.
Mr. Gowdy. Right. Thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. It would make you uncomfortable. Interesting
transition.
Ms. Holmes Norton is recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Secretary Geithner and Chairman Bernanke,
for being here.
Every country and every culture, of course, is very
different, and it is very risky to go looking at cultures,
whether it is Greece or some culture or country that you
perhaps admire. I do want to ask you about Germany. There are
some in the Congress who believe that the way out of our
present recession and dilemma is to impose draconian cuts
repeatedly, even forsaking the budget deal that was very
difficult to reach, was reached at a huge sacrifice, the loss
of our triple-A rating.
I look to Europe, this was a worldwide recession, and look
at the difference among the various countries. The British seem
to have adopted something of that approach, approach to
emphasize retrenchment over growth. I am intrigued by Germany,
everybody's favorite example of the strongest economy in
Europe, perhaps the strongest in the world today, and do not
understand and believe we need to come to grips with the theory
that they have embraced during this recession. They are one of
the few countries in Europe not to cut the budget deficit. I
take it it wasn't terribly out of control but I don't know. I
am going to ask you. In fact, they have added to their deficit,
certainly in 2009 and 2010, one of the few countries in Europe
to do so.
I am truly intrigued by a country that did not abandon its
working class, did not abandon its social net, has a national
policy that is maintained of keeping unemployment low. I know
they have some things that are culturally oriented toward them,
like work sharing and the rest. They also, of course, subsidize
employers to keep people on the job. We do that in a scattered
fashion.
But I believe we have to come to grips with why this
country continues. It is a country that we identify we so
closely. We need to come to grips with their model and how they
do it, so I have to ask you, how has Germany maintained its
strength, continued to grow, without cutting its budget
deficit?
Mr. Bernanke. Let me take a first stab at that. Germany has
achieved quite a bit. When they had reunification a couple of
decades ago, there were significant problems with the
competitiveness and efficiency of their industries, trying to
integrate the two parts of Germany together, and so on. And
they made a very sustained and successful effort to increase
the competitiveness and efficiency and productivity of their
industry, which is all to their credit.
In addition, though, as part of the Eurozone, they have
benefitted quite a bit from that arrangement. First, because
they have sort of an export market that they have easy access
to, and, secondly, because the Euro, which reflects an average
of the economic strength of the different parts of the
Eurozone, is probably weaker than a Deutschemark would be,
which means that they have something of a currency advantage to
some extent in their ability to export.
Ms. Norton. Just like we have a currency advantage.
Mr. Bernanke. I don't know about that.
Ms. Norton. Not today, all right.
Mr. Bernanke. This is more or less permanent, I think.
Ms. Norton. Go ahead.
Mr. Bernanke. As you point out, they also had work sharing
policies, which in this particular case it is a question
whether that is a good strategy in general, because sometimes
it could promote inefficiency because there is not movement of
workers between different industries and so on, but----
Ms. Norton. Of course, nobody claims that the Germans are
inefficient. Go ahead.
Mr. Bernanke. In this particular case, they avoided some of
the sharp layoffs we saw in the United States, and their
unemployment rate remained lower. In fact, it is lower today
than it was before the crisis. That in turn meant that their
fiscal stresses haven't been as great as some in the United
States or some other countries.
So they have had a number of things supporting their
economy, and certainly they deserve credit for their improved
competitiveness. But it is the case that not every country in
the world can be a major exporter. Somebody has to buy. So that
model is not necessarily exportable in itself to every country
in Europe.
Mr. McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired. Mr. Turner
from Ohio.
Ms. Norton. Could I ask for a second----
Mr. McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Norton. I have wanted to hear from----
Mr. McHenry. The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Turner, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Geithner, the title of this hearing is Europe's
Sovereign Debt Crisis, Causes, Consequences for the United
States, and Lessons Learned. Focusing on that portion of
lessons learned, I have a concern as we look to the issue of
Europe that stems from my concern from the bailout process that
has gone through in the United States. Largely, as we look to
what occurred in the U.S. with bailouts, I think many people
like me have a significant concern of conflicts of interest,
issues of lack of transparency, and a lack of openness.
Mr. Secretary, as we look to the auto bailouts you served
in three different roles. You served as the Secretary of the
Treasury, looking at issues of the taxpayers' dollars, and
exercising the ownership interest of the United States to the
extent the United States became an owner frequently in the auto
bailouts. You served as co-chair of the auto task force and a
board member of the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation. You
were not merely involved in the GM bailout, but you were
simultaneously leading all of the agencies on every side of the
deal in one role or another.
Throughout these processes, you have refused and Treasury
has refused to answer questions. You have provided unredacted
documents or disclosed relative information that people have
asked to try to hold accountable the Treasury to find out what
has occurred, where the tax dollars have gone.
One of those issues obviously affects Delphi salaried
retirees, where 20,000 people across this Country lost a
significant portion of their profits as the three roles of the
Treasury, the co-chair of the auto task force, and the Pension
Benefit Guaranty Corporation picked winners and losers, and
they were ones that, with our tax dollars, were picked as
losers.
If you looked at that hardship that was imposed on tens of
thousands of Delphi salaried retirees left in the wake of the
GM bailout and then you have concern as to how we look to the
European crisis and whether or not similar conflicts of
interest, taxpayers' dollars, and a lack of openness or
transparency, as you know, as the Delphi salaried retirees have
tried to get the information as to what happened, how they lost
their pensions, the three roles of yourself, both in Treasury,
PBGC, and the auto task force, have been closed. Documents have
not been provided. Redacted documents have been provided, if at
all. And most recently we have the PBGC acknowledging your role
as the ultimate authority in the decision to terminate Delphi
pensions. With the GM bailout you were involved in many of the
decisions to terminate these.
But yet there is this sense of how do we have a system
through bailouts where a person like yourself would have the
three roles that conflicts exist, and yet Congress have no
ability for oversight. Individuals who lost their pensions, who
don't have an ability to hold you or Treasury accountable in
seeking additional information.
As you know, this comes at a significant price. We have the
$1.3 billion loss on the Chrysler deal, the $25 or so billion
that is at risk in the GM bailout. If we look to the European
issue, how can we be assured, looking at the performance of
what occurred in the prior bailouts, that we are not going to
have this issue of conflicts of interest, of lack of
transparency, that there will be some openness, that Congress,
that people who are impacted by this, will have access to
information?
I sit here as a Member of Congress knowing that Treasury is
not answering the basic questions about the decision-making
that occurred with the Delphi salaried retirees losing their
pensions and wondering how then can we look to perhaps a
European issue and not know whether or not our own Government
is going to be willing to tell us the decisions that are being
made and the basic financial underpinnings of the decisions
that occur? Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Geithner. Good questions. Let me try to be
responsive.
Our financial crisis caused enormous damage across the
Country, not just in the case of Delphi, but that is a good
example of how much damage caused by the causes that led to
this crisis.
We have, of course, cooperated very closely with this
Committee and every other Congressional Committee in making
sure we are as responsive as possible for all your requests for
information, and will continue to do that.
Mr. Turner. But Mr. Secretary, does that mean that you
would be willing to release unredacted versions of the
documents? You say you have tried. If you send us documents
that are redacted or you, in litigation that is pending, send
redacted documents, you are not being forthcoming. That is not:
here is what your Government did.
Secretary Geithner. Of course I disagree with you on that,
but we will try to be as forthcoming as we can. But let me just
point out every action that we took in this crisis has been
subject to not just the oversight of four separate independent
bodies established by the Congress to oversee our actions, but
by all the Congressional committees involved. All the actions
we took in the auto context were reviewed and validated by the
courts. There is a good set of checks and balances in our
Country.
Mr. Turner. Wait a minute, sir. The one with the Delphi
retirees is still pending, and you have not been
participating----
Mr. McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. The
Secretary can summarize his answer.
Secretary Geithner. I just want to point out that we have
provided an incredible level of transparency over every
decision we made with the taxpayers' money in that context. The
roles you described to me are roles Congress gave me and my
predecessors. There is no conflict in those roles. Again, we
have a very strong, robust set of checks and balances in this
Country, appropriately so, that gives you the ability and the
authority and the right to oversee everything we have done in
this context, which I know you will continue to do, and I
respect and honor that process.
Mr. McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mrs. Maloney from New York is recognized for five minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
I would like to join my colleagues in welcoming Chairman
Bernanke and Secretary Geithner. Secretary Geithner is a former
resident of New York, and I think I speak for all New Yorkers
when we say we are so proud of you and your service, and thank
you, Chairman Bernanke.
I would like to follow up on my good friend's questioning.
There is a consensus in this Country that if we had not
invested, he uses the term bailout, but if we had not invested
in the American auto industry we would have totally lost it.
Lost it. I don't know about my colleagues on the other side of
the aisle, but it is hard for me to imagine an America that
doesn't make its own cars.
I would prefer to see more things made in America with
American jobs. It was at a hearing at this Committee where GM
testified they are now the leading car producer in the world,
that they are employing 1.3 million Americans, and that they
are now exporting the Volt. I would call that an American
success story. I would call that American dream.
If it is true that you are the architect of this program--I
am not so sure that you are. Many people, I am sure, worked on
it. But if it is true that you were the architect of it, we
should be carrying him around on our shoulders and thanking him
for saving American jobs, building American exports, building
up the economy of our Country.
So I would like to say thank you, Secretary Geithner.
Now, I would also like to continue on Mr. Turner's
questioning that I think was a really valid one in that we need
to learn. We need to learn from the crises that we just went
through. I would like to ask both of you what lessons we have
learned as a Country and how we are going to be better prepared
in the future.
Very specifically, how would you compare the actions that
were taken by the American Government in the face of the crisis
that we faced in 2008 and 2009 and the actions we took with the
actions that have been taken by Europe. And I would like to
begin with Chairman Bernanke and then Secretary Geithner on
what was the difference in the response? What are the lessons
that we have learned to make us stronger in preventing it?
And I would just like to close by saying that Christina
Romer testified before Congress that the economic shocks of
this particular downturn in our economy was three times greater
than the Great Depression. So because of the lessons and
reforms that we put in after the Great Depression we were
better able to combat it. Hopefully, the lessons we have
learned now will help us not only to combat it but to prevent
it in the future.
Chairman Bernanke? And thank you for your service.
Mr. Bernanke. Thank you, Congresswoman.
We did make a very strong effort to arrest the crisis. It
was a global crisis. We worked with the Europeans in order to
do that. I think, relative to the history of financial crises
and given the size of this one, I think we were pretty
successful in stopping it.
Since then, I think the United States has been somewhat
more aggressive in trying to restrengthen our financial system.
I would cite, for example, our 2009 stress tests, which were
highly credible and led to substantial capital races by our
banking system. Our capital in our largest banks has increased
in the last two years by about 75 percent, something in the
order of $300 billion.
So we have, I think, taken a lot of positive steps to
strengthening our system. There are many aspects of dot frank,
including orderly liquidation and macro prudential oversight,
which have been, I think, very constructive.
That being said, I think we also have to learn lessons from
how we got into the mess in the first place, and there clearly
were gaps and weaknesses in our regulatory system, mistakes by
supervisors and regulators, including the Federal Reserve.
Obviously, lots of problems in business practices, which we are
still seeing. I think we will not have really learned the
lesson unless we can correct those issues, as well.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
Mr. Geithner?
Secretary Geithner. I think the best way to look at what we
did is to judge us on the results, and if you look at the path
of the American economy since the beginning of 2009, you
compare that record against the record in Europe and the record
in the United States or other countries in past financial
crises----
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Geithner. My time is almost
over. I just would like to put in the record I have been
researching you and getting all your quotes that are very
positive about this crisis, that Europe has the ability to
avoid the debt crisis, Geithner. And a direct quote was, ``And
he said that the European Union has the ability to avoid a
worsening crisis and urged E.U. members to speak with one voice
about plans to solve their debt problems.''
I have no time left, but a yes or no. Chairman Bernanke, do
you agree with that statement that Europe has the ability to
solve this debt problem?
Mr. Bernanke. They certainly have the economic and
financial resources. As was pointed out, their economy is about
the same size as that of the United States. They face very
difficult political problems getting agreement among 17
countries on a path forward, so it is not going to be easy, but
yes, I do think they have the capacity.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you.
Mr. McHenry. Thank you.
Mr. Meehan from Pennsylvania is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Meehan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me express my appreciation to both of you as public
servants for making this commitment that you have at a
tremendously challenging time not just for our Nation but for
our world. I am grateful for your efforts. Obviously, there are
many complexing questions that are part of this overall
equation, but, Chairman Bernanke, as I was listening to your
testimony, one of the things that struck me was in your review
of the totality of the circumstances in Europe.
One of the places where, in my estimation, you seemed to
identify a little bit of the hesitancy was with respect to this
issue of the currency swaps in which we take American dollars,
make them available to the European banks, as I understand it,
and then they are going to be paid back again in American
dollars by the central bank.
Now, what is the real purpose behind that? Is that any
distinction from the other kinds of IMF funding and other
things? It is a liquidity issue, primarily?
Mr. Bernanke. It is a liquidity issue, not a long-term
loan. The longest of these loans ever made is three months. We
have our counterparty is not the country; the counterparty is
not the bank. Our counterparty is the central bank, the
European Central Bank, which we have every confidence will
repay. As I said, we have the collateral of the currency.
So we have a lot of confidence in the financial integrity
of those swaps. They have very substantial benefits to the
United States. European banks do a lot of their business in
dollars for two main reasons. One is that they lend in the
United States, and so it directly affects their ability to make
loans to American businesses and households. Secondly, they do
a lot of lending support trade globally, a lot of which takes
place in dollars, and that activity strengthens the role of the
dollar as the principal trade currency and as the leading
reserve currency.
So our interests are very much involved, and at no
financial cost. We have achieved a significant improvement in
funding conditions in Europe and, as I mentioned earlier,
because of that improvement the demand for those swaps is
actually going down, and so we think that has been a successful
step.
President Draghi of the ECB has made a point of saying how
important the contribution of the swaps was to the
stabilization we are seeing.
Mr. Meehan. You mentioned a three-month period. Is this
more or less a rolling line of credit, so to speak, that over
the course of the three-month period you get repayments and
then you make new available credit, as well, or access to the--
--
Mr. Bernanke. Yes, but we approve not just the program but
every single draw, so we can, there is never a point where we
couldn't end the program with----
Mr. Meehan. Well, what is our exposure currently? What is
the totality of our exposure?
Mr. Bernanke. The totality of our exposure currently is $69
billion, of which $54 billion is to the ECB and the rest is
mostly to the Bank of Japan.
Mr. Meehan. Just $64 billion. What is our total exposure in
terms of other things by the United States to the European
sovereign debt and other forms?
Mr. Bernanke. As our stress test analyzed, the exposure of
our banking system to the debt of the weaker countries is, on
net, about zero, because even though they hold some such debt
and they have written some insurance on that debt. They have
hedges in the other direction that protect them from loss, and
we are comfortable in the security of those hedges.
Mr. Meehan. What is the credibility of the hedges? Where
does the strength of the hedges come?
Mr. Bernanke. The hedges are written by a variety of
stronger European institutions, and we are quite comfortable
that we can't imagine a scenario when essentially every major
European institution----
Mr. Meehan. Well, explain to me the qualification, because,
if I am not incorrect, in your testimony you did express some
reservation. One area of exposures was currency swaps. I
thought I heard that in your testimony.
Mr. Bernanke. No. No, we are quite comfortable with the
security of the currency swaps.
Mr. Meehan. Okay. Let me ask just one closing question from
either of you. We are also living in a very dangerous world. I
know you run these with respect to models. The instability that
is currently existing in our relationship with Iran and what
may happen, to what extent may these models be impacted by what
may be a very problematic future with regard to global unrest?
Can this whole system be subject to a complete reordering if we
have significant instability in the middle east?
Mr. Bernanke. You mean our banking system?
Mr. Meehan. Yes.
Mr. Bernanke. So we haven't done directly a stress test
based on a shock to oil prices, but we have done a stress test
based on a much more severe U.S. recession, 13 percent
unemployment and a 50 percent drop in stock prices. So I think
a geopolitical event that caused oil prices to double, as I
think Mr. Gowdy perhaps was suggesting, would have effects of
that sort. We believe our banking system has sufficient capital
to deal with that.
Of course, it would be very costly to the American economy
and to the banks and to the financial system more generally.
Mr. Meehan. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired.
The Chairman. [Presiding] The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to yield my time back to the Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you. I will use it briefly.
This has been very instructive. Before we go to a second
round, originally we said we would get you out of here before
1:00. If we get you out of here before 12:00 are you willing to
stay for a second round?
Mr. Bernanke. Of course.
Secretary Geithner. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Good. But before we go to that, a couple of
quick questions.
I just want to clarify. The European Central Bank can print
an unlimited amount of Euros, is that correct, the same as we
can print, theoretically, an unlimited amount of dollars?
Mr. Bernanke. Yes, but it has an inflation objective, which
it is very scrupulous about.
The Chairman. And we know they have only cheated on that a
few hundred times; is that right, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Bernanke. They have had a good record of keeping
inflation around 2 percent.
The Chairman. But they have cheated on a lot of other
monetary things? The fact is that Greece is where it is because
nobody was watching what Greece was doing while Greece was
pumping up its debt; is that pretty much true?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, I would argue that was basically both
Greece and some of the other authorities rather than the ECB
that was responsible for that.
The Chairman. But isn't the European Central Bank somewhat
the fair arbiter of whether or not they are obeying it? Who is
responsible to prevent, within the Eurozone, violations by the
Eurozone, because ultimately the debt affects the value because
on a common currency they are agreeing to live within certain
guidelines which clearly nobody was watching, when many
countries just ignored the guidelines, at least as to debt.
Mr. Bernanke. Right. There was a stability in growth pact,
which in principle was supposed to limit debt and deficit, and
it was violated, and for political reasons there wasn't
sufficient enforcement of that. They have tried to strengthen
that now with the fiscal compact that they have agreed to more
recently.
The Chairman. Well, going back to my original question,
then, within the obligation we have for currency swaps, are
they obligated, notwithstanding political pressure, to make us
whole? In other words, if, hypothetically, the Euro were to
drop in half, they would have to give us back twice as many
Euros to get dollars. Is that within their jurisdiction, or
would they have to go back to that kind of interesting vote of
so many members?
Mr. Bernanke. No. That is entirely within the jurisdiction
of the ECB, and I have no doubt whatsoever they would honor
their obligation.
The Chairman. Okay. So that is the underpinning of your
confidence that the swaps are, in fact, extremely safe?
Mr. Bernanke. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. And I appreciate that, because I think the
American people have to understand that the swaps that we are
talking with today are not the swaps we were talking about in
the AIG era.
One more question that I know the answer to but I want to
make sure the American people hear. Secretary Geithner, I think
the Ranking Member addressed it toward you. He talked about the
huge amount of debt built up in this Country in mortgages, and
you may have noticed that the word principal reduction comes
out of the Ranking Member in every question. He is very good at
it. He is very disciplined.
Isn't it true that in Europe, in fact, their loans are
recourse, and in the U.S., almost uniquely within the world,
ours are non-recourse, meaning in Europe they can't walk away
from their loan until they have exhausted all of their
resources. In the U.S., you could have a pile of money of
millions and you could walk away from your mortgage if it is
upside down and you don't want to deal with it.
Is that essentially your understanding?
Secretary Geithner. I am sure you are right in some
countries, but I can't speak to the broader pattern across
Europe.
The Chairman. Okay. We found no countries in Europe that
were non-recourse. And that doesn't mean that you can't have a
loan chosen to be non-recourse, but the ordinary default in
Europe apparently is you sign like you would for any personal
loan. They take the house and then they come at you for the
deficit.
Secretary Geithner. You did see very, very substantial
increases in borrowing by households, not just against
mortgages, not just for mortgages, but generally in many of
those countries in Europe anyway. So even with that slightly
different system, you saw in some countries in Europe, very,
very large rises in debt by individuals.
The Chairman. Now, I went to the debt clock. That may not
be the best one but, Mr. Chairman, it is the one we all tend to
use because it is on the Internet. I looked and, in round
numbers, at the time of the crisis we were at, like, $14
trillion, about a trillion more in mortgage debt than we have
today. That shows me that overall debt of mortgages has fallen,
if you will, a relatively small amount, certainly less than 10
percent.
What does that really say to you from a standpoint of debt
to equity of debt is down by that relatively small amount but
housing values are down less? And how does that make you feel
relative to the security of home mortgages?
I realize that is outside the original scope of this
hearing. You don't have to respond if you are not prepared.
Mr. Bernanke. Well, there has been about $7 trillion of
homeowner equity lost by declining house prices, and so
obviously leverage in the housing sector is up. But things are
moving in a de-leveraging direction as home purchases have gone
down and home ownership has gone down and as there have been
write-downs and as people have paid down their debts.
The Chairman. Okay. I will now take advantage of this
opportunity to call on one last first-round member, the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Farenthold.
Mr. Farenthold. Actually, Mr. Chairman, I would like to
yield my time to Mr. McHenry.
The Chairman. The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. McHenry. I thank my colleague for yielding.
Chairman Bernanke, is the current fiscal trajectory
sustainable?
Mr. Bernanke. In the United States?
Mr. McHenry. In the United States.
Mr. Bernanke. No, it is not.
Mr. McHenry. What is a sustainable debt load for a country
such as ours?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, there is no exact number. I think that
the current levels would be sustainable if they were kept more
or less constant relative to the GDP. I think that is an
important criterion. If we could, over a period of years, get
the debt-to-GDP ratio to some level like 75 percent and then
over time even begin to improve that, I think that would be a
much better situation. But as it stands, the CBO projections
show that under current law the debt-to-GDP ratio begins to
explode in the next couple of decades.
Mr. McHenry. So explain what happens. You have mentioned
this before, and just to clarify, what happens at the end of
this year in terms of our fiscal situation?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, for a number of reasons, under current
law if no further action is taken there will be what I have
termed a fiscal cliff on January 1 of 2013 as a number of tax
and other provisions expire, including the Bush tax cuts, the
payroll tax, UI benefits, and at the same time on the spending
side is the sequestration arising from the failure of the Super
Committee to agree kicks in. And if all those things happen, I
think there would be a very sharp and rapid fiscal contraction
that would be a serious negative for the recovery.
I hope that Congress will take the opportunity to think
through where they want fiscal policy to go, and this will be
in some sense a forcing event.
Mr. McHenry. So austerity too fast and spending cuts too
soon and tax increases that would have a negative impact in
economic growth, that is the fiscal cliff that you are speaking
of?
Mr. Bernanke. A very sharp change in fiscal stance in a
short period of time would have a negative affect on growth,
yes. Again, it is important to achieve sustainability over a
longer period, but one day is kind of a short period to have
such a big change in the position.
Mr. McHenry. Secretary Geithner, I know you have spoken of
this. You are obviously the economic spokesman for the
Administration, and you have taken that role on in a vigorous
fashion. I have heard you speak about the tax increases, the
component of the President's budget, and raises a number of
folks' taxes at the end of this year, but can you speak to this
cliff, because under that scenario of sustainability the
President's budget that he submitted to Congress falls short of
that, and there is only one fiscal plan that actually puts us
on that sustainable path over the long term, over the next
decade, over the next 20 years, over the next 30 years, and
that is the budget that we passed out of the House last year.
The President's budget that he submitted this year puts us in a
very harsh spiral based on the debt-to-GDP ratio, based on the
tax increases, and for not addressing the cost drivers of our
budget.
I will give you an opportunity to respond, obviously.
Secretary Geithner. Obviously, I have a different view, but
let's look at it this way: CBO just did an assessment of the
implications of the President's budget on the long-term fiscal
path, and they concluded, as did we, that if Congress were to
adopt those policies then we would reduce our deficits over the
next three to five years to a level that makes them sustainable
over time.
What that means is they would bring the deficits down as a
share of GDP to the level where our debt burden would stop
growing as a share of the economy and would start to fall. That
is for the next ten years.
Mr. McHenry. And that is done through a number of increases
in the revenue to Government as a percentage of the economy
above the historical norm?
Secretary Geithner. I will explain the mix. If you go back
to where we were last summer, before the agreement last summer,
we needed to find savings of roughly $4 trillion over ten years
to achieve that objective, meaning getting the deficits down
low enough so the debt stops growing as a share of the economy
and starts to decline, so we had to hit a $4 trillion target.
The Congress agreed on about $1 trillion of cuts last
summer, which we are obligated to hold to. That leaves us with
about $3 trillion left to do.
What we propose to do is about half of that through an
increase in the effective tax rates of the top 2 percent of
Americans, very few number of Americans affected by that, and
to find a balance of other savings across the Government.
Mr. McHenry. Unspecified or specified?
Secretary Geithner. Very specified. We have a very detailed
set of savings in Medicare, in Medicaid, and other mandatory,
like farm subsidies and civil service retirement, things like
that, that would provide an additional $1.5 trillion of
savings. And so the overall balance we propose is roughly $2.5
of spending cuts for every dollar in revenue increases. And the
reason why we propose that is not because, we know no one likes
to raise revenues or raise taxes, is because if we don't find
that additional tax revenues out of our current system, then we
have to find a trillion-and-a-half dollars in spending cuts in
Medicare or low-income programs or education or infrastructure
or defense, which we don't think we can justify, or we have to
ask somebody else to pay higher taxes, and we don't think that
is a fair thing to do for the American people.
So that is the proposal we made. We have got some other
differences between us, of course, and those mostly relate to,
over the longer term, how we bring our commitments in health
care to a more sustainable level. As you know, we have
fundamental disagreements on what it is going to take to do
that. We have laid out an approach designed to reduce the rate
of growth in cost but still preserve that basic commitment to
Medicare, to retirees, and we have millions and millions and
millions of more Americans retiring in the coming decades. And
that is an approach which is very different from the approach
you guys embrace in that budget.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. I would also mention
we will ask that the record indicate the CBO scoring for
Obamacare be put in at the same time to sort of complement the
two CBO claims.
Secretary Geithner. That helps us though.
The Chairman. Not so much.
Mr. Burton, would you like to lead off the second round as
chairman emeritus? The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Burton. Sure.
My colleague, My colleague, I think Mr. Meehan, asked a
while ago about the exposure of the United States and our
financial institutions. According to CRS, in U.S. dollars in
2011, September 2011, our total exposure is $2.08 trillion. Can
you quantify that? You said you didn't know what I was talking
about.
Mr. Bernanke. I am not clear whose exposure you are talking
about, the banks or the U.S. economy? I am not quite sure what
it refers to.
Mr. Burton. Well, since you don't understand it, if I
submit this to you will you check it out and let me know?
Mr. Bernanke. Certainly.
Mr. Burton. Could you answer that for me? I would really
appreciate it.
Mr. Bernanke. Certainly.
Mr. Burton. The second thing I would like to ask is one
more time. I am not a banker. I am not a financier or a
financial expert, but I would like to ask this question one
more time, and that is, If there is a default in Europe by
Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal, some of these other countries,
and the European Central Bank has to start printing more Euros,
which would cause an inflationary problem and devalue their
currency, you said a while ago that we were not in any trouble
because they would pay us back in dollars they are holding. But
what if they can't?
Now, they are going to have to pay for the dollars that
they are going to repay us with currency that has been devalued
substantially. How are we going to get our money, number one,
and, number two, would we refinance that debt?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, Congressman, first of all, the ECB has
been very clear that they are not going to be financing
sovereign debtors, and they have not, and their primary
commitment is to the low inflation rate, the 2 percent
inflation rate in the Euro. So I don't see any necessity or
even likelihood that the ECB would print inflationary amounts
of money in order to address sovereign default.
Mr. Burton. I know, but it seems like to me Europe is
absolutely committed to keeping Greece in the European Union
and make sure that nobody is leaving, and if these expenses
continue in Greece and they have these civil disorders, and
possibly in Italy and these other countries, the European
Central Bank and Germany and other countries are going to have
to pay the freight to keep these countries afloat.
Now, if they do that it seems to me that the European
Central Bank, and I talked to some of the leaders over there,
they said that they would, of course, do like we did we
quantitative easing and they would print whatever currency they
needed.
Now, if they did that there would be an inflationary spike,
it seems to me, at some point, and if we had to recover our
debt how would they repay us?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, first, the European Central Bank,
itself, has capital.
Mr. Burton. You mean they have U.S. dollars?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, I guess their capital is in Euros. That
is correct.
Mr. Burton. Well, how would they repay us then?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, I guess they get repaid from the banks
they lend to in dollars. That would give them dollars to repay.
Mr. Burton. Well, many of those banks could go belly-up, as
well, so they are going to have trouble recovering that, so the
inflationary problem is a real problem, so how would we get our
money back?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, again, the European Central Bank is a
highly solvent institution. It is committed to low inflation.
It is, in turn, supported by a whole network of central banks
of the 17 countries which have their own----
Mr. Burton. I understand, but that is not really answering
my question.
Mr. Bernanke. The kind of scenario you are envisioning
where they couldn't pay us back would be absolutely
apocalyptic. It would mean a collapse of major governments in
Europe. It would mean a collapse of----
Mr. Burton. Let me follow up with this question then.
Mr. Bernanke. Yes.
Mr. Burton. Let's say that Greece defaults and they leave--
--
Mr. Bernanke. It has already defaulted.
Mr. Burton. I understand, but let's say they are forced to
leave the European Union because they don't comply with the new
demands. And we have a cascading effect into Italy and maybe
Portugal and Spain and some of those other countries. In a
worst-case scenario, the European Central Bank and the other
countries say, okay, we are going to try to keep this from
becoming a catastrophe, and they start printing Euros. We are
obligated and we are involved, to a large degree, according to
the figures I have. How would we fare in the United States and
how would we get repaid and what kind of impact would that have
on our Country?
I know you used the term apocalyptic. I would like for you
just to explain a little bit more thoroughly.
Mr. Bernanke. Well, again, the money we have lent, first of
all, the swap that we have made, the collateral, we have taken
collateral for it, which is coming down, is backed, first of
all, by the European Central Bank, which, in turn, has behind
it 17 national central banks which have gold, they have other
kinds of assets. Those central banks, in turn, are backed by
the governments of the Eurozone. So it is an extraordinarily
unlikely situation that we would lose any money.
Again, it is a three-month obligation. You are talking
about a situation where national governments are defaulting
across the Eurozone.
Mr. Burton. If I might follow up?
The Chairman. Thirty seconds for a brief follow-up.
Mr. Burton. Thirty seconds. I know some of those
governments over there are having political problems and they
are not anxious to pour more of their money and their resources
into saving other countries. Germany in particular has had some
political problems, and maybe more severe. So when you say
these 17 other central banks are going to come across and help
keep everything afloat, there is a political problem that is
involved in that, too. That is why I asked about a worst-case
scenario.
Mr. Bernanke. I didn't say they were----
Mr. Burton. I think it is important that we understand all
the problems that we might be facing.
Mr. Bernanke. I didn't say they were going to support the
individual countries; I said that they would pay the United
States back the swap money.
The Chairman. Thank you.
We now go to the Ranking Member, Mr. Cummings, for a second
round.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman had mentioned a little bit earlier that I am
very disciplined with regard to this foreclosure issue, and I
am, because so many of my neighbors and people across this
Country are suffering tremendously. I think it was you,
Secretary Geithner, who mentioned the $7 trillion in wealth
that has been lost. That is why I do that. And I also do it
because I realize it is going to be kind of difficult to
address this recessionary problem that we all want to deal with
unless we do that.
Several Republicans have likened the fiscal situation of
the United States to that of Greece. Chairman Issa likened it,
the U.S. financial situation, to the sovereign debt crisis.
They argue that the social safety net in this Country as we
know it, which provides critical support to the Nation's 99
percent, should be tossed aside. Those Republicans have used
the European crisis to justify arguments for draconian
austerity in the United States, just as it is now being imposed
in Greece.
Chairman Bernanke and Secretary Geithner, can the financial
situation of the United States be reasonably compared to that
in Greece? Just curious.
Mr. Bernanke. As I responded earlier on this, I think a
direct comparison is not appropriate. Greece has a much higher
debt-to-GDP ratio. They have a much weaker and less diversified
economy. They are a very small economy. And they don't have an
individual central bank, a separate monetary policy, so there
are lots of differences.
With that being said, I think everyone needs to
acknowledge, and I am sure you do, that in the long run every
country, including the United States, has to have a sustainable
fiscal path, and we do need to pay attention to that.
Mr. Cummings. I agree. And so would you agree with that,
Secretary Geithner?
Secretary Geithner. Of course. I think it is very important
to point out the contrast. The additional policies we have to
agree to in the United States to bring our deficits to a more
sustainable level over the medium term are very modest as a
share of our economy, completely within our capacity to do,
without asking the economy to suffer some undo burden or
without dismantling our safety net, or without abandoning
commitments to retirees in Medicare and Social Security.
The gap between where we are today and where we are
expected to be and what is sustainable in economic terms is
roughly 2, 2.5 percent of GDP, which is a very small challenge
relative to what many countries around the world are starting
to face. And the existing level of benefits we give our
retirees are very, very modest. No one could call them
excessively generous. We ask Americans to bear a much, much
larger portion of the risks in retiring or in paying for health
care than is true in really most of the other economies in
Europe in that context.
So I see really no comparison in our situations. We are a
much stronger Country, much stronger position, both fiscally
and financially, probably because we were much more aggressive
in responding to our crisis. And even with all our challenges--
and we have many challenges, and fiscal sustainability is one
of them--we are in a very strong position as a Country to
address those challenges.
Mr. Cummings. Now, Greece failed to have a firm
understanding of what its deficit actually was. In 2009 Greece
reported a deficit of about 7 percent. Months later this figure
was revised to 12 percent, and again later to 15 percent. When
Greece's sovereign debt was reported, it had no explanation as
to how such a monumental error had taken place.
Chairman Bernanke and Secretary Geithner, I cannot imagine
the U.S. failing to have a firm grasp of what our debt actually
is; would you agree with that?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, our debt obligation is complicated. We
have unfunded liabilities with respect to our entitlement
programs and so on, but yes, I think I have confidence in our
Government's accounting system. In Greece there were obviously
questions about whether or not the numbers were being
accurately reported, and that clearly made things much worse.
Mr. Cummings. Now, in Greece any monetary stimulus aimed at
mitigating financial stress must be channeled through a third
party, the European Central Bank, and it must be agreed to by
several other nations in the Eurozone; is that right?
Mr. Bernanke. I am sorry? Repeat the question?
Mr. Cummings. In other words, in Greece any monetary
stimulus aimed at mitigating financial stress must be channeled
through a third party, the European Central Bank, and be agreed
to by several nations within the Eurozone; is that correct?
Mr. Bernanke. That is correct. There is one central bank
for the whole Eurozone, and it makes decisions based on the
whole Eurozone, not on the situation in one given country.
Mr. Cummings. I guess that makes their situation a little
bit more complicated than ours.
Mr. Bernanke. It does.
Mr. Cummings. To remedy anything to do with the deficit and
spending and whatever.
Mr. Bernanke. The main difference is that both the United
States and Europe have a single monetary policy, but in the
United States we have a Federal Government and a national
fiscal policy; in Europe they have 17 different national fiscal
policies.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Chairman.
The Chairman. You are very welcome.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. I thank the Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, Mr. Bernanke, thank you so much for being
here today. I know you are in a difficult position. I have been
in that same spot myself very many times. I am an automobile
dealer and have really gone through some times that were very
difficult.
My question deals more with prime rate and where prime rate
goes. I think if you go back to 47 until present it averages
somewhere around 9.5 to about 9.8. Right now we are at 3.25.
But I remember, and with not really pleasant memories, in the
early 1980s where it went to 21.5 percent for prime rate. Now,
people tell me, Are you out of your mind? That couldn't
possibly happen. The reason I remember is because we paid 1
percent over prime for our floor plant so borrowing money to
buy cars at 22 percent made it a little bit crazy, because that
meant that we were paying 2 percent per month on every car that
sat in the lot, so the idea then was not to have too many cars
on the lot.
What I worry about is our dollar starts to drop in value.
If we start to pump more money into the equation to raise the
levels, what do you see happening in the future. I know that
right now at 3.25 it looks awfully attractive. In fact, we just
negotiated a loan to build a new building, but it was the
certainty, Mr. Bernanke, thank you, by the way, that the banks
came to us. We had about five bidding for our business, and we
came up with what we thought was a real attractive package.
But again, the driver for all of us in small business is
the certainty of what the markets are going to be, or, as we
look into the future, how we plan our purchases, our equipment
buys, our employee hires, and everything like that.
What do you see happening right now dollar-wise, our value
of the dollar, because it does drive what lenders are going to
ask for us to give back. I know for me it became very difficult
because the covenants changed every quarter, the fact that we
had a single-purpose building they say, you know what? Your
collateral is not worth what it was before, so you become a
difficult risk for us.
So risk is the key that drives everybody throughout the
whole world. We are looking at great risk in Europe, because I
really look at us as mountain climbers all attached to the same
rope, and so as they start coming off the side of the mountain
it is going to pull all of us down.
Tell me about prime rate. What do you see happening with
prime rate? I know we have some certainty, at least in the very
near future. Where is it going to go?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, first, of course, the Federal Reserve's
policy has been to try to keep interest rates low to stimulate
our economy, and in that respect auto dealers and auto
purchasers have obviously benefitted from low cost in funding.
In fact, what we are seeing now is that auto purchases are
going back close to where they were before the crisis, so that
is a very significant improvement.
So that is part of the plan is to try to get the economy
growing and get people back to work, and that can only be good
for auto sales, as well as for the economy, in general.
With respect to the dollar, there are two definitions. One
is the value of the dollar in terms of other currencies, which
may matter for international competition in autos and so on,
but there the dollar has been pretty stable. There has not been
any real trend in the dollar over the last few years.
The other measure of the value of the dollar is the
inflation rate, and there also, with some exception relating to
gas prices, inflation has been low and stable. In particular,
we haven't had the problem of high inflation that we saw in the
1970s, which led to the 21 percent interest rates that you were
referring to earlier. So I think our policies are achieving
support for the economy without damaging the value of the
dollar.
Going forward, as the economy strengthens over a period of
time, I don't know exactly how long, obviously interest rates
will go up to some extent. The dollar will react to the change
in interest rates, it will react to expectations about growth
in the United States, but we think that meeting our mandate of
maximum employment and price stability is the best way to get a
strong dollar in the medium term, and that is what we are
trying to do.
Mr. Kelly. And I would agree with you when it comes to auto
sales, but again the SAR in 2009 at 16.5 million units a year
dropping to 9.5 million units a year, just through attrition,
right now we are seeing people whose cars are no longer
operable so they are coming back into the market. But still, I
have got to tell you, when I am on the lot or when I am in the
showroom, when I look across the desk at people it is the
uncertainty of where they are going to be three, four, and five
years down the road drives their decision to make a purchase or
not to make a purchase. So I have got to tell you, the
stability of our economic recovery is so critical.
I look at energy prices right now and I am watching the
value of used cars drop almost daily, especially cars that are
deemed to be gas guzzlers. If they start to drop off you can
lose 35 or 40 percent very quickly as the price point goes up,
and that is the one thing I fear. I watched it happen before,
and we are very quickly reaching that tipping point again at
about $4 where all the sudden the whole world stops and we
start to go in a rapid decline.
But I do appreciate your being here today and I appreciate
what you are trying to do.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. We now go to the
gentlelady from New York for five minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. I thank the gentleman.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to place in the
record quotes, an article from Secretary Geithner, the
President of the United States, Simon Johnson, a former IMF
chief economist, all that say that Europe is working hard to
address the problem and has the ability to handle the problem.
I think it is an important statement.
The Chairman. Without objection.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you very much.
I would like to come back to the stress test that came out
last week, Chairman Bernanke. Fifteen of our largest banks
examined have sufficient capital to withstand a crisis,
according to this test. By my calculation, that is roughly 78
percent of all the banks tested. I would call this overall
positive news, although our banks do need to do more. Would you
agree?
Mr. Bernanke. Yes, there has been a very substantial
increase in capital and ability to withstand stress.
Mrs. Maloney. I have a specific question that pertains to
the European situation. What should we be doing here at home in
order to ensure that American banks stay well positioned to
manage their exposure to Europe and the European financial
situation?
Mr. Bernanke. Well, as supervisors, the first thing that we
look at is capital, and the capital situation is much improved.
And, as I said, the stress tests mimic, to some extent, the
effects of intensification of the European crisis on the United
States. Beyond that, though, we are looking more specifically
at the exposures they have and how they are managing those
exposures. We talked about the credit default swaps and other
kinds of insurance.
We are also looking at liquidity and other types of aspects
of bank safety. So again, we have come a very long way in the
last couple of years, and although a blow-up in Europe, let me
be clear, would be very costly and create a lot of problems for
our banks and for our economy, I think we are much better
prepared to meet such a challenge today than we would have been
a couple years ago.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you very much.
You have testified before the Financial Services Committee.
Specifically, on February 29th you testified and expressed
concern about sharp spending cuts that would take place next
year due to the inability of the Super Committee to reach an
agreement on a plan. I would like to place in the record some
of your statements, because there is a debate now before
Congress on the stimulus versus austerity.
May we place in the record the chairman's statement before
the Financial Services Committee?
The Chairman. I am assuming this is his opening statement?
Mrs. Maloney. No, no. It was in response to questions. No,
it was in his opening statement.
The Chairman. Of course, without objection.
Mrs. Maloney. Secretary Geithner, I would like to ask you
basically do you think the U.S. Government would have been
worse off if, instead of passing the stimulus package in 2009,
it passed an austerity plan? Would you consider, since we now
have before us a blueprint of how we are going to go forward
with the budget, proposed budget that Congressman Ryan put out
yesterday, and it is the equivalent of a severe, would you call
this a severe and damaging austerity plan? His proposed plan
cuts even more than the final agreement with the Super
Committee.
I want to know if you agree with this statement that was in
the New York Times by Paul Krugman when he stated, ``The truth
is that if you want to know who is really trying to turn
America into Greece, it is not those urging more stimulus for
our still-depressed economy; it is the people demanding that we
emulate Greek style austerity, even though we don't face Greek-
style borrowing constraints, and thereby plunge ourselves into
a depression.''
Would you agree with this statement by Mr. Krugman? And
what is your response to those who demand that our Nation take
austerity measures that have not particularly worked well in
other countries?
Secretary Geithner. If the United States had not, in the
early part of 2009, put in place $800 billion of tax cuts and
emergency spending increases, then our economy would have been
dramatically weaker than it has been and we would be in much
worse shape today. The estimates, of course you know, and maybe
it is worth recalling that in the last quarter of 2008 the
economy was shrinking at an annual rate of 9 percent, and it
was only the actions in the Recovery Act, combined with those
of the Fed and our plans to stabilize the financial system that
we had, that we had growth resume really, really quite quickly.
As you know, we have some very fundamental disagreement
with the President's opponents on the fiscal side. The Ryan
plan, as I understand it, would not just cut spending too
deeply and prematurely in the short term, but it would
dramatically erode our capacity not just to meet our
commitments to retiring seniors and Medicare, but would
dramatically erode what is already a very weak safety net and
leave us without the ability to fund critical investments in
education or innovation which we think are essential to our
ability to grow in the future.
So we would not support those policies, do not believe they
are in the interest of the United States, and do not believe
they would be responsible to adopt at a time where the economy
is still healing from a devastating crisis.
The Chairman. Thank you.
The gentleman from Vermont, Mr. Welch.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary Geithner and Chairman Bernanke, for
your incredible service in a pretty tumultuous time.
I want to go back to this question. It really is a central
issue for Congress. I will start with you, Mr. Bernanke. We are
having a debate, as you know, in Congress about, with the
levels of debt, is austerity the policy that we should be
pursuing, or should it be investment, putting it in broad
terms, and on the investment side have it be something where,
in the short term, we try to maintain low interest rates and
rebuild our economy, but have a long-term plan to make for a
sustainable fiscal future?
On this question of austerity, the budget that has recently
been introduced I think has implicit in it two assumptions. One
is austerity will be beneficial to growth, and the budget that
has been proposed in the House for our consideration would cut
spending across the board in many of the domestic discretionary
areas: infrastructure, housing, medical research, education. It
would fence off the Pentagon. In fact, the sequester cuts would
be avoided.
So, number one, the implicit assumption is that austerity
is the path in this budget, the path to progress and growth.
The second assumption in this budget appears to be that if
we reduce taxes on folks who have substantial incomes, that
likewise will lead to growth.
My question to you is: is there any evidence that either
the assumption about cutting taxes on high incomes in these
economic circumstances does lead to growth, number one. Number
two, is cutting some expenditures in these items I mentioned,
medical, research, education, is there evidence to indicate
that that will also lead to growth and a lower debt?
Mr. Bernanke. I think the general approach, without talking
too much about specific policies, again is a balanced approach
which works to achieve financial stability and fiscal
sustainability in the longer term, while being respectful of
the need to maintain the recovery at the current stage. I think
that is a balanced approach that could be managed.
On the other issues, I think it is also important not just
to look at the size of the debt or the debt-to-GDP ratio, but
ask ourselves what is the quality of the fiscal programs being
undertaken. On the spending side, if we are making investments,
are they a bridge to nowhere or are they a type of
infrastructure investment that will pay a return and improve
economic activity and be worth the investment that is being
made.
On the tax side, is it smart tax policy? Is it broadening
the base and lowering rates and achieving a fair and more
efficient tax code?
So on both of those things I think a balanced approach to
fiscal sustainability, but also looking at the specific
programs with the eye of trying to achieve healthier, long-term
growth is very important.
Mr. Welch. Thank you.
Secretary Geithner, do you have anything to add on that?
This is the central debate in the House, certainly.
Secretary Geithner. The fundamental debate we have to face
and the things that happened at the end of this year require
Congress to confront these things, provide a huge incentive to
deal with them now, and the choices are: how fast should we cut
our deficit? Be careful not to do it in a way that would
undermine the economy in the short run and the long run.
What mix of cuts and tax increases is most appropriate for
the long run? What should be the role of Government in helping
support investments in infrastructure, education, high returns
over time? And what commitments should we leave in place to our
retiring seniors in health care and Social Security? Those are
the things which separate us fundamentally.
You know our approach, which is a balanced approach which
phases in savings over time as we recover and preserves room to
make investments in education and infrastructure so that we are
growing over the long run, and maintains a commitment made by
Republicans and Democrats for decades in this Country to
guarantee our seniors a retirement security and health care
security in their retirements. Those are things we can afford
to do.
Now, we can't put off these fiscal challenges indefinitely.
Our fiscal position is unsustainable over the long run. But
that is not an argument to go and dramatically erode the
capacity of this Country to make the economy stronger, provide
more opportunity over the longer run.
Mr. Welch. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you. I will now recognize myself for a
second round. I will try to be brief and keep our promise to
get you out of here before 12:00.
Chairman Bernanke, you alluded to how much of our debt is
not really on budget. If you take our on-budget debt, our
inter-government debt, and our off-budget liabilities,
contingent liabilities, as a percentage of GDP, roughly what is
our debt?
Mr. Bernanke. I would have to get back to you. I think the
biggest component of off balance sheet is the unfunded Medicare
liabilities, 75 years, which is a tremendous number, and more
than $30 trillion, something like that, according to the
Medicare trustees. That assumes essentially continuation of the
increased costs we see in health care delivery out into the
indefinite future.
The Chairman. So at about 100 percent of GDP on budget we
could be at 300 or 400 percent of GDP including what is off
budget?
Mr. Bernanke. As I said, if we don't make any changes to
our current fiscal trajectory, it is definitely not
sustainable.
The Chairman. Well, Secretary Geithner, and I am only
entering this subject because he brought it up, talked about
these costs being small, but isn't it true that America already
spends a bigger percentage of GDP than our European allies do
on health care? In other words, we already are more generous in
health care in the sense of what we spend. Maybe not what we
get for our money.
The Secretary is absolutely right, more than half of all
health care is paid for outside of Government, but it doesn't
mean that what is paid for in Government isn't already larger
than what Canada pays in Government for total health care.
Isn't that right?
Mr. Bernanke. I am not sure about the government
comparison, but it is true that the United States spends more
total on health care as a share of GDP than other industrial
countries.
The Chairman. Well, I would like to go on looking at that
for a couple of reasons. There has been a lot of discussion
about austerity and this brings it back home a little bit. I am
an Art Laffer economic model guy. I am not a Keynesian,
clearly. But I think we can all understand, I knew that was
good for a laugh, Peter, that all economists tend to believe
that there is probably a sweet spot, in other words, a right
balance of public and private spending, a right balance, and so
on.
As we talk about austerity in Greece or in Portugal or in
any country and we talk about austerity here, and particularly,
Mr. Secretary, aren't we agreeing that we are trying to get to
the same position, whatever that sweet spot is, of promoting
growth through not taking it all to the Government, and that we
are only debating, when you talk about the rate of austerity,
we are not debating where we need to get to.
Where we need to get to so that the private sector can
flourish is probably very similar to where we are telling the
countries of Europe to get to, so that the difference of the
austerity we ask for others and the austerity we need to get to
may be about how much time we have to get there more than it is
about what we need to achieve; isn't that true?
Secretary Geithner. That is probably right. The fundamental
reality, the fundamental constraint we all have to live with,
whether you are European or American or Japanese, is you have
to get the deficit down to a point where the debt stops growing
as a share of the economy and starts decline, and you have to
stabilize at a level that is acceptable.
The Chairman. Right. And I want to follow up on that, just
for the record.
Secretary Geithner. But the difference, just on your first
question, is it is partly a debate about how fast and what is
appropriate.
The Chairman. Right.
Secretary Geithner. But it is also a debate about the
composition, and the composition, if you look at what divides
the Country----
The Chairman. The left and the right will never agree on
where Government should spend/invest, so we will assume that
that part is probably very much ours.
Chairman Bernanke, you had already, I think, provided a
little bit of a mea culpa, and I am not going to ask for it
again, but you put out a white paper related to the housing and
what banks and so on should do. If you don't mind, I would like
to follow up to a great extent in support of the Ranking
Member. In your white paper, and, again, your representative
from Richmond, Virginia and others may have chastised you over
this, but since it is out there in the record, one of the
things that was in the white paper had to do with the
possibility that banks should essentially flip their properties
into rentals, that that was an element.
And the Ranking Member, very disciplined, talked about
principal reduction. When we are looking at what is best for
people who find themselves in homes that they could not
originally afford, I mean, principal reduction in these low-
interest times assumes that they can no longer or could not
when they bought the home afford what they bought.
When we look at the potpourri of options both for Freddie
and Fannie and FHA and for the banks in their roles, would you
comment further for this Committee on the record to try to
understand why these alternatives of perhaps you can't afford
the rent for this home for a period of time, perhaps that is
the best transition, perhaps it is best for the community, I
think that is an element that has not been discussed, if you
will, by the left or the right, and you did put it in your
paper, and to the extent that it exists I would like to have it
fully vetted.
Mr. Bernanke. The theme was that we need to attack the
housing issue at different points. Obviously, if we can avoid
unnecessary and uneconomic foreclosures we should do that, and
there are multiple ways of doing that. We didn't come down in
favor of any specific approach. I think it depends on the
situation.
But what we noted was that, no matter how hard we work, and
the Country has been working pretty hard on this issue, that
there are going to be still a number of foreclosures that
occur, people who lose their homes or leave their homes,
investors who abandon their properties, and it is bad for the
housing market, it is bad for neighborhoods, for empty houses
to stand in a row on a street.
So we still think that we should be looking at ways to
avoid unnecessary and uneconomic foreclosures, but another part
of the problem is the fact that we have got so many empty
houses overhanging supply in the housing market, which pushes
down prices and reduces construction.
So there are various possible approaches to that. One of
them is REO to rental, which we described and talked about in
our paper. There are other things. For houses that are in bad
condition, land banks can purchase them and perhaps bulldoze
them if necessary.
So our point is only that loan modifications have a role to
play, but there is a whole number of different things that can
be helpful in the housing market.
The Chairman. And I will give the Ranking Member some
additional time if he would like it, but I want to follow up
with one more, and this is much more broadly in your purview,
both of you.
A number of cities, even States, have found ways to extend
dramatically the amount of time it takes to foreclose on
somebody that isn't paying. In Brooklyn where we were they
basically got it out to three years, if your papers are all in
order, between the time someone stops paying and perhaps stops
maintaining the home and the time that the institution can take
possession. In the case of Illinois, I am sorry the gentleman
is not here right now, they have tried to have Freddie and
Fannie, during the foreclosure process, which is being
elongated, maintain the home on behalf of the homeowner who is
not maintaining it on behalf of the community.
I don't want to presume your answer, but would you say that
these are probably not helpful to either the long-term credit
market because of certainty, or to the process that we are
trying to get beyond and get to where we have a positive market
and positive neighborhoods? And feel free to answer as you
think is appropriate.
Mr. Bernanke. Well, I think delay for the sake of delay is
not constructive. The homes deteriorate. The process drags on
and the healing of the housing market drags on.
That being said, obviously we have seen a lot of cases
where servicers have not performed their due diligence where
they have foreclosed in appropriately, et cetera, and when
there are situations where there are questions about the
integrity of the process then we have to take the time
necessary to make sure that things are being done correctly.
The Chairman. Yes. Mr. Secretary?
Secretary Geithner. I think the chairman said it right.
There are, of course, huge numbers of innocent victims in this
crisis, and there are lots of people who can afford to stay in
their homes, and you want to make sure you give them a chance
to do it. And there are some people that have already left
their homes or need to pursue a more affordable option, and we
should help make that easy for them to do it.
You want to make sure that when you foreclose that process
has complete integrity, and so you want to have some checks and
balances on that, but I agree with you that the process is
taking too long in many parts of the Country, and if that could
be sped up without compromising those other fundamental
objectives, that would probably be better for those
communities.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Cummings, a couple minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much.
I want to just go back to a matter that the Chairman
brought up on Monday in Brooklyn at our hearing and just get
your opinion on this. We had major banks there, and we asked a
question about how, when interest rates are lower, and let's
say somebody has a mortgage at 6 percent now, and dare I say
underwater, we were asking or he was asking the banks what is
the negative side, and you can correct me if I am wrong, Mr.
Chairman, of trying to make sure that those people are able to
take advantage of lower interest rates?
Do you all see that as one of the, we talked about a number
of remedies. In other words, do you understand my question? I
mean, I just wanted your opinion on that. It seems like a lot
of people would fall into that category.
Secretary Geithner. No, exactly right. That is why it is so
important that you give people the opportunity to refinance and
take advantage of the lower rates, and one of the most
important things that we have done and what the head of the
FHFA has done over the last six months is to put in place a
much better-designed program to help people who are
significantly underwater take advantage of lower interest
rates, but we want that to happen on a much larger scale.
That program is actually getting quite a lot of traction
now. You are seeing, as you may have heard in New York, a very
substantial increase in refinancing by people who are
significantly underwater, and we think we are at the early
stage of that increase, expect much more to happen.
Now, those programs now only apply to the loans that have
been guaranteed by Fannie and Freddie, and so we have also
suggested that Congress consider authorizing the FHA to provide
an additional program in that context too, just to be fair. You
know, most people are not sure who guaranteed their loan, and
we want to make sure those opportunities are available to
everybody who owns a house.
Mr. Cummings. Just one last question. One of the things
that I looked at is this whole idea of when the banks did their
settlement, FHFA did not bring them under those provisions for
writing, as a matter of fact, they said we don't want to be a
part of that. I know that you are talking to Mr. DeMarco. Was
that a concern of yours, particularly when we have tripled the
incentives for those kinds of things? I am just curious.
Secretary Geithner. As I said, there is a very strong
economic case in some circumstances, and that is why you are
seeing private investors do it, to reduce principal for people
who are deeply underwater but can afford to stay in their own
and meet a reasonable payment. And that case will be equally
compelling in parts of the people whose loans were guaranteed
by Fannie and Freddie, and so what we are trying to do is
encourage Mr. DeMarco, who is fully independent and has----
Mr. Cummings. I understand that.
Secretary Geithner.--to take another look at the evidence
because we think there is a place for doing more in a way that
is completely consistent with the mandate that Congress gave
him appropriately to make sure he is protecting the interest of
the taxpayer as he helps the housing market. So we are working
through those numbers with him and I expect to hear some more
in the next couple of weeks.
Mr. Cummings. On the behalf of the many millions of
Americans who are dealing with this issue, I would ask you to
use your most convincing voice to try to get him to move off
the dime.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank you.
I want to thank our witnesses. We did get you out pretty
close to the 12:00 o'clock. You extended your willingness to
answer far beyond the initial scope. I would only ask one more
item. Please, the next time we invite you back, remember that
this was a Committee that has worked a lot in areas that
overlap, and accept our invitation, as you so graciously did
this time.
With that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]


