- WHY RESHUFFLING GOVERNMENT AGENCIES WON'T SOLVE THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S OBESITY PROBLEM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WHY RESHUFFLING GOVERNMENT AGENCIES WON'T SOLVE THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT'S OBESITY PROBLEM
=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 15, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-138

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-374 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 8, 2012....................................     1

WITNESSES

The Honorable Mark A. Warner, United States Senator from the
State of Virginia
Oral statement...............................................     4
Written statement............................................     8
The Honorable Ron Johnson, United States Senator from the State
of Wisconsin
Oral statement...............................................    11
Written statement............................................    13
Paul C. Light, Ph.D., Paulette Goddard Professor of Public
Service, New York University
Oral statement...............................................    22
Written statement............................................    24
The Honorable Dan G. Blair, President and CEO, National Academy
of Public Administration
Oral statement...............................................    34
Written statement............................................    36
Mr. Robert Shea, Grant Thornton LLP
Oral statement...............................................    46
Written statement............................................    48
Mr. Max Stier, President and CEO, Partnership for Public Service
Oral statement...............................................    55
Written statement............................................    57

APPENDIX

The Washington Post Article: Government continues to shrink,
despite `obesity problem' rhetoric.............................    80
The Honorable Elijah E. Cummings, Ranking Member, A Member of
Congress from the State of Maryland: Opening Statement.........    82
List of the 108 committees and subcommittees.....................    84

WHY RESHUFFLING GOVERNMENT AGENCIES WON'T SOLVE THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT'S OBESITY PROBLEM

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 2012

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:34 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Darrell E. Issa
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Issa, Walberg, Lankford, Labrador,
DesJarlais, Gowdy, Kelly, Cummings, Towns, Norton, Kucinich,
Tierney, Connolly, Quigley, and Murphy.
Staff Present: Michael R. Bebeau, Assistant Clerk; Molly
Boyl, Parliamentarian; Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director; Adam
P. Fromm, Director of Member Services and Committee Operations;
Linda Good, Chief Clerk; Tyler Grimm, Professional Staff
Member; Jennifer Hemingway, Senior Professional Staff Member;
Frederick Hill, Director of Communications and Senior Policy
Advisor; Ryan Little, Professional Staff Member; Justin
LoFranco, Deputy Director of Digital Strategy; Mark D. Marin,
Director of Oversight; Tegan Millspaw, Research Analyst;
Jeffrey Post, Professional Staff Member; James Robertson,
Professional Staff Member; Laura L. Rush, Deputy Chief Clerk;
Rebecca Watkins, Press Secretary; Kevin Carter, Detailee;
Krista Boyd, Minority Deputy Director of Legislation/Counsel;
Beverly Britton Fraser, Minority Counsel; Kevin Corbin,
Minority Deputy Clerk; Carla Hultberg, Minority Chief Clerk;
and Paul Kincaid, Minority Press Secretary.
Chairman Issa. Good morning. The committee will come to
order.
We on the Oversight Committee exist to secure two
fundamental principles. First, Americans have a right to know
that the money Washington takes from them is well spent. And
second, Americans deserve an efficient effective government
that works for them. Our duty on the Oversight and Government
Reform Committee is to protect these rights. Our solemn
responsibility is to hold government accountable to taxpayers
because taxpayers have a right to know what they get from their
government. We have a responsibility to work tirelessly in
partnership with citizen watchdogs to deliver the facts to the
American people and bring genuine reform to the Federal
bureaucracy.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement. Today
we are at the core of our responsibility. President Obama
recently unveiled or announced in the State of the Union a
reorganization plan. His request for authority comes without
any specifics, simply the need for reorganization. Although we
recognize that there may be a specific plan that the President
can work with us on, I believe this committee has an obligation
to go far beyond what the President has in mind.
In fact, under both this President and his predecessor OMB
has told us that Congress won't, in fact, be necessary, that we
can do it with limited authority. That is simply not true. The
history has shown since the Hoover Commission that the only way
to get genuine change in the Federal bureaucracy is to have
buy-in in advance from the House, the Senate, the community at
large and the Executive branch. Reorganizations, like the first
major reorganization, require multi-term occurrences.
Congresses change, the House and the Senate changes
significantly and the White House is likely to change who is in
it, not because this President may not win reelection but
because reorganization takes more than 4 or 5 years. A good
plan is in fact a plan for at least a decade and one that takes
years to accomplish. Just bringing together disparate databases
that in fact have grown up over a generation into a single
cohesive interactive system would easily take two presidencies.
So as we begin today talking about waste in government
anew, let's understand that since 2008 spending on Federal
programs has increased by hundreds of billions of dollars. We
simply cannot reshuffle the deck chairs on this Titanic. The
truth is that uncollected debts total over $290 billion,
improper payments total at least $115 billion in 2011, the
Federal Government has grown its workforce by 200,000
employees. Last year the duplicative programs reported by the
GAO identified numerous areas that overlap, and in fact none
have changed during the interim.
It is very clear that the administration is on the right
track by saying that we need a major reorganization, but this
committee more than any other committee in the House has an
obligation to look at the big picture. We have to look at last
Sunday's announcement of the new budget which will add $1.3
trillion to the deficit. Clearly we cannot tax our way out of
it and we cannot cut our way out of it. Reorganization that
brings efficiency; in other words, win-win situations in which
you make changes in which all the essential services get
delivered but they get delivered for less.
Additionally, every Congress we talk about how much is not
collected and yet we haven't made the fundamental investments
into making sure that next year and the year after collections
are more and more honest because of the kind of transparency
that real reform and database and in cooperation between
Cabinet positions can bring. That is why I am excited to have
not one but two Senators as our lead panel. And before we go to
them I now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Cummings, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
would like to welcome all of our distinguished witnesses here
today. And let me thank you, Mr. Chairman, for agreeing to my
request to invite Senator Warner who has been a champion of
government reform efforts for many years, both as Governor of
Virginia and now as the head of the Senate BudgetCommittee's
Task Force on Government Performance. I would also like to
thank the chairman for agreeing to my request to invite our
witness on the second panel Max Stier, the President and CEO of
the Partnership for Public Service, which issued a very good
report on government efficiency issues last year.
Now on the topic of today's hearing I confess I am a bit
confused. The hearing title suggests that the Federal
Government has an obesity problem that somehow caused the
Nation's budget deficit. But according to economists and
financial experts, the most significant causes of the Federal
deficit are, one, the Bush era tax cuts for the wealthy; two,
the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan; and, three, the fallout from
the 2008 financial crisis. Unfortunately, we will not be
addressing any of these issues today.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to enter into the
record an excellent Washington Post column published yesterday
titled Government Continues to Shrink Despite Obesity Problem
Rhetoric.
Chairman Issa. Since it is excellent, without objection so
ordered.
Mr. Cummings. It so happened to be by Joe Davidson who did
a great job. The column addresses today's hearing and describes
how the size of the Federal workforce has decreased and the
government is doing more with less.
The hearing title also refers to a recent proposal by the
President to reorganize and consolidate a number of our
Nation's trade agencies into a single department that will be
more effective and save billions of dollars in the process.
Unfortunately, we will not be addressing the details of this
proposal today either.
Instead, today's hearing appears to be a survey of
proposals to reduce the size of government and cut the pay and
benefits of Federal employees without focusing on the negative
impacts of these proposals on core services that the American
people depend upon.
I think it is safe to say that every member of the
committee and this Congress agrees that the Federal Government
can and should work better. We should always strive to ensure
that agencies work more effectively and efficiently on behalf
of the American taxpayers. Our differences come in figuring out
how we get there. I do not believe that the way to reform
government is to attack millions of hard working middle class
workers who are already contributing $60 billion towards
deficit reduction as a result of the existing 2-year pay
freeze. Yet the House is scheduled to vote this week on a bill
approved by this committee that will take an additional $44
billion out of their pockets by slashing existing pension
benefits for new, current and retiring Federal workers.
This is a wrong approach. We should not try to solve our
budget problems on the backs of middle class Federal workers
while we refuse to ask the wealthiest Americans, refuse to ask
them to contribute even one penny more towards these goals.
Instead, we should reform government by cutting waste. For
example, there are billions of dollars waiting to be saved
through contracting reform. The mission on wartime contracting
identified between $31 billion and $60 billion in waste and the
United States continues contracting in Iraq and Afghanistan.
And Congressman Tierney to his credit has introduced a bill to
enact one of the Commission's recommendations by creating a
special inspector general for Overseas Contingency Operations.
Congress should also promote greater competition in Federal
contracts. Federal agencies awarded about $170 billion in
noncompetitive contracts in 2009 alone. The administration is
also taking a number of actions, such as improving agency
systems to reduce improper payments by the Federal Government
by $50 billion by the end of the year. One key tool that we
already have in place is GPRA Modernization Act on the House
side. This new law came out of this committee and it was signed
by President Obama on January 4, 2011. It requires the
administration to develop crosscutting agency priority goals
and to track progress toward meeting those goals.
Finally, I know that Senator Warner was one of the biggest
proponents of this law on the Senate side, and I understand he
has been pressing the administration to fulfill each and every
provision of the new law. I look forward to hearing his
testimony, as well as that of Senator Johnson and all of our
witnesses today. And again, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Chairman Issa. Would you yield to the gentleman from
Virginia for a moment?
Mr. Cummings. Of course.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
ranking member. I just wanted to of course welcome both of our
Senators, but I particularly wanted to welcome my home state
Senator, soon to be the senior senator from the Commonwealth of
Virginia, Mark Warner. Senator Warner and I worked together
when he was the Governor and I was Chairman of Fairfax County.
And now we have the privilege of both serving our constituents
here in the Congress. And I want to thank him for his
leadership, his willingness to try to find bipartisan
solutions, his leadership on trying to find creative solutions
to our fiscal problems, and of course his championship for the
Federal workforce where the Commonwealth of Virginia hosts so
many Federal employees.
So I just wanted to welcome him to the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee. And I thank the chair.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Thank you. We now go to our distinguished
panel of witnesses. Whether junior or senior Senator you are
still distinguished. Senator Mark Warner represents the
Commonwealth of Virginia, and of course Senator Johnson
representing the State of Wisconsin. If you were not members of
our body you would be required to be sworn pursuant to
committee rules. Since all of us on both sides of the dais at
this time are sworn officials we would like to hear your
testimony. Since you are Senators we have to tell you that we
do have this clock. It runs for 5 minutes. And it means not
that much but try to summarize as close as you can to 5
minutes.
Senator Warner.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MARK R. WARNER, A UNITED STATES SENATOR
FROM THE STATE OF VIRGINIA

Senator Warner. Thank you, Chairman Issa and Ranking Member
Cummings, for inviting me today, and members of the committee.
I am proud to be here with my good friend Ron Johnson. I want
to make sure the record shows that both Senator Johnson and I
were here at the committee on time. And as the chairman
mentioned a little bit earlier, since we are both fairly junior
in the Senate we will soon get over this affliction and start
treating you House Members as House Members as opposed to just
new Senators. But we really look forward to the opportunity to
be here and discuss the way government works.
I also want to thank the chairman for the collaboration we
have had on the data bill, something I think that is very
important in terms of bringing across the board financial
transparency to government operations, and I look forward to
seeing if we can get that passed into law.
I want to echo what the ranking member said. I looked at
the title for the hearing today and I had to think it was a
colorful title. I am not sure that our government is obese, but
I am sure it could use a bit of housekeeping.
Chairman Issa. Senator, it is kind of like when you have a
really good article but the headline is different. Different
groups write them.
Senator Warner. I get it, I get it. I think we would all
agree though that for too long we have added programs,
regulations and policies layer after layer without ever taking
time to step back and review the structure of government to see
if these existing programs and policies really make sense. And
this is something that Senator Johnson and I have worked on on
the Budget Committee together and I know it is the function of
this committee. I have got a lot of ideas, and recognizing the
time constraints I want to try to hit these very quickly and
would love to have the opportunity to come back and share in
more detail any of the subjects that I am going to briefly
discuss. And I do think that, as Ranking Member Cummings said,
that in a number of these areas President Obama has made
progress.
Let's start with the overlap and duplication of Federal
programs. I recall as a Governor how frustrating it was for me
when we looked at things like workforce training, when we
looked at teacher quality programs. Trying to rationalize them
at the State level was virtually impossible because we had so
many different Federal programs with different streams of
funding. We should not have 82 teacher quality programs across
10 different agencies. We shouldn't have 56 financial literacy
programs across 20 different agencies.
I do believe that reorganization and consolidation of
similar and duplicative programs can provide more effective
services and at the same time save taxpayer money. There is a
couple of different ways we can go about this. Ranking Member
Cummings mentioned the Woodlace bill that probably most folks
have never heard of other than members of this committee, the
GPRA bill, the Government Performance and Results Modernization
Act of 2010, which I was proud to co-sponsor. One of the
requirements of that bill was to try to limit the number of
goals an actual agency has. Because anybody who has been in
business knows that if you have 10, 20, 30 goals you really
have no major goal. Unless we can limit this to a more limited
number and start looking across the function of government, not
just by program and by agency, we are not going to be
effective.
On Monday, when the President outlined his budget, he
outlined 14 cross-agency priority goals in the 2013 budget. As
I mentioned previously, there was no requirement. This was one
of the requirements of GPRA. The 14 goals I think that the
President outlined were clear. One, for example, was the goal
to double exports by the end of 2014. That is clearly in the
Nation's interest and cuts across a series of agencies.
So I think we are seeing some of the results of GPRA
already. I would argue as well one area that the administration
I think needs to do better on, we asked in GPRA for agencies
not only to identify their top programs, but to do something
that has never been done before, which is identify the least
performing programs. We too often in government want to
highlight our successes, we are not as willing to expose those
areas that need improvement. And we need to continue to focus
the administration on performance of least performing programs.
But obviously we continue to do more. The President has
also requested that we restore executive reorganization
authority with expedited congressional review. And again, there
would be a process for Congress to review any proposed
reorganization. I urge the committee to consider this proposal
favorably.
As the chair and the ranking member knows, I spent most of
my career in business and every CEO has the authority to
reorganize and structure their company to improve results. As
Governor I had the authority to reorganize the State agencies,
and I was also held accountable for results. In fact, every
President from 1932 to 1984 had the authority to submit
proposals to reorganize the Executive branch. I believe we
should give the President as our Chief Executive the authority
to do this job and modernize the way the government works to
deliver better results, and again hold the President
accountable.
I think one of the things that we can include in this type
of proposal is to make sure that any reorganization would
actually save money and eliminate overhead. And I would also
point out again that what the President is proposing would
still give Congress the ability to vote on an up or down basis
on any specific reorganization.
I intend to be a sponsor of the President's Reforming and
Consolidating Government Act in 2012 in the Senate, and I can
assure you that there will be broad bipartisan support in the
Senate, and I hope again that same kind of support can be
garnered here in the House. And I would argue since this bill
is coming so late in the President's term this would obviously
be a tool whoever becomes the next President serving in January
of 2013.
Another area I believe we need to do more housekeeping on
is regulations, and I know the committee again has worked on
this as well. I believe regulations are like programs. We have
added layers and layers over the years. But we rarely go back
and review what works. We need regulatory reform to put in
place basic metrics and incentives to provide some regulatory
housekeeping.
I am working on a proposal that will require all agencies,
executive and independent, to conduct economic impact analysis
for all those proposed regulations costing over $100 million. I
have also got a proposal that will build on this that will try
to change some of the incentives inside the agencies. Right now
an agency is basically rewarded with more personnel and more
funding if you add more regulations. We have got to try to
change that framework. So my regulatory reform proposal will
also include a PAYGO type mechanism that will require agencies
to identify offsets that will force them to modify or eliminate
rules from their existing stock of regulations whenever they
seek to put new regulations in place. This kind of balancing
out aspect will actually, I believe, change the incentives
inside the agency so as they move forward on proposed
appropriate new regulations you have to find that offset. It
makes I think good commonsense. And before you say this would
be impossible to do, the U.K. Has actually implemented a
similar system called the one-in/one-out proposal. It has been
up and operating for a couple of years right now. And again, we
are modeling after some of the very effective things that have
taken place in regulatory reform in the U.K.
In addition, as we have looked at regulatory reform I have
seen that one of the things we don't do a very good job of is
ever looking back and seeing did the regulation that was put in
place actually achieve its goal. It is remarkable, we have
never done this in any meaningful way. And what we have instead
is we have sometimes agencies saying here are all these
benefits, businesses saying here are all these costs. We don't
have some level of independent analysis on this. I believe we
need a legislative agency, like the CBO, to review the economic
impact analysis every 5 years or so to determine if the
regulations that we have put in place, that the agencies have
put in place, are working and report this information to
Congress. This independent analysis will provide helpful data
for Congress and the agencies to modify and eliminate both
outdated laws and regulations.
In closing, let me just say this. We do have a lot of work
to do. I did see recently the President identified 9,000
reports that agencies submit to Congress. If there was one,
again, low hanging fruit that we could relieve some burden on
the agencies, but also start to streamline some of this
duplicative reporting, systems also need to be reviewed. I do
think it is the responsibility for Congress to think boldly in
this area. We have also got a proposal. We are working on a
civilian BRAC process in terms of real property, something that
as we are looking at our enormous deficits we ought to put in
the hopper as well.
So I would like to come back at some point, recognizing I
have well exceeded my five minutes here, as any good Senator
would. But I look forward to working with this committee. I
appreciate the opportunity to appear before it. And I would
want to again say, Senator Johnson, while he is a new Senator,
has taken up this mantle as well and he is a good colleague and
someone I know will be a firm ally of this committee in terms
of making government more efficient for our people, our
taxpayers and at the end of the day savings in dollars.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Prepared statement of Senator Warner follows:]

Chairman Issa. Thank you, Senator. And Senator Johnson,
even though he has got you by a year and a half more or less
you can have the same time. Please, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RON JOHNSON, A UNITED STATES SENATOR FROM
THE STATE OF WISCONSIN

Senator Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning
Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Cummings, members of the
committee. Thank you for the opportunity to participate in
today's hearing. We are entering the fourth year of an
administration that promised to cut the deficit in half by the
end of its first term. The U.S. incurred a deficit of $459
billion in 2008, the year before President Obama entered
office, yet the deficit grew to $1.4 trillion in fiscal year
2009, followed by $1.3 trillion in 2010, $1.3 trillion in 2011,
and OMB has just projected another deficit of $1.3 trillion in
2012.
And as a quick aside, contrary to popular belief, the total
cost of the 2001-2003 tax cuts plus the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan, approximately $300 billion, when our annual
deficit is $1.3 trillion, or $1,300 billion, so that is not the
main driver of our deficit.
Any proposal to consolidate operations that would actually
reduce spending would be welcome and should be enacted. And
here is where I would like to commend Senator Warner as being a
real leader in the Senate. And it is a real area I think where
we can work on a bipartisan basis to obtain reform and enact
reform in government. So I certainly look forward to working
with you on that.
But when placed in proper perspective to the magnitude of
our budget and regulatory crisis, President Obama's requested
fast track reorganization authority looks more like an election
year talking point than a serious cost cutting proposal. Why
should the American people take this proposal seriously when
President Obama's fiscal 2013 budget adds $10.6 trillion to our
current debt level and proposes spending another $47 trillion
over the next 10 years? By the way, this compares to his budget
from last year that proposed spending $46 trillion over 10
years. Where are the spending cuts? The Federal Government is
obese. For 50 years, from 1960 to 2008, Federal spending
averaged 20.2 percent of GDP. Last year it exceeded 24 percent.
And without reform it will consume 35 percent of our economy by
the year 2035.
As Federal Reserve Board Chairman Bernanke stated in
testimony before the Senate Budget Committee last week, this
dynamic is clearly unsustainable. Federal spending is the
visible portion of government fat. Federal regulations are the
less visible plaque clogging the arteries of our economy.
According to a study commissioned by the Small Business
Administration, it cost $1.75 trillion to comply with Federal
regulations in 2008. That amount is larger than all but eight
economies in the world, and is a burden imposed by Washington
on job creators each and every year. Reshuffling agencies, akin
to rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic, will do little to
slow the out-of-control growth of the Federal Government.
Instead of saving costs, consolidation efforts could take
on a life of their own. For example, while the mission of the
Department of Homeland Security is a worthy one, no one knows
if the cost of consolidating 22 agencies has been worth the
price tag. A 2011 study by Ohio State University estimates the
total cost to the economy of homeland security measures tops $1
trillion. With more than 230,000 employees, DHS is now the
third largest Cabinet department. Yet an unqualified audit of
its operations remains elusive and unfulfilled.
And let's face it, the Federal Government is replete with
unfulfilled promises. Our $16 trillion war on poverty is
impoverishing America. In 1965, .3 percent of the population,
561,000 individuals, received food stamps. Today that number
has increased to 46 million, or 14.8 percent of all Americans.
During the same period the percentage of families living below
the poverty line has only slightly declined from 13.9 percent
to 11.1 percent, but the absolute number of individuals in
poverty has almost doubled from 24 million to over 46 million.
Partly as a result of government programs making out of wedlock
births financially possible, those birth rates have skyrocketed
from 7.7 percent in 1965 to 40.6 percent last year with obvious
negative economic implications for those families and Federal,
State and local budgets. These are not metrics of success, they
are profoundly disappointing metrics of abject failure.
As someone new to this process, it is apparent that
Washington's bias is geared for addition and rarely
subtraction. Last year proved the current critical political
makeup of Washington does not possess the courage or will to
adequately limit the growth of government. Enforceable spending
controls, like the CAP Act, and a constitutional amendment to
limit the size of government must first be passed to force
everyone to negotiate spending priorities and entitlement
reform. Everyone should be at the table and everything should
be put back on budget subject to annual appropriations and 75-
year solvency standards.
To address the growing regulatory burden on job creators, a
regulation moratorium should be put in place until measures
like the United Kingdom's one-in/one-out rule and the REINS Act
can be enacted to achieve regulatory balance.
And finally, a bicameral sunset committee should be
established with the sole mandate of identifying Federal rules,
regulations and laws that do more harm than good and then
recommending their elimination. In a government where most
activities are additive a permanent sunset committee would
provide a formalized process for subtraction. That would be a
welcome change.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[Prepared statement of Senator Johnson follows:]

Chairman Issa. Thank you. I will now recognize myself if
you will take some questions. Senator Warner, that
distinguished document, the very good document that was entered
in the record by the ranking member, talks about the size of
the Federal workforce, and it takes full advantage of a million
men and women who were taken out of the military during the era
of shrinking that they mention.
Do you think that the size of the Federal workforce and
number of employees is the appropriate measure or do you
believe that when we are looking at the size of government we
should use Senator Johnson's metrics, which is the portion of
the GDP that is consumed by government?
Senator Warner. I would first of all point out that I have
used those same numbers on the----
Chairman Issa. Well, I knew you would go with this.
Senator Warner. --amount of consumption of Federal
Government at 24, 25 percent. Of course I also point out the
fact that revenues now are at 15 percent of a 75-year low. And
any time we have had, as somebody who has been more than
slightly obsessed about the $15 trillion debt and deficit, if
you look back over those 75 years any time we have had relative
balance it has been when spending and revenues have been
between that 19-1/2 and 21 percent. So I want to get in the
point that if we are going to get a deficit solution it is
going to require both a shrinking and an increase on revenue
size.
I think in terms of the size of the Federal workforce what
is the exact right number for the workforce I think is what is
the least number possible to provide efficient service. As we
were talking in the anteroom, you know, the size of the Federal
workforce right now is a bit of a mystery because are we
counting full-time employers, are we counting contractors? And
those numbers, the fact that we don't have frankly as good a
data on the size, the fact that we don't know, for example, the
exact number of contractors that DOD has at this point, this is
one area where I would completely agree with Senator Johnson,
we ought to have at least full and complete data so then we can
have this kind of discussion.
Chairman Issa. Well, and I think that is the leading
question I asked. You know, Senator Johnson, we often debate
how much we pay a Federal worker, whether we out-source or in-
source. To a great extent those questions are to be a question
of cost versus benefit. I think we would all agree to that. You
said quite candidly that, well look, we have got this 24
percent that could and will likely grow to 35 percent if
unchecked. We have a historic 19 percent. Senator Warner points
out that we in fact have 15 percent coming out of revenue. Do
you agree that we need to get--our goal should be to get to 19-
19, so to speak, that we can't expect to get to 19 percent of
GDP in spending and still have 15 percent in revenue and then
say we have a balanced budget; would you agree to that?
Senator Johnson. First of all, I think you have to
recognize reality, and over the last 50 years prior to 2008 the
total amount the Federal Government was able to extract from
the economy and revenue was about 18.1 percent. And that is
regardless of whether the top personal tax rate during my
lifetime has been 90, 70, 50, 28, 31, 35, 39.6 percent. So to a
certain extent you have to recognize reality. And I realize
that when we had surpluses for 4 years at the end of the '90s
or early 2000s revenue did bump up against above 20 percent one
year, otherwise still below 20. But spending was only at 19.1
percent one of those years, otherwise it was in the 18 percent
range.
So from my standpoint I think the size of government in
relationship to GDP is a key metric. And when you currently add
in State and local spending we are at about 40 percent
nationally. So 40 cents of every dollar filters through some
level of government. And to put that in perspective, Norway
spends 40 percent on government of its GDP, Greece, anybody
hear of Greece recently it is about 47 percent, Italy is 49.
Chairman Issa. A little different than how much they get
from oil, between Greece where they have olive oil and Norway
where they have export oil that is much more profitable.
Senator Johnson. Precisely. But right now in the United
States we are at the lower level of European style government.
And we are seeing that economic model collapse. And it is just
not a metric for success. And again, I think we should really
be looking at metrics. Certainly everything the government does
needs to be judged based on what it actually accomplishes and
the metrics of success are not really there.
Chairman Issa. Well, let me quickly, because my time is
expiring, and I know you have very short time here, the
President has talked about reorganization authority. And you
may differ on this, but let me ask sort of the rhetorical
question.
In the best case, because you both alluded to this,
wouldn't we plan a reorg authority in the House and the Senate
that envisions, if you will, continuous reform, envisions the
idea that reform is not an up or down vote one time on a change
that the President thinks works for one or more agencies, but
in fact change the whole system to be more corporate? And I
will preface this by saying, Senator Warner, you and I, we
agree on almost everything. But I have been a CEO and I have
been a board member. CEOs do not have straight reorg authority.
What they ordinarily do is they bring their ideas to the board
and they get sort of a pre-approval. Then they go out and they
refine it. And then they come back for a final approval. And
during this time they periodically come for major chunks of
money. And, oh, by the way, the CFO tries to figure out how to
explain it to Wall Street. So when we look at the process of
government one of the challenges is, and this is where I want
you both to comment as much as you feel you can, don't we
inherently have a problem considering reorg authority up or
down one time and shouldn't we fashion our bill so that there
is ongoing commission, both House and Senate, but also
independent thinkers working in concert with whoever is in the
White House to try to get continuous improvement?
Senator Warner. Well, I would agree, Mr. Chairman, that we
need to have a process that has continuous improvement, number
one.
Number two, I think on any reorg authority that a
requirement that said you have to show that the reorganization
would save costs and save overhead would be important.
Number three, what the President is requesting would be
then subject to an up or down vote. And I would concur with you
that most CEOs would have to then go to their board and get
approval. The one difference that I would point out, and I
didn't fully appreciate this until I got here, was that in the
case of a business operation generally speaking the board of a
company has the best interest almost always of the company at
heart. One of the things that has been interesting as we come
up here, and I could never understand why we didn't have a
rational, for example, transportation policy at the Federal
level, now having been here for 3 years I understand that it is
because of congressional jurisdiction turf battles that mean
that I am not sure, and I say this in an ecumenical fashion,
that too often rationalization of the Federal Government is
held up by the congressional oversight and congressional
jurisdiction functions that has no equivalent in the private
sector.
So giving this President, giving any President the reorg
ability with a straight up or down with a requirement that you
have got to show cost effectiveness and overhead savings I
think is just a rational way to move forward on an entity as
large as the Federal Government.
Chairman Issa. Before we go to Senator Johnson I would ask
unanimous consent that a small but meaningful list of the 108
committees and subcommittees that the Department of Homeland
Security alone reports to in our turf battles be entered in the
record as germane. Without objection, so ordered. Senator
Johnson.
Senator Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we need
to recognize that what motivates business and what motivates
bureaucracies are two totally different things. Business
actually has the discipline of making a profit so they have
every incentive to keep their expenses and costs in line.
Bureaucracies, on the other hand, their primary goal in many
respects is growth, they continue to grow. And so if we are
going to think about reorganizing bureaucracies any successful
business of course does have a culture of continuous
improvement. And the way they are able to maintain that culture
of continuous improvement is they actually benchmark goals and
they measure what goals they have established. And that is part
of the problem of government, is we just simply never really go
back and take a look what were the good intentions and measure
what actually was achieved versus what the intention was. And
that is what I was trying to point out in my testimony. That is
where it starts. We have to establish the goals and the metrics
for accountability.
Senator Warner. Mr. Chairman, if I can add one comment. And
I am not sure we are all that far apart, you know, your concept
of continuing----
Chairman Issa. This is what we like about having the two of
you, is that for this committee I think there is no two
Senators closer to the view where we need to be.
Senator Warner. But I do think we have put in place some
tools. I do think GPRA, which requires a consolidation of a few
identifiable goals for each program or agency, is a critical
first step. I think the notion of crosscutting agency goals so
that as you have these 47 different financial literacy programs
and 92 teacher training programs, not only do you need
consolidation but you need amongst those what are the top
couple of goals around teacher quality and improvement.
I do think the notion of regulatory reform, a one-in/one-
out regulatory PAYGO makes sense in terms of a housekeeping
approach so that there is an incentive inside the agency to
look at cleaning out. I also think the notion, particularly on
the regulatory front, of creating someplace, and CBO may or may
not be the best spot, an independent entity that can assess the
claim oftentimes made by the agency that X thousands of lives
are saved or the cost by the business that X hundreds of
billions of dollars are charged, we have no independent
analysis there. And we have no analysis that says 3 years, 5
years after the fact did the regulation that was put in place
actually achieve the goal that was said to put in place. These
kind of areas I think would help bring about some of the
objective metrics I think all of us would like to see if we are
going to hold government more accountable. And recognizing as
we have to take on this $15 trillion debt, clearly we have got
to spend smarter than we are spending now.
Chairman Issa. Thank you. With that we go to the gentleman
from Virginia who was here at the start for his questions.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair. And again welcome both of
our colleagues from the United States Senate. Just a few
questions to my friend and colleague Senator Warner. Senator
Warner, if I understood what you were saying in terms of
metrics, surely looking at spending, Federal spending as a
percentage of GDP is absolutely a valid metric. But if I heard
you correctly so too is revenue as a percentage of GDP. And
right now that revenue figure is far below what it was last
time we actually balanced the Federal budget without a
constitutional amendment 4 years in a row, is that correct?
Senator Warner. Yes, I think again I have, as my friend the
congressman is aware of, been very active in the effort to try
to bring about this balance cutting spending, reforming
entitlement programs, a tax reform program that generates
additional revenue, because I frankly believe that debt and
deficit is our single greatest threat to this country and in
effect has become a proxy for whether Congress is up to solving
any problem. And it is going to require I think looking at both
sides of the balance sheet.
Mr. Connolly. And Senator, when you were the Governor of
the Commonwealth of Virginia you had to balance the budget 4
years of your term. Did you only look at cutting spending to
balance that budget?
Senator Warner. Thank you, Congressman, for that very nice
easy softball you have just thrown me. You may recall Virginia
was dealing with a $6 billion budget shortfall. We were put for
the first time ever on credit watch. We substantially cut
programs, shrank our State workforce. But we also put together
a tax reform plan with a 2 to 1 Republican legislature that
passed with significant numbers. And Virginia was reaffirmed
not only its triple-A bond rating ranking for the best managed
State in the country, and I would add ranked as the best State
for business.
Mr. Connolly. So balance worked out pretty well for the
Commonwealth of Virginia?
Senator Warner. Balance worked out pretty well. I would
also add one of the challenges we have, and I think this again
needs to be reflected as we look at what is the appropriate
percent of Federal spending in the GDP, is that, and again it
would be an area where actually I think Senator Johnson and I
would agree, we might disagree about the specifics of the
reform, but we do need to reform our entitlement programs. One
of the challenges we have is we have 3 million people a year
hit retirement age. Whatever that retirement age ends up being,
there are going to be costs in those programs that are in
effect unprecedented always keeping upward pressure on the
amount to spend the Federal Government will have. So this is
just demographics taking place and how we grapple with that is
terribly important.
Mr. Connolly. And Senator Warner, again, looking at
metrics, certainly I remember, both in the Commonwealth of
Virginia and in local government, one metric we used was the
ratio of our staffing to population. We used that to see were
we in fact efficiently using technology to create economies for
our taxpayers. And I am just looking at data over the last 50
years. In 1962, when President Kennedy was President, the ratio
was 13.3; that is to say 13.3 employees per thousand
population. And it went up under Nixon from that to 14.4, which
was the high watermark. And it is now the lowest it has been in
50 years, 8.4. And if you look at actual numbers, including
Postal Service workers, actual numbers of Federal employees, it
is 350,000 below its high watermark 20 years ago when President
H.W. Bush was President. So in absolute terms and in ratio it
looks like in the last 50 years we have actually cut out a lot
of that fat we are so concerned about in the title of this
hearing.
Do you think it is a fair metric to suggest that that kind
of ratio might mean we are running a leaner and more efficient
operation, not to suggest there couldn't be additional savings,
but clearly we have achieved something here?
Senator Warner. You know, I have to say that----
Chairman Issa. Feel free to disagree with him.
Senator Warner. No, no. I am just going to say that, you
know, in the Senate when we make these quick testimonies we
speak and then get out of Dodge before the questions come. You
know, it is interesting sitting on this side of the ledger
following a thoughtful provocative but very leading question,
but I think those are good metrics you have put forward.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. And I yield back. Thank you very
much.
Chairman Issa. Senator Johnson, I think you had something
left to say.
Senator Johnson. I would like to provide some balance to
the question.
Senator Warner. May I? I apologize to the chair. I didn't
know that.
Chairman Issa. And I apologize. We are going to let you go.
I felt that----
Senator Warner. No, absolutely.
Chairman Issa. --that you are both sort of Fox, not MSNBC,
but Senator Johnson felt left out here and he is junior and I
don't want him to leave here feeling bad.
Senator Johnson. I just want to provide a little balance in
answering the question. First of all, I think there is a great
deal of agreement, certainly what I found, I would say
consensus in Washington that we actually need to reform our Tax
Code. And I think Republicans also want more revenue, but we
want to grow revenue the old-fashioned way by increasing our
economy. And so the question I would ask when you take a look
at the metric of 24 percent of GDP in terms of government
spending is why hasn't this President in his budget actually
proposed pro growth tax reform? And also we all recognize that
the real long-term looming crisis in terms of our budget is
entitlements, Medicare and Social Security. And again, the
President in his fourth budget, I mean he has basically had
four cracks at the apple here, he still has yet to step up to
the plate and propose any type of reform that would actually
save Social Security and Medicare long-term.
So again, I am all for increasing revenue, but let's do it
the old-fashioned way by actually getting economic growth. The
reason we are at only 15 percent revenue this year and for the
last couple of years is because our economy is in terrible
shape. And that is also to a certain extent driven by the
progressivity of our Tax Code. When you have a highly
progressive Tax Code that is going to be revenue in terms of
the government is going to be far more affected by shocks to
the economy.
So again, I would look at pro growth tax reform. The
broadness of the base eliminates the loopholes in special
deductions. I think there is a great deal of consensus. And
that is what we really need to be doing here. Let's look at
what we agree on. We agree on reforming government, we agree on
pro growth tax reform, so let's actually start doing it this
year.
Chairman Issa. I want to thank both of you. Please tell
your friends on the other side of the dome it is a great place
to come, a great audience, another opportunity for a C-SPAN
moment. So we will take a short recess just to reset. And thank
you again, Senators.
[Recess.]
Chairman Issa. The committee will come to order. Our second
panel of witnesses includes Mr. Paul Light is a Professor of
Public Service at the Robert Wagner School of Public Service
New York University. The Honorable Dan Blair serves as
President and CEO of the National Academy of Public
Administration. Mr. Robert Shea is a Principal at Grant
Thornton, LLP. And Mr. Max Stier is President and CEO of a
Partnership for Public Service.
You are not Senators. Pursuant to the rules of the
committee all witnesses will be sworn. Please rise to take the
oath and raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you are about to
give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth?
Let the record indicate that all witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
Since there is a few more of you we would ask that you try
to stay close to your 5 minutes. As previously noted your
entire statement will be placed in the record along with
supplemental data you may choose to add after the hearing. So
let's begin with Dr. Light.

STATEMENT OF PAUL C. LIGHT, PH.D.

Mr. Light. It is a pleasure to be here with you today. And
thank you for your work and the committee's work to improve
government performance.
I would like to start by just telling you a quick story
about Senator John Glenn for whom I had the pleasure of serving
back in the 100th Congress on government reform and
presidential appointments.
I remember asking him once what he was thinking when he was
sitting on top of the rocket that would send him into orbit,
now almost 50 years ago. Were you thinking about whether the
rocket was fueled and whether everybody was ready, whether
there might be an accident?
And he said back to me, of course not, I was thinking about
the lawn, my house, Annie, you know, the whole thing. And I
said why? He said because I had faith that the Federal
employees and the contractors working side by side with them
were doing their job.
And I wonder sometimes whether he would have that same
level of confidence given the ongoing problems actually
delivering services now 50 years later. I still think he would
have great confidence, but I think we have got to ask ourselves
the question about whether government is currently working as
well as it should.
Chairman Issa. And this was even though every other launch,
every second launch prior to that had blown up?
Mr. Light. He was very----
Chairman Issa. He was an optimist, wasn't he?
Mr. Light. And he still is. He still is. We should all be
in his shape, you know?
I just want to answer a couple of questions that came up
earlier. You have my statement.
On the overhaul issue, you are quite right. There were two
Hoover Commissions. One ran from 1947 to 1949, the other from
1953 to 1955. They produced 50 reorganization plans. It was not
a single up or down. Now, they did have the reorganization
authority, and, of course, the President is asking for
consolidation authority. And we can talk a little bit about
that. I don't think it is a bad idea, but I am not sure where
the reorganization plans would come from, given the shrinking
of OMB's ability to deliver reorganization plans. So, you know,
it is worth asking about.
On the size of government, head-count issue, I think you
have to include all the Federal Government's employees,
including contractors. And, by my estimates, we have about 7.5
million contract employees, another 3 million grant employees,
and then we have the 2.2 million Federal employees, plus
postal, plus military. It is a big workforce to deliver the
mission we have, you know. So I think the issue of head count
is deceiving, to some extent. I think we could have the same
head count but different distribution of workers and get the
job done well.
On the agenda, I think GPRA modernization is very
important. I would like to see a budget table that shows the
amount of money that we spend on the priorities that are
generated through the Modernization Act and see whether they
add up to the total budget or what percentage of the budget
cannot be classified as related to the small handful of
priorities identified through this important process.
On the thickening of government, really, what does a
government agency look like? I think that you are on point here
regarding the need for a more efficient government. I think we
have too many layers of government, too many Presidential
appointees. We could cut the number of Presidential appointees
in half and do better. I think the baby-boom retirements, while
troublesome to many of us, also offer an opportunity to take a
good, hard look at the senior levels of government, where I
think we could have some downsizing and redistribution of
workers down to the bottom.
You have a bill before you that has been passed by the
Senate on some modest streamlining, a small first step really,
by my view. And Max Stier here will argue that it is an
important first step. I think we can move forward with it, but
I still think we have too many appointees and we ought to do
something about it.
Let me conclude by saying that my father was an auto-parts
man. And in his business was a machine shop, and he ground down
pistons and engines and overhauled day-in and day-out. So when
the President says we need an overhaul, I think of pulling the
engine out, grinding it down and really working it over, not
just changing the spark plugs. And I think, to date, we have
had relatively timid proposals for an overhaul, and it is time
to get big. I don't necessarily know exactly how to do it. I
have some ideas and I have a list of proposals. But I think
this committee, with its proud history, should be the place to
begin this effort.
So good luck, and keep up the good work.
Chairman Issa. Thank you, Doctor.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Light follows:]

Chairman Issa. Mr. Blair?

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DAN G. BLAIR

Mr. Blair. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. I appreciate the invitation----
Chairman Issa. Could you pull the microphone just a little
closer, please?
Mr. Blair. Certainly.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Blair. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, thank
you for the invitation for me to testify today.
I am Dan Blair, president and CEO of the National Academy
of Public Administration. The Academy is a congressionally
chartered nonprofit organization comprised of more than 700
fellows who are selected by the membership.
I am honored to appear on this panel today with three of my
distinguished Academy fellows: Dr. Light, Mr. Shea, and Mr.
Stier. And I would also note that Mr. Shea is the vice chairman
of the board. So I will be on good behavior today.
Mr. Light. But are we all paying our dues?
Mr. Blair. Well, that is a better question, and we will
talk about that after the hearing, Dr. Light.
As noted in my written testimony, the Academy's
congressional charter precludes from taking an official
position on legislation, and the views I am presenting today
have not been formally endorsed by the Academy.
We now use a 20th-century government organization to
respond to 21st-century problems. The President's proposal to
merge the Commerce Department with other trade-related agencies
might be a step in the right direction if done right. However,
moving the boxes around without taking a hard look at how the
actual work is being done is unlikely to lead to significant
improvements. Organizational changes must be bolstered by
additional approaches to improve public management.
First, consider using the principles of ``Smart Lean
Government'' to examine the delivery of government programs and
services through a holistic or a cross-government approach. An
SLG examination of government programs would take an enterprise
architecture approach of examining the interrelationships of
information, people, technology, and processes. For example,
the trade promotion activities would not focus solely on the
International Trade Administration, but would examine trade
promotion activities and expenditures across the spectrum of
agencies supporting foreign trade. This approach can identify
areas where coordination can be improved and government
activities may be consolidated, and improve how programs are
operated, measured, and managed.
Other approaches include improving productivity and
expanding the use of technology and data. A term called
``disruptive innovation,'' which is the introduction of new
technology which replaces an earlier technology or product, can
be utilized for the benefit of government and the taxpayer.
Across the government, Congress and the Executive should
foster environments that encourage innovation and creativity.
For example, Congress could require that agencies report on
their use of data accumulated from industry, other agencies,
and the public in order to make it accessible and useful to its
stakeholders. In the private sector, where disruptive
innovation has become commonplace, consumers are used to steady
price reductions and performance improvements over time. The
challenge is creating management structures and environments
which foster and encourage this type of behavior in government.
Further, what gets measured is what gets done. So one step
forward may be for the Bureau of Labor Statistics to begin
again to measure Federal productivity. The Federal Government
last measured its productivity almost 20 years ago, and it may
be time to revisit that concept to determine what the
appropriate productivity metrics would be to measure.
Other tools include enhanced human capital flexibilities,
increased interagency and intergovernmental collaboration and
coordination, and linking budgets with program performance
across agency and department lines. The GPRA Modernization Act
gives OMB this type of authority to change the way budgets are
developed and implemented.
Further, Congress could consider engaging in a rigorous
review of agency missions, functions, and programs in an effort
at a strategic realignment. This approach would examine what
agencies do as required by statute, regulation, or practice,
and evaluate whether underperforming activities or programs
should be shed in order to protect budgets for core mission and
high-performing activities and programs.
Mr. Chairman, by changing the way that government work gets
done, we can dramatically improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of government services and programs.
This concludes my oral testimony, and I am happy to answer
any of your questions.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Blair follows:]

Chairman Issa. Mr. Shea?

STATEMENT OF ROBERT SHEA

Mr. Shea. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. I am proud to be with you today to talk about
reorganization, especially at the committee that gave me my
first job in Washington. I am also proud to be with such good
friends. You will get, like on the last panel, a lot of violent
agreement among us.
My name is Robert Shea. I am a fellow of the National
Academy of Public Administration and a principal of Grant
Thornton.
Reorganization and consolidation offer many opportunities
to improve government's performance, but they take time. Faster
results, in my view, will come from greater collaboration among
government programs and a more focused assessment of their
relative cost-effectiveness.
And the Federal Government, as has been discussed, has been
grappling with reorganization almost since its inception. But I
wonder what past Presidents would say about the volume of
overlap and duplication that plagues our government today.
There are hundreds of government programs, many aimed at the
same problem, often from different organizations throughout the
executive branch.
If Congress or the executive branch were to undertake a
substantial reorganization, where would they start? How would
we know which programs to keep, consolidate, or terminate? Past
efforts have made a dent but really haven't provided you the
information you need to make good decisions. After a decade of
the Government Performance and Results Act implementation, many
agencies began to make great strides understanding the
performance of their programs. Unfortunately, that effort did
not result in the kind of information you need to make
decisions, like good cross-cutting goals or collaboration among
cross-cutting programs.
In 2001, OMB developed the Program Assessment Rating Tool
to inventory the government's programs and assess their
relative performance. After 5 years of implementation, OMB and
agencies assessed nearly 1,000 programs, nearly 100 percent of
the Federal Government's budget. They assigned each program a
rating of ``effective,'' ``moderately effective,''
``adequate,'' ``ineffective,'' or ``results not demonstrated.''
A number of efforts to improve the performance of
duplicative programs flowed from this effort. For instance, the
administration used assessment results as one factor in its
decision to propose consolidation of 17 community and economic
development programs. We also used the PART process to arrive
at a common set of outcome measures with which to measure the
government's job training programs.
For a variety of reasons, the Obama administration is no
longer using this tool to assess and improve programs. So what
tools exist to do this today?
A lot has been said about the Government Performance and
Results Act Modernization Act, a promising framework for
improving the coordination among like programs. If Congress
takes an active role holding the executive branch accountable
for its implementation, the law's requirements can be powerful
incentives to improve coordination among duplicative programs.
The budget released Monday does include 14 cross-cutting
goals, as Senator Warner mentioned. And you can find those
goals at www.goals.performance.gov. I think they are a mixed
bag, but I think they could use your attention. Your feedback
on those goals would be readily accepted by the administration.
Getting programs in different agencies to agree on common
goals and a coordinated approach for achieving them is hard.
Agencies or programs with common goals often have completely
different congressional authorizing and appropriations
committees, a situation that enables stovepipes. They also have
separate constituencies who will fight to preserve the status
quo.
While there are many barriers to interagency collaboration,
technology provides enormous opportunity to overcome those
barriers, especially social media and collaborative technology.
The Federal Government is really only just beginning to
capitalize on these tools to enhance collaboration.
A number of other initiatives show promise: program
evaluation. The Obama administration is building on the Bush
administration's effort to more rigorously evaluate programs
across government, a very necessary step in order to discern
what works in government.
The Administrative Flexibility Initiative is also an
important effort. Overlapping and duplicative programs tend to
have exponentially more cumbersome and wasteful administrative
requirements imposed on State and local governments. The
administration has tasked agencies and OMB with inventorying
those requirements and reducing them, which may seem like a
minor effort but could, when you combine them, really free up
money that State and local governments can use to focus on
outcomes.
Improved coordination is easier said than done. Agency and
program leadership are busy enough working within their own
domain without having to be concerned with another's
activities. Active congressional and Presidential leadership
and oversight can produce results sooner than what an
organization may never produce.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Shea follows:]

Chairman Issa. Mr. Stier?

STATEMENT OF MAX STIER

Mr. Stier. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee. It is a pleasure to be here and, as my
colleagues said, a pleasure to be testifying with them. I think
we are all trying to do the same thing, and I would also say
all friends. So it is really an honor to be here.
Chairman Issa. By the way, since you all in the same
academy, do you have a quorum here? Because, you know, each of
you says you don't have this authority individually. Together
do we?
Mr. Shea. We could vote on the President's salary right
now. We could make some savings right here.
Mr. Stier. Exactly. And I think that Dan appropriately
speaks for the whole Academy.
But be that as it may, you know, we do have violent
agreement here. And I think a real question to ask is, since
there is so much agreement, why isn't more happening? And I
think that the execution imperative is fundamental here, and we
have to focus, you know, our primary attention on those
execution questions.
One way to do that is look at what happened the last time
that there was a major contraction in the government's budget,
during the 1990s. We have a process in government of repeating
the past mistakes because we don't pay attention to what has
happened before. So we actually did a report with Booz Allen
called ``Smart Cuts,'' where we examined what occurred during
the 1990s and drew a set of lessons that I believe have great
application for today. And I am just going to mention five of
them. Obviously, we go in greater depth in the testimony.
The first one is--and this is a conversation that,
likewise, has been held with the prior witnesses, as well--and
that is talent needs to be viewed as an asset, not a cost, in
government. The bottom line is that good government begins with
good people. It is real easy to cut costs in cutting, you know,
money out of the workforce. But at the end of the day, we need
to make sure that we are not really impacting mission in a way
that we don't want.
IBM did a great study of companies during the last
downturn, and what they saw is that the companies under
pressure were actually investing more in their people because
they needed more out of them. And I think we need to take that
attitude when we examine the Federal workforce. It doesn't mean
that there are not costs available, but we have to be real
smart about how we do it.
Secondly, we need to make sure that we are making better
choices about what we are doing and not simply looking at
across-the-board cuts, which, again, is the norm and what we
saw during the 1990s. That penalizes the efficient and
effective organizations, when, in point of fact, if you want to
save resources, you just have to do fewer things and do them
well. But, again, the tendency and the easy thing to do is just
say, we are going to cut across the board. And that doesn't end
up actually giving us what we ultimately need.
Third, we need to--and this is building off the comments
that you made, Mr. Chairman--we really need to look over the
long term. This is a long-haul process. My belief is one of the
root causes of dysfunction in government is that we have a set
of political leaders in the executive branch that are around,
on average, for 18 months to 2 years. That means that they are
incented to focus on policy development, crisis management, but
not on the health of the organizations that they run, because,
frankly, they are not going to be around long enough either to
have that impact or to actually pay the piper for problems that
they create or don't solve. And so I think it is fundamental
for to us have that long-term view.
There are some great good examples. Patent and Trademark
Office is one of the ones that I love, where they went out--
they had to change their physical site. They chose a building
with a much smaller footprint. They decided, we are going to
change the culture, we are going to move to a telework
environment. They wound up saving money on the physical plant
that they had, they wound up producing, you know, better
results in terms of their productivity, and they reduced their
costs. We need to look for opportunities like that. Ask the
question whenever an agency is actually moving buildings, why
don't see that as a transformation opportunity? But, again,
looking at the long term.
Fourth, we have to measure the impact of our choices that
we are making today. And, again, you know, Robert, the work
that he did on PART I think is a fabulous example of things
that we need to see more of. I would present to the committee
also the work that we have done at the partnership around the
Best Places to Work rankings. Again, a challenge in the public
sector is you don't have financial metrics for performance,
frequently. And in the private sector, where you do, smart
companies look at employee attitudes because there is a strong
correlation between those attitudes and ultimate performance.
We should be using those numbers to tell us what is going on
inside the Federal Government today, and Best Places allow us
do that.
Fifth, coming to the question of reorganization, it is a
reasonable strategy to use, but, frankly, we ought to start
with the talent issues. The 9/11 Commission said it best; the
quality of the people is more important than the quality of the
wiring diagram. Important to see how those boxes play together,
but if you don't solve the internal issues, frankly, moving the
boxes, as we have heard from a number of other folks, won't
make any difference.
In our written testimony, we offer 25 questions that we
think are a good starting point in thinking about
reorganization. And, Mr. Chairman, I salute you for also the
chart you put in. You know, this is, again, a 9/11 Commission
report recommendation. If we don't see this as a board of
directors for the government, if we don't see the
interrelationship, frankly, the executive branch won't work
right.
So, pleasure to be here, and look forward to any questions
that you might have. Thank you so much.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Stier follows:]

Chairman Issa. I will now recognize myself for a first
round.
First question for all of you: In a reorganization, is a
reorganization of the executive branch--we are talking about a
significant change, not just one, if you will, Cabinet
position--is there any way that that can be effective without
Congress buying into it in a way in which, one, we support the
change not just by a vote but by post-vote, particularly,
reorganizing to match the executive branch? I think Senator
Warner said it pretty well, and, as you have mentioned, Mr.
Stier, the chart says it all.
If we vote for a reorganization, don't we have to, in the
House and the Senate, realign so that our committees match the
new government reality?
Mr. Blair. I will take a stab at that question, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Issa. You don't have to say ``yes'' or ``no,'' but
``yes'' would be good.
Mr. Blair. I think if you don't look at the organization of
Congress in light of the changes that take place in executive
branch organization, you risk running into the same problems of
overlap and duplication which you are actually trying to
address within the executive branch organization itself.
Can Congress, as a body, effectively conduct its oversight
and authorizing and appropriating duties without changing? The
answer is yes, but I think it is going to take a lot more
effort. So I think that the Congress is going to have to take a
look at itself in terms of trying to align itself better with
the reorganized executive branch.
Chairman Issa. So does that, by definition, beg the whole
question of a reorg the way the President is talking about,
``Give me authority and I will loosely tell you what I am going
to do,'' or Hoover Commission, where you came up with 273
recommendations, most of which were accepted but accepted over
a long period of time with multiple interim steps?
Mr. Blair. Well, you can do a one-off here or a one-off
there in terms of executive branch organization, but you really
need----
Chairman Issa. Yeah, but Dr. Light said that is not an
overhaul.
Mr. Blair. --to do it in terms of an overarching strategy
and within an architecture that makes sense as to what your
ultimate goal would be.
Chairman Issa. Let me ask, sort of, the broadest question
here. Senator Warner is a cosponsor, or he, actually, has a
companion bill for the DATA Act. We are trying to make
interoperative fundamentally how we communicate, so that data
in one place and the other, it doesn't take a team of people to
try to match up on a one-off basis, but rather you can look at
it transparently back and forth if you have the rights. Nice
thought, nice idea. Clearly, I am very dedicated to it.
But let me ask a more fundamental question. OMB, which has,
I am told, six Senate-confirmed positions, is repeatedly
clearly ignored when they want to make fundamental changes in
how Cabinet positions spend their money and do their work.
Do we have a fundamental problem that, even though there
are 23 Cabinet-level positions, including the OMB Director is
considered a Cabinet level, do we have a fundamental problem in
that back-office functions--sort of, OPM, OMB, all the data
questions, all the questions of how money is spent not on what
the Cabinet position does but on the things that facilitate
that--those, in fact, are hierarchies that belong to Cabinet
positions, and unless there is consensus, they can ignore, if
you will, the Office of the President by simply delaying?
Is that a long but fundamental truth that every OMB
Director faces?
Mr. Shea. I, as having led a lot of interagency
collaborations from OMB, I can tell you without question, you
know, there are going to be some who are really invested in the
success of the enterprise and you have their buy-in, but there
will be a pocket, almost invariably, who oppose what you are
trying to accomplish and want to protect their turf. And when
it has been successful is when OMB and a lead agency and
Congress are all joined at the hip and invested in the success
of the enterprise.
Examples include security clearance reform and the Federal
Funding Accountability and Transparency Act implementation. In
both cases, Congress had virtually a seat at the table
throughout the nitty-gritty of the implementation of both those
initiatives. And they have proven more or less successful.
Chairman Issa. I am going to ask just one exit question, if
you will.
Mr. Stier, you used the PTO. The PTO currently has a
backlog greater than it did before reorg. They have hired a lot
more people. They now consume their entire budget even without
fee diversion.
If this were a private enterprise and basically because
they charge the revenues that run them, wouldn't you give them
less than an ``A''?
Mr. Stier. I think that the PTO, again--and on the backlog
side, first of all, I mean, clearly there is a 3-year backlog,
I believe it is over 700,000 applications, on the patent side.
That is a massive problem. I think what David Kappos is doing
is actually the right movement. I think he has gotten the
backlog--my understanding is he has gotten the backlog down.
And he is, I think, aligning his resources in a very smart way
against their needs. And a good example of that is even around
understanding how to use performance incentives to increase
productivity.
So they don't, clearly--and I think Dave Kappos would be
the first person to say that--deserve an ``A'' in terms of what
they are producing today. But to your point about the time it
takes to turn something around, my sense is--and you may have
greater expertise in this than I do, but from what I can see,
he is on the right track but he has a long distance to go.
Chairman Issa. And I am a big fan of his. That is the only
reason that, besides having my own patents and serving on
Judiciary, that--and I wanted to make sure we understood, he
has a big job and a long way to go----
Mr. Stier. Yes.
Chairman Issa. --and his is a predominantly Federal
workforce that he is trying to get to be more productive,
including the telecommuting and including, by the way--they are
siting a West Coast facility so they can recruit and retain
people that right now just do not want to come to that little-
bitty building----
Mr. Stier. Right.
Chairman Issa. --because it is in an area they don't want
to live.
Mr. Stier. Right. No, absolutely. And that is critical. And
I think the longer he stays in that job, the better the agency
is going to be.
Chairman Issa. You heard it here.
With that, we go to the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Connolly, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome to our panel.
Mr. Stier, I gave a town hall meeting at the PTO
headquarters you referred to, and I can confirm what you said.
I saw a lot of energy and synergy. I mean, I think that it
created something in terms of a dynamic that improved
productivity and morale. And those are things definitely I
would hope at some point we care about with respect to the
Federal workforce, not only at PTO but throughout the Federal
Government.
The President has proposed consolidating a number of
international economic entities to try to achieve similar
synergy and productivity. And I note a GAO report from last
year that said, ``These practices,'' meaning desirable
practices, ``include leveraging physical and administrative
resources, establishing compatible policies and procedures,
monitoring collaboration, and reinforcing agency accountability
for collaborative efforts through strategic or annual
performance plans.''
From your point of view, does the President's proposal make
sense in terms of similar synergy and productivity potential
gains?
Mr. Stier. Look, I think there is no question but that we
have a government that needs to be changed in many dramatic
ways. I think the challenge here is that the idea, almost, is
less important than the execution issues. And so that is why in
my testimony I identify 25 questions that I think we really
want to look for answers for before we start down this road.
And, again, thinking about historical example, if you look
at the Department of Homeland Security, if you look at any
major reorganization in the modern era, it is after many, many
years at best still a work in progress.
So I think the answer to your question is that I think it
is important for the President to be putting his marker down to
say that we need to examine the form and shape of government,
but what I would ask for and what I would suggest would make
for a more successful ultimate resolution is that we look at a
more comprehensive set of issues that include primarily some of
the talent and culture issues that I think are fundamental,
ultimately, to success in getting better productivity out of
the government.
I think you have to look at that holistically, and you have
to build a time frame into it. So, again, I think that,
whatever reorganization is imagined, we need to make sure there
is continuity of attention and a leadership group that is
around long enough to see that execution through.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Blair, one of the concerns I always have
when I look at any government structure is the stovepipe
structure and mentality. And, again, sort of keying off the
suggestions or the recommendations made by the President, when
you go to some of our embassies overseas, there are lots of
stovepipes, seemingly uncoordinated, and yet sharing a common
mission in terms of trying to promote U.S. economic interests,
investment, trade, and exports.
And I just wonder if you might comment on that. How do we--
if not this proposal, what, to try to overcome the stovepipe
mentality to achieve efficiencies and productivity gains that
we desperately need?
Mr. Blair. Thank you, Congressman. I appreciate the
question.
There are different approaches you could take to attack
that stovepiping that you identified. And one of them that is
outlined in my testimony is an approach called Smart Lean
Government. This approach was brought to the Academy by some of
its fellows, and we have been working with an outside group at
refining this. But, fundamentally, what it does is takes a
holistic approach, looking at government across the spectrum,
not at a department or an agency, but by looking at the actual
program that is being delivered.
And so, one of the things that I talked about was--take,
for instance, international trade. It is just not one agency;
we have a series of agencies. And look at the ultimate service
or product or program that is being delivered, and how is the
most effective way of getting that to the customer? Is there
overlap and duplication? Are multiple departments involved? If
so, why?
GAO came out with a report last year that highlighted
potential overlap and duplication in a whole host of programs.
Sometimes that duplication is necessary and intentional.
Sometimes you want those belts and suspenders in order to
prevent a program failure. But this approach would take a look
at it across the government spectrum and say, what is the most
effective way of delivery to the customer? Usually the customer
doesn't care who delivers it so much as it is done well and
that it meets his or her or their industry's needs.
So that is one approach that could be taken.
Mr. Connolly. And, Mr. Shea, if I had a little more time, I
might ask you to elaborate a little bit. You made a very
interesting point in terms of expanding evaluations as a tool.
I wonder if you might just elaborate on that, as my last
question.
Mr. Shea. Yes, sir. Thank you very much.
In order to find out whether our programs are working, it
is necessary to conduct a scientific experiment, basically,
isolating what we are doing from other factors so you can say
without a shadow of a doubt what we are doing is working.
Simple performance measurement is a very good indicator, but it
often disguises other factors that are impacting the
performance outside of what we are doing.
The Department of Education has a large investment, through
the Institute of Education Sciences, to really figure out what
is impacting student outcomes throughout the country. And they
are building a body of evidence that helps them invest in
better and more effective practices.
This is being expanded throughout government on a
relatively small scale, but a kernel of information about an
effective practice is gold if you can really use it to scale up
and impact outcomes that, frankly, we have been working on for
centuries and haven't made a dent.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. DesJarlais. [Presiding.] The gentleman's time has
expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Walberg, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to the panel for being here.
Listening to the Senators earlier, I was interested to hear
a lot of violent agreement, as you have mentioned, from two
Senators in a body that has extremely violent disagreements on
actually doing something.
And I am reminded that we are coming up on the third
anniversary of the stimulus that expanded government, that
really did not produce an economy that would grow. I look at a
little card here that I have that lists a number of things to
deal with regulatory barriers that come from government and a
significant number of bills that we have passed, including the
REINS Act and other regulatory accountability reforms, that
still sit in the Senate, not acted upon.
So while I am not asking you as a panel of Senators on how
we should accomplish this, I have appreciated some of the
statements that you have made in your opening remarks.
Dr. Light, I was raised in the home of a machinist who was
also an extreme conservative and always thought that he could
build his cars and engines much better and more efficiently
than taking it to a mechanic. And so, in the grease pit that he
built in our family garage, I watched him do that and then
became a gearhead myself and have had engines--both light tune-
ups as well as rebuilds, taking the whole engine out of the
car, as well, when I had to. I know also that in the process of
grinding valves, that is a fine process taken carefully, as
opposed to wrenching out the bottom end of an engine and taking
out the crankshaft and replacing it.
I was interested in your background on that as you
discussed what needs to be done with the bureaucracy. And so I
would like to ask you if you would discuss a bit further and in
detail your proposals to overhaul the bureaucracy, including
removing engine parts as necessary.
Mr. Light. Well, I know how to tune and set the timing on a
'57 Chevy, but that is not how we do it now, is it?
Mr. Walberg. That is right. We don't have the points
anymore.
Mr. Light. You know, I think, to continue this metaphor,
the first thing you do is drain the oil and clean out the
sludge. And that is something we got to do.
I agree with my colleagues that it is difficult. And there
is a lot of conversation about rearranging the chairs on the
deck of the Titanic, but we have a real opportunity here. We
have about 50 percent of the Federal workforce moving toward
retirement. And that can be seen as a problem or that can be
seen as an opportunity. We have a lot of opportunity here to
take a look at what we have, and instead of downsizing through
attrition at the bottom or reductions in force, we can take a
look at jobs and not fill them as they have been exited.
We can take a look at the structure of government and
reorganize, but we are going to have to go big. We are going to
have to take a look at the whole structure. And this
opportunity is going to slip through our fingers, and 10 years
from now we are going to have the same government that we have
right now. I am all in favor of patience, but when an
opportunity like this comes along, you take advantage of it.
Now, how do we do that? I am not wild about another Hoover
Commission. I am not sure we could do it with the current
structure of Congress, and I am not sure that the President
could relay the reorganization plans. I do like the idea of
creating some sort of government reform trust, modeled on the
Resolution Trust Corporation, to which we would give
responsibility for collecting the delinquent taxes, collecting
the bad loans, collecting and dealing--liquidating the useless
property that we have, and collecting the money from doing so.
I mean, we have some cherry-picking that we can do that can
yield big dollar returns if we just invest in it and give
somebody the authority to do it.
And then we have to actually delayer the government. We
have to take some things off and streamline the block, if you
will.
Mr. Walberg. Well, let me follow up on that and ask maybe
across the panel, if you would care to comment. Does the
Constitution and, as one witness in a hearing last week said,
the ``constitutional niceties''--I disagree with that; I think
there is still authority in the Constitution--does that come
into play in dealing with the size of government, in your
minds?
Mr. Light. Well, I will just quickly say that the
Constitution is quite clear that the executive is to faithfully
execute the laws. And Hamilton, a particular proponent of a
well-functioning government, argued that the jarrings of
parties that we see on Capitol Hill, the intense conflict, is
important for protecting the public from tyranny, but once the
laws are passed, the President is to execute--period, end of
story.
And the President has authorities, properly checked by this
institution. And we can figure out ways to get this done and
get it done in a timely fashion without wasting this
opportunity that we have. We can figure this out. You are
capable of doing it, and you have done it already. So, I mean,
I think it is possible.
Mr. DesJarlais. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Blair. One comment I would have on that is that we
don't--it would be interesting to see what our Founders would
think about our Federal Government today. And to that end, and
maybe in some shameless self-promotion----
Mr. Walberg. As long as we had an EMT close to them.
Mr. Blair. What I was going to mention is that--and this
may be shameless self-promotion on the part of the Academy, but
we are going to be looking at hosting a seminar on this in a
couple months. And we are looking at what The Federalist Papers
and others said at the time of the Founders and looking and
comparing and contrasting that today. So I think that will be a
good debate, and I think that I will be able to more fully
answer your question after hearing from our panelists on that.
But we have a very fundamental problem today, that we can't
deliver--or we have a hard time delivering on the products and
services that government is supposed to be delivering on. And
we are not doing it as efficiently and effectively as we have
to. We have a pending sequestration that is hanging over
everyone's heads, and something needs to be done.
And it is going to take leadership. It is going to take
executive leadership, congressional leadership, working
together and working across the aisle. But if it is done by one
side or the other side, or it is done to the other side, you
are not going to build together that critical mass that is
necessary to shepherd those reforms through.
We can look back through history, like, over the last 10 to
15 years and seeing reforms, if it has not been in personnel,
in health care, et cetera, that didn't have that strong
bipartisan, bicameral support. And if you don't have that, when
the sides switch, where are the promoters and where are the
people who are the stakeholders in that?
And so, what I would urge this committee--this committee is
poised and primed to serve that function, to come up with a
plan to--maybe not the plan itself, but to direct an
organization or to come up with the parameters for what a
reorganized Federal Government should look like. Your
counterpart in the Senate is equipped to do the same thing, and
you are at a point in history when this can be done.
And the American people are depending on you. They are
depending on the Congress; they are depending on the executive
branch. They want to see everyone join together at least to do
what is good and in the best interests of the American people.
And so, to that effect, I think that this committee has a rare
opportunity to make that happen.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. DesJarlais. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from the District
of Columbia, Ms. Norton, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to take a stab at building on the violent
agreement among you to see if we can model it for this
committee. Often, there is needless division in this committee,
and I wonder if this might not be the time, when I listen to
your testimony, to draw out something of what the committee has
done with what the President proposes to do.
And, by the way, watch out for your looking at the Framers.
The Framers were so wise. The Framers knew what they didn't
know and what they did know. And one thing the Framers could
not have envisioned is a global economy, the Industrial
Revolution, and the technical revolution that we are trying to
go through. So the last thing they did was to try to reorganize
the government. That is up to us.
The committee has voted to reduce the size of government--I
am not sure where this has gone in the House floor--by 2015 by
10 percent, some across-the-board figure. Now the President now
wants to reorganize the government.
My only experience with this kind of massive reorganization
comes from having served on the board of three Fortune 500
companies. And I must tell you that it is only out of that
experience that I can counter my inherent hostility to fast-
track. Because I can tell you that no CEO in a Fortune 500
company would have done anything but put the plan before the
board of directors and that is it. And what the President
faces, it is 400 CEOs, or 400 and some CEOs, that want to get
into the act of reorganizing the government. So I guess that
drives him to fast-track, and we always hate it.
But let me tell you what has already happened. For decades
now, we have had a base closure commission. And look, I have
lost--I have lost a base. They have another one coming up. We
hate it. They survive. This very committee has just approved a
BRAC-type bill to allow for the consolidation and disposal of
property. A bill from another committee, a similar bill, went
to the floor last week, BRAC-type, civilian BRAC-type bill for
agencies so you can dispose of or consolidate some of this
excess property held by a number of agencies, passed in the
House. Okay.
So what we have before us now is--the committee uses the
word ``obesity,'' meaning some are concerned with the number of
employees, despite figures showing a quite remarkable and
steady decline in the number of employees. When you listen to
Senator Warner's testimony, it suggests that our problem has
not been so much people as duplication of programs. Indeed,
Senator Warner himself, in listing his examples, didn't point
to agencies, he pointed to programs: This one does, you know,
this for the poor children, and so does that one, and there are
10 agencies that do it.
So my question is, with Members of Congress wanting to
reduce the Federal workforce further right now and with the
President wanting to reorganize the workforce, isn't this a
time to bring the two together, rationally, so that, for
example, instead of a 10 percent cut across the board, you may
with reorganization eliminate whole programs altogether and
therefore accomplish what you want perhaps with the same amount
of funding in a more rational way?
I think you, Dr. Light, talked about streamlining and
delayering. Well, you don't do either with a 10 percent across-
the-board cut. You do what happened when I was at the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, when I was chair. You know,
we did the attrition and so forth, but if there were too few
lawyers, we would have to fill those positions anyway because
they were vital to what the agency did.
So I would like to know whether you--I would like to hear
from all four of you--whether you think the President's desire
to reorganize and the committee's desire to cut employees in
fact could come together if the President were given this
authority, which I hate? I am trying to fight against my own
bias to find what is the right way to go.
Mr. Light. First of all, it is a delight to be back
testifying before you. It is nice to see you again.
But let me say that I am violently opposed to the
attrition-based downsizing. I don't think it is going to work.
And, in fact, oftentimes you hear people who advocate the
downsizing--which hits the bottom layer of government with a
tsunami force while insulating the higher levels of government
from much turnover at all. So we hear people saying, ``We ought
to cut the workforce,'' but, incidentally, PTO has that
backlog. And SSA has a backlog. And the Veterans Administration
has a backlog. And the backloads grow and grow and grow because
these downsizings--and the Clinton administration did this,
too--these downsizings whack off the bottom of government
because the quit rates, the separation rates are much higher.
And Max Stier has documented the separation rates in the first
5 years of service.
Now, if we start looking at the jobs that the baby boomers
are vacating at the middle and higher levels, we can get some
reductions in force there. But we should take the dollars, I
believe, that we save from those reductions in force and hire
more people on the front line. You might end up with----
Ms. Norton. Well, can you do that without reorganization?
Mr. Light. You can do it without reorganization, but it is
a multiplier effect on reorganization. You might end up with
the same number of Federal employees, but they would be at a
different level and there would be a different cost. You would
have more inspectors, you would have more disability review,
you would have more people looking at those patent and
trademark applications. You would have a better-working
government. And you wouldn't have do it through an attrition-
based downsizing that would reduce the number of people who are
actually delivering the goods and services.
I understand the point of the effort, but I don't think it
works the way people think it will.
Mr. DesJarlais. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The chair will now recognize himself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Light, you proposed a $1 trillion cut in Federal
spending last July, and there are a lot of areas that you cut
from. Can you focus for a minute on why the Federal management
has 18 layers of, I guess, management and you would like to
reduce that number to 6? Why does the government currently have
so many management layers? And how does that impact its
efficiency?
Mr. Light. The management layers exist for a simple reason:
The Federal Government pays exactly no price for creating new
layers. Every business in America pays a price--in lost
productivity, lost clarity of communication--when it creates a
new layer of management. So does Congress, which has created
more and more layers, and the Office of Management and Budget
and so forth, and universities. You want to see a paragon of
layering? You ought to take a look at university hierarchies.
It is when you pay a price for creating a layer that you
reduce the creation of layers. That is it. And we have allowed
them to be established, and we allowed them to spread. I
counted 64 layers between the top of the departments, on
average, and the bottom of just the administrator compartment.
I mean, it is because we don't pay a price for it.
And we have used it during pay freezes, and we have used it
during hiring freezes; we have used the creation of layers to
get our people moved up. It is often by accident, and we just
don't do much about it.
Mr. DesJarlais. Do you know what the total number of
Federal employees are--the private contractors, Federal
employees like ourselves, postal, veterans? Do you know what
the total number is?
Mr. Light. The estimated number I would use is 14 million.
Mr. DesJarlais. Fourteen million?
Mr. Light. And that includes some number--I mean, that
includes the contractors, the military, the Postal Service, the
quasi-government--you know, the full-time-equivalent Feds, the
full-time-equivalent contractors.
Mr. DesJarlais. I think Chairman Issa asked Senator Warner,
what would be the ideal workforce, and he gave an answer that,
you know, seems acceptable: Whatever is appropriate to do a
good job. And I think he went on to say we don't really even
know how many people work for us. And that is a problem.
I ran a medical practice for 20 years, and I have had from
four to five employees, and I can say down to probably 15
minutes a day I know what each one of those employees does. And
the Federal Government, when we don't even know what these
people are doing, that seems like a big problem.
And a good example, this year on our MRA accounts for all
of the Members, we were tasked with reducing that number by 5
percent in 2011, and in 2012 we are tasked with reducing that
by 6 percent. So we have seen a 10 percent cut in 2 years. And
the reason we are successful at getting that done is because I
was told when I came to Congress that I had this budget to
manage my staff and if I went over budget that money came out
of my pocket. So guess what? We are meeting those levels.
How can we transform that into a bigger approach with
government and get better accountability?
Mr. Light. Well, I mean, we know everything possible about
Federal employees once they are on the payroll, almost to their
shoe size. We know nothing about the number of contract
employees.
Every time I roll out these estimates, which are pretty
solid, but, you know, they are estimates, the service
contractor association says, you know, these are terrible
estimates, they are just estimates, they are overblown. And I
will always say back to them--I get phone calls from my
colleague over there, and I will always say back, you know,
Stan, that is a good point, but what is your number? And he
will say, we don't have one, and we don't want to get one, and
we don't have to get one; we don't have to tell you how many
people we employ.
So we do not extract from the contract community or the
grant community any data on what gets paid. The Project on
Government Oversight just released a report comparing contract
costs by job classification code in the contractor community,
the private sector, and the Federal community. And Feds are
overpaid somewhat in many categories to private employees and--
--
Mr. DesJarlais. Is it like 70,000 to 50,000, on average? Is
that the gap between Federal and private----
Mr. Light. But when you go to the contractor community, the
contractors are vastly overpaid compared to the Federal
employees.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay.
One other point. I think I have heard from Ed and
Workforce--we had a hearing, and 98.5 percent of government
employees are retained once they join the government workforce.
Have you ever heard of that type of retention rate of employees
in any other private-sector industry?
Mr. Light. You know, the turnover rate has to be somewhere
between 0 and 5 percent to get that fresh blood. I mean, I
would rely on Max here, my colleague Max, to give you something
on that.
Mr. DesJarlais. Okay. Actually, I did want to get to some
of your thoughts on the unpaid tax liability that the IRS has
identified, about $300 billion per year, but my time has
expired.
And so I will yield to the ranking member, the gentleman
from Maryland, Mr. Cummings, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Light, you just said something that was very
interesting. You said the contractors are paid more than the
Federal employees. Is that right?
Mr. Light. Absolutely correct, according to the Project on
Government Oversight. In 33 of the 34 job classifications they
studied--I think it was 34--contractors were overpaid--not
overpaid--were paid more. You know, I shouldn't have let that
word slip.
Mr. Cummings. And the Federal Government is spending over
$500 billion on Federal contracts. We keep hearing about
proposals to cut Federal employees. However, you recommended in
your testimony that the acquisition workforce should be
increased to strengthen oversight.
Now, why is it so important to increase the number of
employees focused on acquisition oversight?
Mr. Light. We need to know what is happening out there in
that 40 percent of contracts that are sole-sourced,
noncompeted. We have a vast increase in the number of bundled
contracts, which are nests of contractors, sub and sub and sub.
We don't know what is going on in there. And the acquisition
workforce has remained pretty steady, a little bit lower now,
at sort of low-60,000s since 1990.
We just got to take a look inside those nests, those sole-
source contracts. That is what the Shays Commission has done on
Iraq wartime contracting. I mean, you start looking inside
these nests and you see these conflicts of interest and
problems monitoring what is going on.
We have to have more people with the skills--and this goes
to Max Stier's point. We have to have a stronger acquisitions
workforce. And we cannot rely on contractors to write our RFPs,
which happens in many agencies.
Mr. Cummings. Well, you know, we had an experience with
that with the Coast Guard. The Coast Guard in the Deepwater
project, they had the private contractors pretty much write the
contract.
Mr. Light. Right.
Mr. Cummings. And we now have sitting in Baltimore eight
ships that they bought, pretty much, that don't float, because
they did not have a decent acquisitions department. So they
left it up to the private contractors. And they were buying
radar systems that were supposed to cover 360 degrees that
covered 180 degrees. That is what the private--and we lost
millions upon millions of dollars in that Deepwater project.
Mr. Light. Well, we have primes on some of these bundled
contractors that are subs to other primes on other contracts,
who are subs on their contracts. You see what I mean?
Mr. Cummings. Yeah.
Mr. Light. I mean, we have, like, this nest of potential
conflict of interest across the contract community, but we
can't see it. It is not transparent at all.
Mr. Cummings. So it is so big that we are--it is like a
monster that we can't control. But yet and still, we are
letting go a lot of Federal employees.
And it seems like a lot of people why this impression that
these Federal employees are making a whole, whole lot of money.
And a lot of them work right here on the Hill, and they are not
making but so much money. But yet and still, we are chopping
and freezing their pay. It is very interesting.
Mr. Light. Well, I don't want to help you set your
oversight agenda, but we ought to take a look at the
implementation of the Service Contractor Act of 1965 in terms
of what the bottom level of the contractor industry is paying
its workers. They are supposed to be paying a small premium for
health insurance and other benefits if they are not providing
those directly. And there is absolutely no evidence that that
goes on.
I mean, we just need to understand more about what we are
spending. Could we use fewer contract employees? We can't
answer the question until we know how many there are.
Mr. Cummings. So let me make sure I understand what you
just alluded to. And I know you didn't come to a conclusion;
you sort of put it out there as a question. But are you
thinking that one of the questions that needs to be asked is,
when these contracts are then awarded to the private
contractors, work that would have normally been done by Federal
workers, and they are supposedly for a lower amount, I guess,
but in the end a lot of times the benefits that would flow to
the employees of those contractors are not at all comparable to
what they would get as a Federal employee. Is that----
Mr. Light. Right. Right. What happens is that we save money
on the frontline delivery in the short term, but we have an
intergenerational cost transfer 30, 40 years down the line. If
you take in a worker at 22 and do not provide a compensation
package, you do not provide any kind of pension support, 40, 50
years later they are going to come back to us for Supplemental
Security Income. The cost of not providing compensation at the
bottom of the contract workforce eventually catches up to us.
And, of course, the spread between the top and the bottom is
also something worth looking at.
We increased the--this committee led the effort to increase
the President's salary to $400,000 starting in 2001. And we
thought that might lift the top of the Federal salary structure
to eliminate compensation for the SES. It did a little. But we
still have work to do on that to see what the spreads are
across the sectors.
Mr. Cummings. I see my time is up. Thank you.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
I am just going to do a very quick follow-up. And, Dr.
Light, I am not sure I understand the whole idea that if you
pay less now, you are automatically going to have this tail.
That would beg the idea that Greece had the right idea lock,
stock, and barrel, that, you know, a job for life and
guaranteed retirement at 50 and so on is the right answer.
Mr. Light. That is a good point.
Chairman Issa. But I won't go there.
I will go to one area, because this committee--Mr. Cummings
is on both--but this committee looked deeply into Deepwater,
and what we found was that the Navy had all the assets
necessary to deliver those eight ships properly. And a classic
example--and I would like your comment on it--was the Coast
Guard didn't know how to build major ships at sea, the Navy
does it for a living, the Coast Guard decided to do it itself
without the resources.
So my question to you is, rather than say you have to
develop the Coast Guard to have the ability to build what is
essentially identical ships to what the Navy builds every day,
how do we change government so that, quite frankly, the Coast
Guard gets told, ``Sorry, you are just not the best to buy your
own ship in this case; we will give you a seat at the table,
but the Navy is going to procure it''? How do we make that
change to where that same dumb contract doesn't happen again
that gives us ships that break in half in less than 20 years?
Mr. Stier, you look like you are anxious to answer.
Mr. Stier. Yeah, I think that it is a great question, and I
am quite interested in what Dr. Light is going to respond.
I will throw in one thought, and that is that my view is
that if we increase mobility amongst the leadership in
government, that would actually help address--not fully
address, but it would help address--the issue you are
describing.
Chairman Issa. Goldwater-Nichols for the nondefense area.
Mr. Stier. Absolutely. And, frankly, with DOD, there is a
lot of expertise in DOD. Goldwater-Nichols has worked quite
substantially to increase integration across the services, but
you don't see a lot of integrations with DOD and the civilian
agencies. And, frankly----
Chairman Issa. Or even DOD civilians.
Mr. Stier. That is correct, absolutely. And, you know, it
is 92 percent of the SES come from within government, four out
of five from within the same agency. Once they are actually in
the SES, only 8 percent move agencies. We are putting out a
report on this at the end of the month.
I think if you move people around, you create
relationships, you have people understand that there is
knowledge in other places and they know who to call. And that
is the kind of thing that I think would have dramatic impact.
Chairman Issa. So I see general consensus on that.
Let me follow up with one more thing. This committee is
very partisan sometimes on the Federal workforce. I came out of
San Diego, California, where we had a formal commission process
for outsourcing versus in-sourcing. We had a system in which
you could in-source if you could prove you could do it cheaper.
You could keep a contract if you could prove that you were
nearly competitive to an outsource, et cetera, et cetera.
Do we need to have a refinement in that type of analysis so
that, in fact, the Federal workforce broadly would essentially
get the right to--if they could beat the full-time equivalent
of a contractor and provide the same flexibility, they could,
in a sense, bid for it, so that we wouldn't have this big
question of, are we paying for an outsource greater--and I
appreciate, Dr. Light, your concept on the paying less, but in
some cases we pay more. The best example that I see every day
is what we are paying--or know of every day--right now in Iraq,
the people who replaced our men and women in uniform are
costing us three and four times as much as the uniformed people
they replaced. And I mean not just--I mean, you know, it is a
quarter of a million dollars per security person. And no matter
how you load our active-duty military, you don't get to that
number.
Is there a responsibility and a possibility that we could
create the kind of flexibility so the question of what we used
to call ``bill or buy'' in the private sector, but ``bill or
buy'' in the sense of refining the Federal workforce? And if we
do so, do we need to have a level of flexibility of the Federal
workforce that goes with that?
And I would go right down the line.
Mr. Light. San Diego was also a pioneer in public nonprofit
and private competition on the welfare front. You know, very
celebrated experiment out there.
What we really have to do, I think, is take a good, hard
look at Budget Circular A-76, which defines the basic terms for
contracting out. It was revised--when?
Mr. Shea. In 2003 it was revised.
Mr. Light. I think we really need to take a good, hard look
at how it has been implemented and how we define this term
and----
Chairman Issa. So after we determined that it failed,
because we saw outsourcing for greater cost under President
Bush at times, clearly----
Mr. Light. Right.
Chairman Issa. --and now we see in-sourcing in which they
tap the contractor employee on the shoulder and say, we are
going to be in-sourcing, would you like a pay raise?
I mean, we have clearly had an ignoring of these kinds of
considerations under both--at least the two Presidents I have
served under.
Mr. Light. Correct.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Blair?
Mr. Blair. What I was going to interject----
Chairman Issa. So much for briefly, by the way, but,
please. That was my last question.
Mr. Blair. It is really the question of what is inherently
governmental. And if the job is inherently governmental, it
should not be contracted out. And if the job is not inherently
governmental, then there is a fair question of why would you
have a Federal employee performing that function when it is not
inherently governmental. So maybe the more fundamental issue--
--
Chairman Issa. Isn't the answer the lowest-cost delivery of
what the government has determined shall be delivered on behalf
of the government? And I say that because the question of
``inherently governmental''--I can come up with reasons, for
example, that a patent examiner is inherently governmental. On
the other hand, I look and say, well, look, if the quality of
the patent is properly reviewed and the final decision is a
government decision, well, then the government made its
inherently governmental decision, which was only the very last
step, which was the awarding.
So I can go through and have that argument time and time
again, but ``inherently governmental'' is hard to decide, and
we can each have our own. Once you decide the government shall
deliver--and San Diego is, Dr. Light, one of my favorite
examples. We made a decision that maybe the YMCA was better,
maybe Beth Israel was better. We went through whole processes
of secular and religious groups. And it was always a question
of we, the government, are paying for it, we take
responsibility, and we want the highest quality delivered at
the best value, if you will, not just price. And that concept
allowed us to flow in and out and, by the way, take away
contracts even from the most sympathetic groups if they weren't
delivering the best value.
How do we get to defining that, not with a circular, but
with something that we can then check and recheck and recheck?
Because otherwise, how do we reduce the total cost of delivery
and, in fact, guarantee that quality, fully-paid-for service is
delivered?
Mr. Shea?
And I thank the ranking member. I know this has gone longer
than I planned.
Mr. Shea. Yes, sir. During the Bush administration, we had
a program called competitive sourcing, with which you are
familiar.
Chairman Issa. Right.
Mr. Shea. It was governed by A-76. A-76 sets as a target
the completion of a competition within 2 to 4 years. So in a
bureaucracy, that is a goal. You want to shoot for that 4
years. So they were all more complicated and time-consuming
than you wanted them to be.
But the vast majority of these competitions resulted in a
victory by the in-house employees. But a majority of cases, you
perform the same function more professionally and with a
smaller workforce. Now----
Chairman Issa. Right. In other words, it caused the Federal
workforce to reconcile their own shortcomings and get better.
Mr. Shea. Absolutely. I will never forget the looks on the
faces of employees when we concluded a competition at OMB. We
were going to get more professional staff while this function
we were studying was going to get more professional but
smaller. And folks who generally opposed this were delighted at
the outcome.
That suggests that we could have done a much better job
communicating it on the front end, because it does impact
morale when you are going into this. We learned a lot from that
process that I think would benefit future similar efforts.
Chairman Issa. Mr. Stier, you have the last word.
Mr. Stier. I was just going to say thank you.
Chairman Issa. You are most welcome.
The ranking member is recognized.
Mr. Cummings. Just to follow up on the chairman's
questions, Mr. Shea, when you were talking about the
comparisons between the government and private contractors,
where does the piece that I was talking to Dr. Light about--
let's say, for example, we have a private contractor that is
offering X benefits and those benefits don't, say, even compare
to what the government is offering, how does that play into
that? Do you follow me?
Mr. Shea. Yes----
Mr. Cummings. It is certainly going to be cheaper. I mean,
you would figure it would be cheaper if--because I get
complaints from people in my district who say that they are
sitting next to people who may be under a contract doing
basically the same work but in some instances not getting the
benefits that they are getting.
Do you follow me?
Mr. Shea. Let me just say that I am very proud of the
benefits we offer our employees at Grant Thornton.
And I think--I am not sure----
Mr. Cummings. I mean, in other words, how do you----
Mr. Shea. How do you do an apples-to-apples comparison?
Mr. Cummings. That is right. That is exactly right.
Mr. Shea. And I am not sure exactly the parameters of A-76
in that regard. But I think, within some limitations, what you
are saying is, the full cost of the government and the bill the
government pays a contractor. And I think there are some
requirements that Dr. Light mentioned about minimum benefits
you pay, but I think generally that is taken into account when
you are looking at the bottom-line cost that the government is
paying the contractor versus the fully loaded cost that you are
paying an employee.
And that is what takes the time, frankly, in the
competitions. You are trying to make sure that the cost
estimates of each, the in-house team and the contractor, are
fairly compared.
Mr. Cummings. Uh-huh.
Mr. Stier, did you have a comment on that?
Mr. Stier. I would just add that it is also, I think,
important to look at the cost also of the acquisition process.
And one of the--and I say this with some hesitation only
because I haven't been able to verify the data. But I was told
just yesterday by somebody in the IT world that the average
cost of the acquisition in the government was somewhere in the
neighborhood of 50 percent of the total cost of the package,
including implementation, in the government space, in the
public-sector space; whereas a reasonable average in the
private sector was around 12 percent or 12 1/2 percent.
And I think that, again, if we are looking at cost savings,
it is not simply--we have to look at the process itself and the
direct costs that are associated there. But, frankly, we also
do a very poor job of engaging the contractor community in
helping identify the right design according to clear
requirements.
So there is a complex set of issues that, if you are trying
to really take this on, I think are worth examining, in which I
do believe that there are enormous efficiencies that are
available to us.
And the last piece I would say, we are missing inside
government not just the acquisition workforce folks that we
need, but--Mr. Chairman, to your point, at the end of the day,
what we look for in our government is the ultimate oversight to
say that the public good is being looked after in the
appropriate fashion. We don't have the right talent today
internally to make those decisions, and that is a real problem.
Mr. Cummings. And how do you suggest we have it?
Mr. Stier. And I am cognizant of the fact that I am using
up your time.
I think the starting point really is understanding what our
priorities are, because, again, I think there isn't clarity
associated with that, and then examining what critical skills
that we actually need to achieve those priorities. And this is
something that I think needs to take place not just within
agencies but holistically as well. But it is a real challenge.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Issa. Thank you.
And I want to thank all of our witnesses. And as I said in
the beginning, as your thoughts go on for the next several
days, we will hold the record open for 5 days so that you can,
as we like to say, revise and extend.
Chairman Issa. And, with that, we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]


