- LABOR ABUSES, HUMAN TRAFFICKING AND GOVERNMENT CONTRACTORS: IS THE GOVERNMENT DOING ENOUGH TO PROTECT VULNERABLE WORKERS?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LABOR ABUSES, HUMAN TRAFFICKING AND GOVERNMENT CONTRACTORS: IS THE
GOVIERNMENT DOING ENOUGH TO PROTECT VULNERABLE WORKERS?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY, INFORMATION
POLICY, INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS AND
PROCUREMENT REFORM

of the

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 27, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-137

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-126 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND GOVERNMENT REFORM

DARRELL E. ISSA, California, Chairman
DAN BURTON, Indiana                  ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland,
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                    Ranking Minority Member
TODD RUSSELL PLATTS, Pennsylvania    EDOLPHUS TOWNS, New York
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                         Columbia
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 DENNIS J. KUCINICH, Ohio
CONNIE MACK, Florida                 JOHN F. TIERNEY, Massachusetts
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
JUSTIN AMASH, Michigan               JIM COOPER, Tennessee
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
PAUL A. GOSAR, Arizona               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              DANNY K. DAVIS, Illinois
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania         BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          PETER WELCH, Vermont
JOE WALSH, Illinois                  JOHN A. YARMUTH, Kentucky
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              JACKIE SPEIER, California
FRANK C. GUINTA, New Hampshire
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania

Lawrence J. Brady, Staff Director
John D. Cuaderes, Deputy Staff Director
Robert Borden, General Counsel
Linda A. Good, Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

Subcommittee on Technology, Information Policy, Intergovernmental
Relations and Procurement Reform

JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma, Chairman
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania, Vice       GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia,
Chairman                             Ranking Minority Member
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 CHRISTOPHER S. MURPHY, Connecticut
TIM WALBERG, Michigan                STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
RAUL R. LABRADOR, Idaho              JACKIE SPEIER, California
PATRICK MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 27, 2012...................................     1

WITNESSES

Richard Blumenthal, A U.S. Senator from the State of Connecticut
Oral statement...........................................     2
Rob Portman, A U.S Senator from the State of Ohio
Oral statement...........................................     3
Ambassador Luis Cdebaca, Ambassador at Large, U.S. Department of
State
Oral statement...........................................     9
Written statement........................................    11
Cathy J. Read, Director, Office of Acquisitions Management, U.S.
Department of State
Oral statement...........................................    13
Written statement........................................    15
Evelyn R. Klemstine, Assistant Inspector General for Audits, U.S.
Department of State
Oral statement...........................................    18
Written statement........................................    20
Richard T. Ginman, Director, Defense Procurement and Acquisition
Policy, U.S. Department of Defense
Oral statement...........................................    29
Written statement........................................    30
Sharon Cooper, Director, Defense Human Resources Activity, U.S.
Department of Defense
Oral statement...........................................    34
Written statement........................................    36
Ambassador Kenneth P. Moorefield, Deputy Inspector General,
Special Plans and Operations, U.S. Department of Defense
Oral statement...........................................    38
Written statement........................................    40

LABOR ABUSES, HUMAN TRAFFICKING AND GOVERNMENT CONTRACTORS: IS THE
GOVERNMENT DOING ENOUGH TO PROTECT VULNERABLE WORKERS?

----------

Tuesday, March 27, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Technology, Information Policy,
Intergovernmental Relations and Procurement Reform,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m. in
room 2247, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable James
Lankford [chairman of the subcommittee], presiding.
Present: Representatives Lankford, Chaffetz, Kelly, Issa
(ex officio) and Connolly.
Staff Present: Alexia Ardolina, Majority Staff Assistant;
Kurt Bardella, Majority Senior Policy Advisor; Richard A.
Beutel, Majority Senior Counsel; Molly Boyl, Majority
Parliamentarian; Gwen D'Luzansky, Majority Assistant Clerk;
Adam P. Fromm, Majority Director of Member Services and
Committee Operations; Justin LoFranco, Majority Deputy Director
of Digital Strategy; Mark D. Marin, Majority Director of
Oversight; Peter Warren, Majority Legislative Policy Director;
Jaron Bourke, Minority Director of Administration; Devon Hill,
Minority Staff Assistant; Rory Sheehan, Minority New Media
Press Secretary; and Cecelia Thomas, Minority Counsel.
Mr. Lankford. The Committee will come to order.
Just a quick housekeeping piece on the order on how we're
going to go. We are grateful to have the two Senators here to
speak on this same topic that is happening over in the Senate
and the good work that is already happening there.
I am going to open this up with a brief statement, just the
overarching feel of what we are trying to accomplish today. I
will ask the two Senators to make a statement and then Mr.
Connolly, Chairman Issa and I will make a quick opening
statement after the Senators have spoken. Then we will set up
for the next panel.
The Senators are welcome to stay. You probably have a few
things to do as well today. If you would like to be dismissed,
you could, whatever is your pleasure. I am sure our opening
statements will be riveting to you, so I assume you want to be
able to stay as well.
This hearing is on Labor Abuses, Human Trafficking and
Government Contracts: Is the Government Doing Enough to Protect
Vulnerable Workers?
We are a part of the Oversight and Government Reform
Committee. We exist to secure two fundamental principles.
First, Americans have the right to know that the money
Washington takes from them is well spent. Second, Americans
deserve an efficient and effective government that works for
them.
Our duty on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee
is to protect these rights. Our solemn responsibility is to
hold government accountable to taxpayers because taxpayers have
a right to know what they are getting from the government.
We will work tirelessly in partnership with citizen
watchdogs to deliver the facts to the American people and bring
them genuine reform to the Federal bureaucracy. This is the
mission of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee and
obviously, this subcommittee as well.
With that, Senator Blumenthal, we would be pleased to
receive a statement from you on your work.

STATEMENT OF SENATOR RICHARD BLUMENTHAL

Senator Blumenthal. Thank you, Chairman Lankford, Chairman
Issa and Ranking Member Connolly, for your leadership and your
staffs, and for your very helpful work on this issue. I want to
particularly thank my very distinguished colleague, Senator
Portman, for joining me today and for his leadership in helping
to craft this very, very important initiative.
I also want to say that this effort on the Senate side is
really a very bipartisan one as it is here. We have been joined
by Senators Franken, Rubio, Lieberman and Collins in
introducing the End Trafficking Government in Contracting Act
in 2012.
I have a statement which I will submit for the record and
it will condense the remarks I have to make this morning.
This Senate bill is a companion to your legislation and it
is the conclusion of months of bipartisan work between our
members and our staff across the ideological spectrum as it
should be because this problem really is not a partisan one in
any sense of the word. It basically is to say to the American
public and the world that we will no longer tolerate the stain
of human trafficking to taint federal grants and contracts
overseas.
You will hear this morning from witnesses who will tell you
about this problem firsthand, what is happening on the ground
and also indicate that our government has zero tolerance for
human trafficking, but in practice, on the ground, in the real
world, it is happening. It is prevalent, pervasive, insidious,
a serious problem across the globe.
The Bipartisan Commission on Wartime Contracting recently
completed an exhaustive review of contracting practices in Iraq
and Afghanistan and bluntly concluded ``Existing prohibitions
on trafficking have failed to suppress it.'' That is a searing
indictment of our contracting and our contractors. We need to
take strong action to stop it.
This conclusion was echoed last October in hearing
testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee when the
DOD Comptroller, Dov Zakheim, said that it was quite clear in
his words, that fixing this problem ``will require
legislation'' and that is why we are here.
This activity is unconscionable and intolerable and to the
observations that you will hear this morning, and that have
been made already, I would just add my own ongoing human
trafficking on federal contracts is fraudulent, it is immoral
and it is a particular threat to the security and welfare of
our deployed service members.
We can't guarantee that people interacting with them every
day, and I know you have been on the bases as I have in
Afghanistan and seen how close and intimate the contact is
between those people working on the bases on contracting,
whether it is construction or anything else, and the security
of the members of our Armed Services really depends on this
kind of effort.
Our military relies heavily on foreign contractors to
provide logistical support on those bases and I would suggest
that this objective ought to be pursued as quickly as possible.
The objective is really threefold: prevention, accountability
and enforcement. The legislation accomplishes those goals with
a number of strong steps that begin at their core with making
clear that this activity is criminal and is punishable
criminally.
I say that as an Attorney General who was a law enforcer
for 20 years. Clear, strong penalties are at the heart of this
effort, but so is prevention. By expanding the scope of current
language that requires plans and practices specified in
advance, stopping the kind of related fraudulent activity,
whether it is destruction of documents or misuse of credentials
and so forth, misrepresenting wages on work location, using
labor brokers who charge exorbitant recruiting fees, the
procurement of commercial sex acts, all of those related acts
also ought to be prevented.
The bill improves accountability by requiring contractors
to notify the Inspector General of any credible evidence of
trafficking occurring on the contract or any subcontracts. The
Inspector General has to investigate such instances and report
any findings to the contract administrators to consider swift,
remedial action against the contractor. That can include
throwing them off the job, debarment and other measures that
have real meaning to a contractor who wishes to do business
with the Federal Government.
Those are the important measures and again, there are
others that are part of the bill. I would just emphasize how
important my colleagues and I regard this measure and how
grateful we are for your prompt and very constructive work.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Lankford. Senator Portman.

STATEMENT OF SENATOR ROB PORTMAN

Senator Portman. Thank you, Chairman Lankford.
Thanks for your personal commitment to this issue and your
leadership on it.
It is great to be here with my colleague, Senator
Blumenthal. I appreciate his leadership on this in the Senate.
It is always good to be with my friend, Darrell Issa,
Senator Chaffetz and Ranking Member Connolly. We have a number
of House members who have done great work on this including the
members here today, and of course Ranking Member Cummings and
Congressman Chris Smith. It seems to me this is a great
opportunity in a bipartisan way for us to make progress on a
critical issue.
In the Senate, we also have a great team. Senators Rubio,
Franken, Collins, McCaskill and Joe Lieberman have all signed
on to the bill. We have other colleagues who are very
interested in pursuing this. Even in times when it seems
difficult to achieve reasonable and commonsense objectives,
this seems to be one we can move forward on.
I appreciate the leadership you have shown. This cuts
across all party lines and philosophical lines because it is
really about something much more fundamental and that is who we
are as a people. It is about respecting and protecting human
dignity. I think this legislation, as my colleague talked
about, is designed to ensure that the contracting dollars that
come from our taxpayers after all are spent in a manner that is
consistent with our deeply held values as a Nation.
It is a lot of money, over $20 billion a year in
Afghanistan and Iraq alone. Those contracting dollars are
significant and it requires clear rules and oversight.
Despite the existing protections including the Trafficking
Victims Protection Act of 2000, reports have made it very clear
that human trafficking practices in connection with U.S.
overseas contracts remains a very significant problem. To put
this in some context, there are over 70,000 third country
nationals who now work for contractors and subcontractors of
the U.S. military again in Iraq and Afghanistan alone.
In most cases, this work provides valued job opportunities,
but it is not hard to see also how these workers recruited for
low wage jobs often thousands of miles from their home country
can find themselves vulnerable to illegal or fraudulent
employment practices. We have heard this most recently from the
Wartime Contracting Commission. I know you all looked at that
report and also the Inspectors General of the State Department
and the Defense Department, each of which have reported the
trafficking remains an issue and that existing protections in
connection with such trafficking are insufficient.
Broadly defined, as Senator Blumenthal said, it means
forced labor and severely coercive labor practices including
the practice of recruiting workers who leave home based on
fraudulent promises about working conditions or wages and
including confiscating passports, charging workers recruitment
fees that consume more than a month's salary, and creating
indentured, servitude type conditions.
It includes unlawful restrictions on the ability of workers
to return home and sometimes failure to assist in the
repatriation when jobs are over.
The oversight is limited. The Wartime Contracting
Commission, for example, reported that ``Some prime
contractors, although not themselves knowingly violate the
prohibitions on trafficking, have not proactively used all
their capacities to supervise their labor brokers or subs.''
The State Department Inspector General's Report similarly
stated ``Since contracting regulations do not specify how to
monitor contractors for trafficking in persons, the IG could
not conclude that trafficking of persons monitoring is
effective.'' The Inspector General likewise observed that
``Contracting-initiated reporting was the only means by which
DOD could obtain timely and relevant information regarding
actual or alleged violations.'' That is what we are providing
for in this legislation.
I think we should be clear here today that the overwhelming
majority of the U.S. contractors and subcontractors are
honorable, they are law-abiding and have made it a priority to
ensure that abusive labor practices play no role in the very
challenging work they are doing for all of us in Iraq,
Afghanistan and elsewhere around the world, but there are
problems obviously.
Many of the contractors we consulted with already have in
place some internal policies designed to prevent, detect and
stop human trafficking in connection with their own operations
and some of their subcontractors. I think our proposal
basically is to ensure that those best practices are adopted by
other contractors and they become the standard practices on all
significant U.S. contracts broad.
Senator Blumenthal has done a great job laying out the
legislation. I think he is right to put it into three
categories: prevention, accountability and enforcement. It
strengthens current legal safeguards requiring contractors to
have these proactive prevention plans. It is a compliance plan
to ensure that there is no activity that directly supports
human trafficking.
It also gives contracting officers the ability to impose
appropriate penalties, very important, including referring a
contractor for disbarment for the most serious violations. It
beefs up reporting and monitoring requirements to ensure that
federal evidence of human trafficking immediately triggers an
investigation to uncover the facts. Again, that comes right out
of these reports.
The bill closes a loophole in federal criminal law by
extending to overseas contracts the same prohibition against
fraudulent employment practices they would have here in the
United States.
Again, I think these common sense reforms will ensure that
the performance of overseas contracts paid for by our
constituents, American taxpayers, are consistent with the
values that we all hold dear as Americans.
Gentlemen, I look forward to working with you all and my
colleagues in the Senate. This Committee will play a central
role, of course, to make progress on this important reform
effort this year.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lankford. Senators, thank you for being here. Thanks
for your work.
Mr. Issa. Briefly, if I could, just for one second?
Mr. Lankford. Absolutely. Without objection.
Mr. Issa. I want to thank you for coming here. The fact is
that when we show people that we are bipartisan and bicameral,
we show people that legislation is possible even in an election
year. Both your legislation, the Data Act and some of the other
tools that are going to allow us to more efficiently track and
inform people when there is, in fact, the possibility of an
honest day's pay and an honest day's work not being linked
together, which certainly is often the case where we pay the
full dollar and much of it never gets to the recipient who is
supposed to get it for doing the work.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for what you are doing, but
Senators, I am particularly thankful for your coming here and
showing the world that this is an important enough issue to get
it done and get it done this year.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Lankford. Absolutely.
Gentlemen, thank you for being here. Hopefully, this will
grease the wheels for a transportation bill and the budget yet
to come. We will get all these things worked out between us.
Senator Blumenthal. Hope springs eternal.
Mr. Lankford. It does.
Gentlemen, thank you very much.
With that, we will take a short recess to reset the panel.
I would like our witness to come and have a seat. Then we will
do opening statements and begin the second panel.
[Recess.]
Mr. Lankford. On November 2, this same Subcommittee and the
same panel held a hearing entitled Are Government Contractors
Exploiting Workers Overseas. Examining Enforcement of the
Trafficking in Victims Protection Act.
At the hearing, we were distressed to learn that several
U.S. government contracts had used specific labor practices
that can only be characterized as involuntary servitude. I said
in that hearing, as a Nation, we have certain values that
characterize us. We believe that each person has been endowed
by their Creator with certain rights, including life, liberty
and the pursuit of happiness. These are not rights given by men
or confined to our national boundary. They are unique to each
person. They are God given rights.
The passion for freedom and our national security has taken
us across the globe and in the process of doing the right
thing, we must also be careful to do it the right way. Our
November hearing determined that within the confusing maize of
contractors and subcontractors who support our operations, as
already stated, many of them are ethically doing an excellent
job.
There appear to be some with a less than reputable job,
foreign companies sometimes that engage in labor brokers who
apparently, accountable to no one, exploit unskilled workers
from impoverished backgrounds, called Third Country Nationals
or TCNs. These are the workers who tend the gardens, wash the
dishes, prepare fast food meals, do the laundry for American
embassy workers, military personnel and others stationed in the
Middle East, Iraq and Afghanistan.
They come from countries such as India, Nepal, Bosnia,
Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lank, the Philippines, and others. We
heard testimony that established that some of these workers
have been robbed of wages, injured without compensation,
subjected to sexual assaults or held in deplorable conditions
resembling indentured servitude by their subcontractor bosses.
Some have paid illegal job broker fees equal to or greater
than their final pay. Reports have suggested they are deceived
about their work location or conditions when they are
recruited. These unsavory labor practices, collectively called
trafficking in persons, is immoral, it is inappropriate and un-
American.
The purpose of this hearing is to follow up on our November
hearing, to explore whether we are doing enough to stop this
abhorrent practice. There are numerous laws and policies
already in place but they have not fully stopped trafficking in
persons through our contracts.
I asked the witnesses to send us their best ideas about how
to address this problem and they have done so. Thank you. We
will ask them further to describe these ideas and action plans
they intend to follow in the weeks and months ahead and so will
we.
In addition, I am pleased to announce that yesterday in a
rare display of both bipartisanship and bicameral cooperation,
similar legislation was released in both the House and the
Senate that should significantly curtail human trafficking in
U.S. Government contracting. Our goal in this legislation is to
deploy unprecedented economic and purchasing power of the
United States Government, the single largest consumer of goods
and services in the world, to drive accountability, to
establish a higher labor standard than exists in many parts of
the world.
We are still the beacon of liberty in the world. We should
shine through every relationship worldwide. Our End Trafficking
and Government Contracting Act addresses the problem of
enhancing prevention, accountability and enforcement. Our
proposal prevents trafficking abuses by requiring contractors
with contracts over $1 million to implement compliance plans to
prevent trafficking, including destroying or confiscating
passports, misrepresenting wages or work locations or using
labor brokers who charge exorbitant recruiting fees.
The bill improves accountability by requiring that a
contractor notify the Inspector General if he or she receives
credible evidence that a subcontractor has engaged in
prohibitive conduct, requiring the Inspector General to
investigate such instances and requiring the Inspector General
to investigate all those instances and with that require swift
remedial action against the contractor. The bill improves
enforcement of anti-trafficking requirements by extending the
criminal prohibitions that prevent fraudulent labor practices
typically associated with trafficking.
To examine these issues and discuss our legislation, we
have two panels today, obviously the Senators who have already
spoken, the first panel; and our second panel seated now from
the State Department consists of program contracting oversight
experts along with programming, contracting and oversight
experts from the Department of Defense.
I do look forward to receiving answers on this issue. There
is no good explanation of why we would still have contractors
using illegal recruiting fees, providing inadequate living
conditions for TCNs or violating a multitude of other clear
human dignity issues. Ranking Member Connolly and I have worked
closely from the start on this. This is truly a bipartisan
piece on which we have absolute cooperation and we look forward
to a chance to work together all the way through to the end on
this and finding resolution.
Mr. Lankford. With that, I would like to recognize the
distinguished Ranking Member, Mr. Connolly, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me echo what you just said. This is a bipartisan
effort. This is not going to be an issue that is going to
divide us along party lines at all. I have very much
appreciated working with the Chairman of the subcommittee and
his staff.
When we had this hearing in November, I think our reaction
honestly was utter shock at the reality we are talking about.
We had a witness who had responsibility for this subject, I
believe at the Pentagon, who had never been to Iraq and
Afghanistan. It was an academic subject sitting on the desk in
Washington in terms of what the nature of the problem in terms
of contractors.
We noted that there virtually had never been a prosecution
on this charge even though it was a widespread practice in both
Iraq and Afghanistan with contractors or subcontractors. Very
few debarments or suspensions of contractors even though it was
again well known as a widespread practice.
I think that is what prompted the legislation. This is
unacceptable. If America is about anything, it is about a value
system. At the very essence of that value system is the
enshrinement of human autonomy. We haven't always lived that
goal. We fought a Civil War to make sure that goal proceeded,
but it is a value we assert. It is certainly not a value we can
ever sit back and accept to be compromised, especially by
somebody in our employ.
I just want to say to all the panelists today, we must show
utter and complete passion for this subject. We must stamp it
out so that it never even comes close to an association with an
American enterprise at a contractor level, subcontractor level
or, God forbid, a federal agency. It is unacceptable and must
be snuffed out with all of the passion and all of the ability
we have. That is what is behind this legislation in both the
Senate and the House.
This is not just any housekeeping matter. This is about the
preservation of human autonomy, about making sure the people in
our employ follow American norms. Otherwise, why are we in
places like Iraq and Afghanistan. I just wanted to share that
with you because I wouldn't want anyone to think this is just
routine legislation. It is not. It has brought us together on a
bicameral basis, as the Chairman said, and on a bipartisan
basis, fiercely.
We need your help to make sure that the passion we feel and
we experience and the disgust and shock we felt at our first
hearing you share and that you will go back to the State
Department, to the Pentagon and other federal agencies
understanding that is what drives and hopefully sharing in the
mission to make sure we put an end to this practice as soon as
possible.
Thank you for being here.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your leadership and your
bipartisan cooperation. I am privileged to join you as an
original co-sponsor in this legislation.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
All the members will have seven days to submit opening
statements and extraneous materials for the record.
Let me welcome our panel of witnesses. We look forward to
hearing the conversation from them.
The Honorable Luis CdeBaca is the Ambassador at Large at
the U.S. Department of State. Ms. Cathy Read is Director,
Office of Acquisitions Management at the Department of State.
Ms. Evelyn Klemstine is Assistant Inspector General for Audits
at the U.S. Department of State. Mr. Richard Ginman is the
Director of Defense Procurement and Acquisition Policy at DOD.
Ms. Sharon Cooper is Director, Defense Human Resources Activity
at DOD. The Honorable Kenneth Moorefield is Deputy Inspector
General for Special Plans & Operations at the U.S. Department
of Defense. Thank you all for being here.
Pursuant to Committee rules, all witnesses are sworn before
they testify. Please rise and raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
[Witnesses respond in the affirmative.]
Mr. Lankford. May the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative. You may be seated.
In order to allow time for discussion, I would like you to
limit your testimony to five minutes. We will not be absolutely
rigid on that, but as close as you can. Your entire written
statement will be made a part of the record. Thank you for
working hard to pull that written statement together for all of
you.
I would like to recognize Ambassador CdeBaca to begin with
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF AMBASSADOR LUIS CDEBACA

Ambassador CdeBaca. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Connolly. It is an honor to be here today.
I appreciate the series of hearings as an important part of
the fight against trafficking in persons.
As we know, the bipartisan Trafficking in Victims
Protection of Act of 2000 and its subsequent reauthorizations
continue to serve as a touchstone for all of our efforts to
combat this crime both here and around the world.
One of the tools that Congress gave us through the TVPA is
the annual Trafficking in Persons Report. That report
rigorously researched by my office and colleagues in the
embassies and regional bureaus has become an unparalleled
resource for determining how well governments are responding to
modern slavery. It plays a critical role in our diplomacy and
development priorities.
Through the years, Congress has sharpened its analysis by
adding several different things including an analysis of to
what degree peacekeeping operations are driven by human
trafficking.
Today, we come together for another issue which is very
similar. Reflected in what we have seen in the report over the
last ten years, we have come to understand that the role of
government need not be limited solely to law enforcement and
victim services. As the report reflects, over the last decade
we now know more about the market forces that drive modern
slavery.
The forced labor taints the supply chain of products that
consumers rely on every day. The labor recruiters profit
through the use of unscrupulous and non-transparent practices
that saddle workers with debts that they will never be able to
repay. We know that a global market for cheap goods and
commercial sex fuels the demand that the traffickers exploit.
Concerned consumers are pushing more and more companies to do
something about modern slavery in their corporate policies.
As Secretary Clinton said earlier this month to her
colleagues in the Cabinet, that knowledge becomes particularly
important when you think about the government as a consumer,
the government buying power. We conduct business on a global
scale with a massive roster of suppliers and subcontractors and
supply chain monitoring is not simply something for the
business community.
What we have learned about supply chain company responsible
labor recruitment practices and honorable conduct, if we apply
those lessons to government procurement, we feel there would be
a ripple effect far and wide out into the private sector as
well.
Using government's reach as consumers as a tool to combat
modern slavery has been, for far too long, the missing link in
this fight. All governments must do more to arrest traffickers
and assist victims. When governments take up the cause of
fighting modern slavery, their credibility is undermined if
their own policies, procurement and personnel practices are
inadvertently making the problem worse.
Today's hearing comes at a critical time. At the recent
Cabinet meeting, Deputy National Security Advisor Denis
McDonough perhaps said it best, ``We recognize that across the
government, there is still an awful lot to do to improve on
this in terms of procurement of goods and labor, and the
President is demanding that we do more in exactly this area.''
Indeed, the President that day issued a challenge to all of us
to ``find ways to strengthen our current work.''
We take his call to action very seriously at the State
Department. For instance, to demonstrate our commitment, we are
putting place new prohibitions on our contractors that will no
longer allow them to charge recruitment fees to the workers.
You will hear about that from my colleague Cathy Read from the
Bureau of Administration.
Through a subcommittee of the Senior Policy Operating
Group, the interagency anti-trafficking organization, we are
driving out anti-trafficking training for the federal
acquisitions workforce. This is the sort of innovation that
will be critical to the future of this struggle and as in some
many other aspects of this important work, we must work with
you, our partners in Congress, to keep delivering on the
promise of freedom.
I have been blessed to be able to help victims as they come
out of trafficking when I was a federal prosecutor. I was lucky
enough to be able to work on the Judiciary Committee in 2008
when we reauthorized the Trafficking Victims Act, and now have
the opportunity to help deliver on your work.
During the Civil War, making it to the lines of the U.S.
Army meant freedom for so many. We need to make sure that
remains the case.
Thank you and I am happy to take questions.
[Prepared statement of Ambassador CdeBaca follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Ambassador.
Ms. Read.

STATEMENT OF CATHY J. READ

Ms. Read. Good morning, Chairman Lankford, Ranking Member
Connolly and distinguished members.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the Department
of State's continued efforts to combat human trafficking and
abusive labor practices involving third country nationals hired
to perform services overseas and under contracts.
My shop is responsible for 98 percent of the dollars that
are obligated by the Department of State and I have
approximately 200 acquisition professionals, both in
Washington, Florida, Frankfurt and Antwerp who help support
that.
Embassies, as you well know, have limited authority to
procure supplies and local services. Generally, our most
complex and largest contracts are issued from Washington, D.C.
and monitored formally by our trained Contracting Officer
Representatives who are actually on the ground.
The subject of today's hearing is central to the Department
of State's mission and also as a steward to the taxpayer. The
Department has been vigorous in its efforts to ensure none of
the contracts written by the Department are with contractors
that would abuse their employees. We have identified programs
which may result in the hiring of unskilled or semi-skilled
labor from third world countries and TIP focus is on
construction and renovation contracts for new embassy compounds
for our Overseas Buildings Offices and Diplomatic Security
Programs.
I would like to focus on some of the major initiatives and
approaches we have undertaken at State to address the issues.
Training, which is a big thing for us, we have implemented
training on trafficking in persons in several areas at the
Foreign Service Institute and in the training of our
professional acquisition workforce. I have dedicated a senior
contracting officer at FSI to help with the day to day COR
training and TIP is part of that training. In fact, we utilize
the DHS video which has been very successful and every
graduating corps gets the ICE card to carry with them which
notes indications that could happen under TIP.
Our classroom COR training has a module on managing
contracts in the difficult environments. CORs are instructed to
work with both political and economic sections at post to learn
labor practices and TIP and how they apply at their post. Other
FSI training includes regional studies, political and counselor
training.
We have implemented many of the CWC recommendations for
oversight in Iraq and Afghanistan in our program. We developed
a clear working relationship with the program offices, we have
contracting officers embedded with our program managers at some
of our senior program offices.
We travel consistently all the time to Iraq and Afghanistan
at various levels. When a CO goes out, they stay longer and
they look at every program, not just their particular line of
business. We have a direct hire project manager at many of the
difficult posts with instruction or security staff to oversee
housing areas. We have unannounced diplomatic security
Diplomatic Security Regional Security Officers visits to
compounds for all our local guards.
Our Procurement Information Bulletin issued by our
Procurement Executive, as you well know, came out last March
2011 and just yesterday, our Procurement Executive initiated an
released the new Procurement Information Bulletin which
addresses housing and recruitment fees and is mandated. That is
set for implementation now that it has been issued.
In closing, I would like to note that our experience in
recent years has reconfirmed the importance of hiring an
updated, well trained, on the ground acquisition workforce in
adequate numbers and ensuring that everyone is trained to the
highest levels and that we have total collaboration among the
members.
Contract administration, worldwide and especially in
conflicted-affected states can be strengthened only through the
hiring of personnel to provide additional governmental
oversight of contractors and more importantly, their
subcontractors.
Thank you very much for the opportunity and we welcome your
questions.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Read follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Ms. Read.
Ms. Klemstine.

STATEMENT OF EVELYN R. KLEMSTINE

Ms. Klemstine. Thank you, Chairman Lankford, Ranking Member
Connolly and members of the Subcommittee, for the opportunity
to discuss our views on strengthening enforcement of traffic in
persons or TIP in government contracts.
Our Office of Inspector General or OIG commends the
subcommittee for its leadership in developing critical
legislation on TIP enforcement.
Mr. Chairman, OIG believes that TIP compliance can be
better monitored by strengthening the legal framework for
enforcing TIP compliance and prosecuting TIP violators by
establishing requirements in future contracts and the Federal
Acquisition Regulation or FAR and by holding Contracting
Officers and Contracting Officer Representatives accountable
for TIP compliance. In addition, the OIG will continue to
vigorously perform its oversight role on this important issue.
First, strengthen the legal framework. OIG supports a
robust and comprehensive Civilian Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
Act CEJA also the proposed Blumenthal Amendment to 18 U.S.C.
Section 1351. CEJA would provide clear jurisdiction to
prosecute non-Department of Defense employees and contractors
for a broad range of overseas misconduct, some of which are TIP
violations.
We do, however, suggest CEJA use the same approach as the
Military Extraterritorial Act and provide jurisdiction over all
18 U.S.C. felony offenses. This provides the greatest
flexibility for fighting crime associated with U.S. overseas
activities.
Second, establish specific requirements in future
contracts. OIG supports the proposed amendments to the
Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act, Section
111, which would mandate the inclusion of certain TIP related
provisions and contracts.
In addition, future contracts solicitations, which include
third country nationals, at a minimum, should require the
following provisions: one, the contractor shall provide the
agency a detailed description of housing accommodations it
intends to provide for its foreign workers; two, provide
workers with standard contracts in English and their native
languages and include policies on wages, overtime rates,
allowances and other personnel matters; three, provide workers
with written information about labor laws, including the U.S.
Government's zero tolerance policy about TIP in English and
their native languages; four, provide written assurance that it
violates no U.S., host country or third country labor laws; and
five, provide the contracting agency a repatriation plan 120
days prior to completion of the contract.
All future contracts that use third country nationals
should include penalties for TIP noncompliance. In addition,
incentives should be used in the contracts that motivate
contractors to police themselves and their subcontractors.
In addition, we believe that modifying the FAR so that
Combating Trafficking in Persons clause includes the same
language found in the Contractor Code of Business Ethics and
Conduct clause. This would require timely reporting of possible
TIP violations to the OIG which is not currently required.
Third, hold COs and CORs responsible for TIP oversight. COs
and CORs are at the front lines around the world and must
effectively monitor and enforce standards as well as report
violations. The quality, quantity and location of the federal
agency CORs are key to combating TIP.
At all federal agencies, COR experience should be made as a
desirable and sought after qualification. CORs should be made
aware of the importance of their role and they should receive
specific, regularly updated training on TIP.
In March 2011, the Department issued Procurement
Information Bulletin 2011-09 which provides COs and CORs with
suggested actions to minimize the risk of TIP violations in
government contracts.
Although the PIB is a good starting point, much of the
content of the guidance is not mandated within the Department
and is not applicable to other federal agencies. Federal
agencies should require their CORs to make at least semi-
annual, unannounced visits to the contractor-provided housing
site and interview contract employees to ensure they have been
briefed on the TIP clause and obtain copies of TIP-related
training materials.
The agency should also require that COs and CORs document
TIP monitoring programs in their contract files.
OIG will continue to perform audits, inspections and
investigations in areas vulnerable to TIP abuses. Since the
November 2011 hearing, OIG is conducting a follow-up review of
its January 2011 report on TIP for the Arab States of the Gulf.
OIG inspections will continue to review TIP-related contract
provisions and oversight in the course of post inspections.
Our Office of Investigations has been engaging other
federal investigative organizations on ways to broaden
involvement in combating TIP abroad. Since November 2011,
Investigations has received two TIP-related allegations and one
TIP-related investigation remains open.
Once again, thank you and I am pleased to answer any
questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Klemstine follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you.
Mr. Ginman.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD T. GINMAN

Mr. Ginman. Chairman Lankford, Ranking Member Connolly,
thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss our efforts to combat trafficking in persons.
I commend the Subcommittee for the work that it has done to
identify trafficking in persons issues affecting government
contracts and in searching for solutions to these issues. A
commitment to combating trafficking in persons is an essential
requirement in any U.S. Government contract.
At the end of the 1990s, the Department of Defense
implemented a deliberate strategy to reduce reliance on organic
forces for combating service support in favor of contracted
support. During Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring
Freedom, the rate of growth of contracted support challenged
DOD to put a framework necessary to properly manage and control
contractors in forward contingency areas, including aspects
related to the personnel on the battlefield.
The growth of contracted combat service support resulted in
an expansion of contractor personnel working and residing on
forward operating bases including many personnel from third
country nations and local nationals. Department policies and
doctrine associated with managing these contractor personnel
continues to evolve.
The Department takes seriously its responsibilities in
combating trafficking in persons and we need to ensure we
properly manage and oversee all contractor personnel authorized
to accompany the force regardless of origin.
Like the Committee, Defense is committed to finding
solutions that improve our ability to eliminate trafficking in
persons. As the Director of Defense Procurement and Acquisition
Policy, I am responsible for promulgating contracting guidance
to the Department's entire contracting workforce.
With regard to trafficking in persons, my top priority is
supporting the Federal Government's and Defense Department's
zero tolerance policy. We support the Office of Under Secretary
of Defense for Personnel Readiness and their efforts to manage
the DOD Trafficking in Persons Program required by the Traffic
and Victims Protection Act of 2000 and subsequent
reauthorization.
The Department is determined to identify, correct and
prevent contracting efforts not in consonance with our
government's and Department's zero tolerance policy and to work
to identify and implement new policies and procedures that will
reduce and/or eliminate trafficking in persons. We will
continue to aggressively pursue addressing trafficking in
persons challenges associated with the Department's contracts
executed worldwide.
I thank you for the opportunity to speak today about the
Trafficking in Persons Program at the Department. This
concludes my remarks and I ask that my statement be inserted in
the record.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Ginman follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Absolutely, without objection.
Ms. Cooper.

STATEMENT OF SHARON COOPER

Ms. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Connolly.
My name is Sharon Cooper and I am Director of the Defense
Human Resources Activity. It is a field activity in the Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness.
It is an honor to be with you this morning to discuss the
Department of Defense Combating Trafficking in Persons policy,
procedures and the way ahead. Trafficking in persons is a
violation of human rights. It is both dehumanizing and cruel
and has no place in the defense environment. The Department of
Defense has been working to bring an end to this injustice
since 2002 through training, education and regulation.
The Department requires all personnel to receive training
on combating trafficking in persons. In 2011, over 1.2 million
Defense personnel were trained. The Deputy Secretary of
Defense, Ash Carter, just last week announced that we will
begin training all contractors. The Program Office will begin
working with AT&L, Mr. Ginman's office and also the Defense
Acquisition University to start this training immediately.
The training is also supplemented through anti-traffic
public service announcements over the Department's television/
radio spots and the most recently designed mobile applications
through iPhones and Blackberrys.
The Department's TIP Program office is manned by two
dedicated personnel supported by 53 service and agency contacts
with administrative support from the field activity. I am
pleased to report that in the coming weeks, a Defense Contract
Management Agency representative will be onboard to assist the
Program Office in its outreach to all personnel to include
contractor employees.
The Department is in the beginning stages of a strategic
plan designed to implement practices to ensure contractor
compliance and measures to protect workers under appropriate
law. The details of this plan, which is a working document,
were sent to the subcommittee last month. To work on the plan
and to ensure its relevancy, a multiagency, multidisciplinary
CONUS and OCONUS Task Force has been established. This task
force will provide recommendations for improving the
Department's current TIP practices to include more robust data
collection, increased oversight and strengthen contract
procedures. The first meeting of the task force is schedule for
next week on April 4.
I have had the opportunity to read the legislation recently
introduced, the End Trafficking in Government Contracting Act
of 2012. To the best of my knowledge, the bill has not been
reviewed by the Department. My view, however, is that many of
these areas we are targeting in the strategic plan and that Mr.
Ginman and I have been discussing can be found in the
legislation. I am certainly supportive of all efforts to
strengthen our ability to hold appropriately accountable all
who allow or engage in TIP-related offenses and conduct.
In addition to the Strategic Plan, the TIP Program Office
is working with DCMA to facilitate a visit to overseas
locations to discuss with contractors and contractor employees.
DCMA is our responsible body that is on the ground to oversee
the Department's contract compliance.
There is more to do. I look forward to continuing to work
with my partners in the Department of Defense and throughout
the Federal Government to strengthen the Department's oversight
and enforcement mechanism in support of the U.S. Government's
zero tolerance policy against trafficking in persons.
Thank you again for the opportunity to update you on this
important issue.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Cooper follows:]

Mr. Lankford. Thank you, Ms. Cooper.
Ambassador Moorefield.

STATEMENT OF AMBASSADOR KENNETH P. MOOREFIELD

Ambassador Moorefield. Good morning, Chairman Lankford,
Ranking Member Connolly and distinguished members of the
subcommittee.
Thank you for this opportunity to again discuss oversight
reporting on combating trafficking in persons by the Department
of Defense Office of Inspector General, a goal to which we all
are vigorously committed.
Previous DOD IG assessment reports have resulted in the
Secretary of Defense Policy Instructions that set forth clear
DOD opposition to any activities promoting, supporting or
sanctioning human trafficking and also provided guidance that
assigned CTIP Program responsibilities across the Department.
In addition, CTIP awareness training, which remains an annual
requirement, was established for all service members and DOD
civilians.
Most recently, in January 2012, DOD IG issued the last of
three annual reports requested by the Congress on a sample of
contracts or subcontracts under which there is a heightened
risk the contractor may engage in acts related to trafficking
in persons. These assessments covered, in annual sequence, the
Pacific, Central and European and Africa Commands, areas of
contracting operations.
One key observation from these reports was that the most
current FAR clause was not properly included in a significant
number of the contracts reviewed. Although some form of the
CTIP clause was present in most contracts. We also observed the
contract quality assurance plans did not always include reviews
of contractor CTIP compliance, although the Defense Contract
Management Agency had included CTIP in quality assurance
inspections of contracts in the Central Command theater of
operations.
Finally, we reported that DOD contracting officers were not
being advised about TIP related criminal investigations once
they were concluded by DOD law enforcement organizations, thus
precluding subsequent consideration of administrative
contractual remedies. The Department has taken or is taking
corrective actions in each of these areas.
During this latter review, we identified best practices as
well, such as the post contract award orientation reviews of
FAR, CTIP clause requirements held by European Command
contracting personnel.
In addition to the combat and command contract reviews, DOD
has initiated an assessment of CTIP Program compliance and
performance by DOD components. This review will also
incorporate best practices and lessons learned for application
by DOD worldwide, especially as they would apply to contingency
contracting environments. We expect to issue that report in the
April time frame.
Also, DOD IG has been conducting an assessment of the DOD
CTIP Program in Afghanistan. Our team has examined 240
contracts administered by Army, Navy, Air Force and Defense
agencies performed in Afghanistan. It found the current
mandatory CTIP clause in 93 percent of the contracts reviewed,
a significant improvement when compared to previous
assessments.
During its Afghanistan field work this February, the team
visited nine separate military installations, conducted 110
interviews with military commanders and contracting personnel,
met with representatives from 10 U.S. and foreign contracting
firms, and with 145 contractor employees, both Afghan and third
country nationals.
The team learned of several incidents of alleged or
confirmed contractor TIP violations. A DOD criminal
investigation into a report of DOD contractor abuse is still
ongoing. The team also was informed that an Afghan company
under DOD contract had committed trafficking violations and as
a result, the U.S. military contracting officer has recommended
debarment.
Additionally, the team received information from third
country nationals working on a DOD contract at a U.S. military
base alleging they were living there in unsanitary conditions.
The complaint was referred to DOD contracting authorities and
the military base commander who initiated an immediate
investigation.
The team also found that third country national personnel
value the pocket-sized workers rights cards recently issued by
DOD in their own languages and the public service announcements
on TIP were regularly transmitted to DOD personnel by the Armed
Forces Network and via social networking sites. However, the
CTIP oversight challenge continues, particularly given the
extent of reliance on contractors and TCN labor in Iraq and
Afghanistan and even as that reliance begins to diminish.
The House and Senate CTIP legislation proposed recently
will, I believe, enhance oversight, investigative capability
and sanctions of violations.
In closing this morning, let me emphasize that the DOD
Office of Inspector General remains committed to providing
oversight support of the U.S. Government's zero tolerance
policy against trafficking in persons. In this regard, we will
continue to evaluate DOD's CTIP performance and compliance and
report the results to the Congress and the Department of
Defense.
I thank you again for this opportunity to discuss DOD IG
CTIP oversight work.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Ambassador Moorefield follows:]

Mr. Lankford. I thank all of you for the work and the focus
on this. In our conversation before this hearing started, I
told you this is not combative, this is trying to get all our
heads together to figure out how to solve this. There are 19
different policies and procedures that previously exist and in
our hearing in November, the conversation was though we have
many policies in place, it continued still. We are still
discovering it and where it is popping up.
Though we have zero tolerance, it has been a rare moment to
see a suspension or debarment. I am glad to hear about that
already moving forward at this point. It has been rare to get a
chance to see the actual engagement. We seem to be zero
tolerance in word but not always in action as we go through it.
Let me ask a quick question. The legislation that is being
proposed, some of these ideas that came directly from some of
you, things you saw to be strengthened. Where the gaps are is
one of the thing we asked before with 19 different policies and
procedures, what are we missing? Let me run through some of
these things quickly and see if there is any one that would say
there is an issue with this.
I understand you are not speaking somewhat in your official
capacity though you are in a hearing because the agencies
haven't made any official statement on this one way or the
other, but just your personal perspective on it: certification
for contractors, they have to certify they do have a process in
place to prevent trafficking in persons; IG reporting, clarity
of defining what trafficking includes instead of a broad
definition, trying to get some specifics in it; penalty options
and laying those out in greater clarity; and also extending
legal protections to overseas contracts as it would be in the
United States, extending that to the United States operations
overseas.
Does anyone have a problem with any of those? That is the
core of this piece of legislation. Do you want to make a
comment on any of those?
Mr. Ginman?
Mr. Ginman. I have no issues at all with the legislation
that I read.
Mr. Lankford. Any questions, observations or anything on
it?
Ms. Cooper. I would just like to reiterate that we welcome
the legislation and that it seems like it will strengthen our
ability to hold accountable those who engage in these acts.
Mr. Lankford. Accountability seems to be a big issue. As we
discussed in the previous hearing as well, we are sending third
country nationals back to their home country bitter at America
rather than speaking of American values. That is the exact
opposite of what we want to occur. We want goodwill spread
across the world that they know if they come and work for
Americans, they will be treated fairly, treated with honor and
will take that same passion for liberty back into countries
that struggle with the issues we can provide to them as a
beacon of light. This is a very big issue for all of us and how
we are going to take this on.
Mr. Ginman, let me comment on the zero tolerance connection
because this is a common statement that everyone has mentioned.
There as been a historic issue on that. Ambassador Moorefield
mentioned that we have a debarment that is in process that has
been recommended. Do we know of other debarments for
trafficking in persons that have existed? This has been
something we have tried to investigate. How many suspensions
and debarments are out there based on trafficking in persons
that we know of, even in the last several years?
Mr. Ginman. We have identified two referred to the
suspension an debarment official in the Army. One was dropped
for lack of evidence, so it was not substantiated, I think is
the correct phrase. The other, the company was, in fact,
debarred.
Mr. Lankford. That was recently?
Mr. Ginman. I want to say it was in 2011.
Mr. Lankford. Ambassador Moorefield, this is another one
you are discussing that is even more recent than that?
Ambassador Moorefield. Yes, it is. Because it is an Afghan
company, regardless whether or not it is an Afghan company,
there is an appeals process which is apparently going to be
triggered, so that is why we don't have a final determination.
Frankly, the evidence seemed pretty clear to our team on the
ground.
Mr. Lankford. That is a positive thing for us because one
of the frustrations that Mr. Connolly and I both mentioned as
we went through the previous hearing was there was a lot of
conversation about it, there was a lot of sense of this is
occurring, but we are not taking the next step to say, what do
we do on just the very low threshold of suspension and
debarment and start moving on that.
The training you mentioned as well, especially on the DOD
side and State, let me again bring up something. I spoke with a
United States Marine MP coming back from Afghanistan in October
of last year. I asked them specifically about trafficking in
persons and third country nationals, living conditions, and
some of the dynamics. They spoke very frankly and honestly
about the things happening in Afghanistan at their particular
base. This was an MP who know what was happening, that knew the
dynamics on the ground, who was very aware that many of these
people had been trafficked.
My question to them was do you know where to report this?
That MP said no. He was aware of it happening, but an MP on the
ground in Afghanistan at one of our bases did not know where to
report that. While training does need to accelerate, finding
the people like the MPs, people who will notice it and see it
so it is not just a broad brush of all employees and of all
staff, people have a sense of feeling responsibility for that,
to say it is my responsibility if I see to turn that in, not
just I see, I don't know what to do about it, but that is still
ongoing in that work. Ms. Cooper?
Ms. Cooper. Mr. Chairman, if I may, on training, we do have
specific law enforcement training we are updating now to do
exactly that. It is something we hope to get out very, very
quickly. There are three types of training: the general
training, a supervisor leadership training which is
supplemental to the general training,; and then there is the
law enforcement training that we are working on and now we will
be having contractor training.
Mr. Lankford. That is terrific. Obviously that is an area
we can get a chance to step up on then.
You also mentioned the task force that is meeting April 4.
Ms. Cooper, can you give me more detail on that?
Ms. Cooper. The task force with the Strategic Plan, we
decided rather than created something in a vacuum, we would
have something that would be made up of different parts from
the Department: AT&L, Policy, PNR and DCMA. We would also be
working with the other people in the Federal Government to work
both overseas and CONUS in the United States to look at
contract policies, to look at best practices, to look at is
what is in the DOD regulations now.
I have been working with Mr. Ginman and his staff to decide
what it is and this task force will actually look at the thing
we are doing. It really is a blueprint of what we want to do,
it is a working document. Just since we sent the information to
you in February, I have decided that data collection is
something. I was reading what the IG said and the data
collection is something we really need to focus on more so that
we not only collect it but actually take the data we know and
the cases we know and put them out to the law enforcement
agencies and to the contracting offices so they know what is
out there.
We are going to get a subcommittee working on the Defense
Manpower Data Center that holds all of this data and how has
the overseas contracting data which was just transferred to
them earlier this year and they will be working with us on
that. That is what we are trying to do with the Strategic Plan.
Mr. Lankford. I would like to recognize Mr. Connolly for
questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
for being here.
Listening to the testimony, it sounds like we have made a
lot of progress on getting the policies in place that are
right, upgrading the training so that the awareness is
hopefully universal, and helping people understand what
constitutes compliance.
I am still focused on implementation because frankly, if
the message doesn't get out on the field, if people kind of
turn a blind eye and it is enforcement by complaint rather than
proactive enforcement, if people knew the United States
Government is going to be the scourge of God, the one thing you
don't want to do ever, is even look like there could be an
instance of human trafficking because we will come down on you,
like I don't sense that is yet the standard.
That has to do with implementation. It also, of course, is
a function of resources. For example, are we randomly and
routinely checking housing for people who have been hired by
contractors and subcontractors in our overseas operations to
satisfy ourselves that bad things are not going on, that it is
not substandard housing, but also oh, by the way, the more
pernicious aspects particularly of this subject are not
occurring? Let me start with you, Ambassador Moorefield.
Ambassador Moorefield. The Defense Contract Management
Agency has included housing inspections as part of their
regular, periodic inspections of third country national living
conditions. We are reasonably confident that it is, both in
Iraq and Afghanistan, getting an overview.
One of the things we noted in the recent Afghanistan
assessment is you have an estimated 35,000 employees spread
across a very large country in many different sites. Moreover,
there is regular turnover of those employees, so I think one of
the things we deduced from this is that you need to step up
probably the periodicity of that oversight because things may
be kosher right now and six months from now, the situation may
have changed, contractors change and turnover.
You have Afghan contractors also now in the mix using third
country national employees, so the challenge has not
diminished. If anything it has slightly stepped up, so we will
make sure we share anything we have learned that could be of
constructive value to the Department in this respect.
Mr. Connolly. These are unannounced inspections?
Ambassador Moorefield. Frankly, I don't know the answer to
that question.
Mr. Connolly. Wouldn't you agree that sort of would be
important so that we are all on our toes?
Ambassador Moorefield. Yes, I would agree. They are
unannounced.
Mr. Connolly. Okay, they are unannounced. What about the
State Department in this respect?
Ms. Klemstine. I can address that on two points. First of
all, our recent follow up of last year's 2011 report where we
had indications of TIP violations, we have gone back to those
Arab States and we found that in some cases, the housing had
improved, but in other cases, the housing got worse. We are
going to report on that and expect to issue a report in May,
but we were kind of dismayed to find out that conditions in
some places had, in fact deteriorated.
In addition to that, we have an ongoing effort where we are
doing what we call surprise spot checks. This has also been
agreed to by the Ambassador in Afghanistan and he
wholeheartedly has supported this idea. We have run into some
roadblocks lately because of travel restrictions within the
country but our plan is to go and do spot checks. We have a
list of contractors and as soon as we have clearance to get to
some of the sites, we plan on doing that.
Mr. Connolly. Let me ask both of you while I have a little
time, both the Pentagon and the State Department, you can
decide who wants to answer, in our previous hearing, the
inference was drawn that when look you at metrics, how many
cases have been referred for criminal prosecution? I think the
State Department was zero and not much better for the Defense
Department.
When you look at the recommendations for debarment or
suspension, we are celebrating one. We have thousands, tens of
thousands of contractors and subcontractors. I don't want an
arbitrary metric, make sure your number is up, but the fact it
would be close to zero suggests we are not taking
implementation and enforcement as seriously as we could because
that is the ultimate hammer we control, prosecution and status
of ability to affect contract or subcontract with the Federal
Government.
In the brief period we have, I would be interested in
hearing from this panel what can we, what must we do to toughen
up that enforcement and to have more rigorous metrics so the
word gets out that we mean what we are saying?
Mr. Ginman. On Ambassador Moorefield's comment, in the
theater, they are done on an unannounced basis. On our LOGCAP
contracts, it is done bimonthly and on our other contracts, it
is done monthly. DCMA, in fact, looks at all contractors and
all subcontractors if they are within what we call the wire,
inside the bounds, of a FOB.
In February of last year, DCMA expanded their costs to
expressly go ask the questions and take a look at what is the
housing and where it is. It is the Department's preference that
when we find issues, we want them corrected. They have a
process within the Contract Management Agency called Corrective
Action Reports that if something is identified rather than to
immediately throw it into prosecution, we would much prefer
whatever the issue is be corrected and move on as opposed to
looking to do that.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Ginman, if I could just interrupt, if the
Chair will indulge.
Mr. Lankford. Absolutely.
Mr. Connolly. I understand that as a modus operandi and it
is a preferable modus operandi, of course, but when you are
talking about human trafficking, if you stumble upon a
situation where a contractor or subcontractor working for us is
running a brothel and has lured women from a third country
under false pretenses and, by the way, made them pay for the
privilege of it, that to me isn't corrective action, that is
you are out of here. We are going to help liberate these women
and we are going to make sure you can never do business with or
for the United States Government again.
Mr. Ginman. In every circumstance, it would be as you just
described, I would absolutely agree it should be passed to the
Criminal Investigative Division.
Mr. Connolly. Has it been?
Mr. Ginman. To my knowledge, when things are found that
are, in fact, illegal, they are passed to the investigative
groups, either NCIS to CID, to the Air Force or to the Defense
Criminal Investigative Division.
Mr. Connolly. I would just remind you that in our previous
hearing in November, the undisputed testimony we received
undisputed was that almost never happens.
Mr. Ginman. What I don't have insight to, to Ms. Cooper's
comment on collecting of data, how many have been referred.
That is not data we do have. I don't have insight into the
investigative arms as to the outcome, did they investigate, did
they find something or not. On the policy side, we don't have
insight to what goes on.
Mr. Connolly. All right, but I hope you understand where I
am coming from. I am all for getting the policy right and it
sounds like we are doing that but it has to be backed up top
enforcement. Otherwise, it is meaningless.
Mr. Ginman. I agree with that. The Chairman asked me before
the hearing started about things we looked at recently that
were not addressed before. The certification requirement you
have in your legislation I think goes a long way to have
certification. In looking at what was our first opportunity, at
least from a contracts perspective, to determine where the
hiring practice is inappropriate to start with.
We have a requirement before U.S. contract personnel or TCM
contract personnel go into theater to go through what we call a
reception center. We have not been asking the question at the
reception centers specifically as third country nationals are
coming in, how were they hired and where were they and ensuring
they are given the brochure we filled out, ensuring they have a
labor contract.
In talking with DCMA, we are going to look to now make that
a requirement so we have a better opportunity but I don't have
insight, and what we haven't been able to think through as an
approach, is if somebody is hiring in India, in Malaysia or in
an overseas environment, how do we look at that hiring practice
and how that is done? Our first real opportunity to touch will
be when the third country national shows up at a reception
center and asks at that point in time. We intend to go down and
add that to our bag of tricks to be able to do that.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your
indulgence.
Mr. Lankford. Absolutely.
Let me just ask a couple questions of State as well.
One of the things we have pursued, and we talked about it
at length in the November hearing, was the recruiter fees. That
seems to be where we are running into people in debt bondage.
Basically, no matter what you ask when they arrive, they know
they have to stay here, they have to work this off because they
have a tremendous debt back home and can't afford to mess up
because they are trapped at this point.
State is recommending, if I am picking up from your
recommendations, no recruiter fees at all. Several countries
allow some minimal amount of recruiter fee in their law or
maybe up to one month of their salary. You are recommending a
no recruiter fee at all at that point, did I hear that
correctly?
Ms. Read. Yes, and in the procurement PIB that just came
out yesterday from our procurement executive, he notes that
contractor and subcontractors shall only use bona fide,
licensed recruitment companies. All that has to be submitted in
writing and it would state in the offer, this would be the
recruited employee, would not be charged recruitment or any
similar fee.
Mr. Lankford. Licensed by the country of origin or licensed
by us?
Ms. Read. It must be by the country of origin. We just got
this yesterday, so we are just going through this. Any contract
exceeding $150,000 where performance will require the
recruitment of non-professional, third country nationals, any
offeror is required to submit a recruitment plan as part of the
proposal. This isn't suggested, this is a shall, which we are
very pleased about, and also a housing plan which is also one
of the difficult areas.
Mr. Lankford. The housing plan, basic stipulation for space
or for availability? What is the basic criteria on the housing
plan?
Ms. Read. Submitting acceptable plans as appropriate and
living conditions, we are going to our overseas building
operations inspection protocol for inspection of temporary
labor camps. Inspections shall be coordinated with the RSO,
should include a commonsense living evaluation into conditions
taking into account local standards.
Mr. Lankford. What about the contracts and rights in their
native language as well as English?
Ms. Read. That is there as well. There is the whole housing
plan. Contractors shall provide all employees with a ``Know
Your Rights'' brochure and document that employees have been
briefed, here is the English version and contractor shall
provide employees with signed copies of their employment
contracts in English and the employee's native language.
Mr. Lankford. That is new as well?
Ms. Read. That is brand new.
Mr. Lankford. Because there was some consideration, DOD has
tried to take that on as well; State seems to be fairly recent
in trying to add that, in their native language as well as in
English. That is good to hear.
Tell me about the role of the course and the follow up.
That came from everyone at this point, to try to do the follow
up on that because I agree with Mr. Connolly, it is great to
have the policy on that, it goes back to our zero tolerance
policy, but it doesn't matter if we actually never prosecute
and go through the process, if we don't have someone to follow
up on it.
Again, when I was in Afghanistan back in December, I asked
some contract officers on the ground, who is following up on
this to try to get the process and see what is happening with
it for the CORs who were there, how is this happening in real
life?
Ms. Read. I will take that one. For State, it is a three-
prong approach. It is the contracting officer at the COR, then
we also consider it a management initiative. The contracting
officers travel frequently all the time to Iraq and
Afghanistan. For Iraq specifically, for the Diplomatic Security
Corps and also the overseas building operations, we have the
COR, before they go out in theater, meet with the respective
contracting officer and also at a higher level, one of my
division directors.
Before they are ever nominated for COR, these are our top
notch CORs that go in the field, they all meet together. We go
over trafficking in persons, we assist whatever questions they
may have. They also are updated with COR training if they so
need it, they may actually be up to date and don't need a
refresher, and they actually live on the man camps, both in the
Afghanistan diplomatic security end and also in the Iraq man
camps.
We implemented all contracts, we double check, they all
have the TIP clause in them and then when my contracting
officers go on travel, which there are no real announcements
but everyone knows with the country clearance they are coming
in, they hit all of those posts, all those places in Iraq, so
Diplomatic Security CO can visit an OBO man camp and in fact,
that is how we discovered the one problem in Iraq that we had.
COR came back, said we have substandard living conditions, not
necessarily a TIP but substandard living conditions.
Mr. Lankford. Ms. Klemstine, is this the one you are
referring to or a different one?
Ms. Klemstine. No, the one I am referring to is in neither
Afghanistan nor Iraq, it is another Middle East country.
Mr. Lankford. We will come back to that. I am going to let
you finish.
Ms. Read. The COR came back to the one of my COs and said,
we have a living condition issue here, it is substandard. We
reached out to the vendor, who was an American prime who had a
subcontract in-theater, and we said, fix it now. My CO was
having to travel two days later. The CO got on the ground, it
wasn't fixed and we shut down the man camp. We referred it and
right now, it is pending with our suspension and debarment
official. They can revisit it to look at contingencies there.
Unrelated to that but somewhat similarly related, we ended
up TforD'ing that prime contract because they could not
proceed. They had failure to make any sort of forward movement.
That one is not suspended or in debarment yet. We issued the
note from the procurement shop and that one is ongoing.
What I believe is only because the COR knew what to look
for and related back immediately to the CO back here and then
that CO traveled out, that was our two prong. What I do at my
level, and I think it is very important, is we bring in all the
vendors, all of our IDIQ contractors for diplomatic security,
we did this a month ago, at the highest levels, they are CEOs
and COOs, and we discussed issues.
We discussed how often they have compliance officers come
into their corporation and they are visiting, so they come in
quarterly; we talked about TIP on the field and we warned them
in a nice, firm manner that if there are any issues, they will
not be around.
Mr. Lankford. We would appreciate that in a nice, kind
manner as well, that you would pass that on because this is not
something we need to export, people bitter at the United States
of America back to their third world countries. It just doesn't
share our values.
Ms. Klemstine, you mentioned and I want you to give more
detail, you said it is not in our contingency theater at all.
Ms. Klemstine. No. During our follow up review, one of the
countries we went to was Saudi Arabia. Previously reported on
living conditions in Riyadh and time, we found the conditions
had improved in Riyadh but had deteriorated in Dammam.
Mr. Lankford. Are there things you would want to be able to
respond to from your report, give us an advance on it?
Ms. Klemstine. I would rather wait a little bit because the
report is still in the process of being reviewed.
Mr. Lankford. Okay, so you are going to leave us out there
in suspense?
Ms. Klemstine. Yes.
Mr. Lankford. We will take that. Are there other comments
from other folks here?
Ambassador Moorefield. I would just add one thing, Mr.
Chairman. We looked at some recent statistics regarding
investigations conducted by our Defense Criminal Investigative
Service, which is part of DOD IG, and out of 21 investigations
they have conducted, 16 were in OCO countries. Of those 16, 3
were presented to the Department of Justice.
I can't respond to what happened to them at Justice, that
is of course, internal to them, but 16 cases investigated in
OCO countries out of 21 and 3 referred to the Department of
Justice.
Mr. Lankford. Mr. Connolly?
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am just going to ask one question but Mr. Chairman, we
are going to work up some questions about metrics and I would
like to do it jointly with you, if you like, and would ask the
witnesses to get back to the Committee in writing or by email
with respect to those questions with a little more depth on
metrics so we are creating a baseline.
Ambassador CdeBaca, other than your testimony, you have not
said anything in this panel. Your portfolio is in human
trafficking?
Ambassador CdeBaca. It is, sir, although I think since our
contracting professionals are carrying a lot of the weight, I
am content to wait to be called on.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I am calling on you. My one and only
question is to give you an opportunity to share your insights
with us in light of what you have heard and the questions
coming from us in terms of the nature of the concerns we, in
Congress, have and I am very gratified at the testimony today
in terms of we clearly share common objectives and that is good
but I want to give you an opportunity and that is my one and
only question, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador CdeBaca. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
One of the things that struck me as I was listening to the
other panelists was in last year's trafficking report, we
actually had a sidebar on optimal regulatory approaches for
labor recruiting, not specific to government contracting, but
labor recruiting in general. That can be the folks that are
building those high rises in the Gulf, those could be folks
coming to work for folks as a nanny in another country.
Ticking those off, not only do I hear a lot of that from
the other panelists in reviewing the draft legislation, with
the caveat that we don't have official positions on it, that
notion of the recruitment fees being dealt with, that there is
actual competition among the recruitment agencies so that it
has better services offered to the workers, enacting criminal
laws that penalize fraudulent recruitment, imposing sanctions
on private recruitment agencies that break the law, have
compensation mechanisms for the workers, vigorous
investigation, and adequate complaint procedures to actually
identify and examine allegations of violations.
That is not only the optimal approach we are suggesting for
the rest of the world, but in the legislation that has now been
introduced, I think it is something hopefully will bring the
United States to the level we are suggesting to other
countries. We very much appreciate that.
As a former prosecutor that did human trafficking cases, I
think the expansion of the exterritorial jurisdiction to make
it clear that the fraud and labor recruiting provision of the
2008 Trafficking Act, which was such an important addition to
the arsenal of the federal prosecutors, making sure that is
available because it does get a bit murky when you are talking
about the TCNs, especially if they are on a military base in a
place where there are restrictions of movement applied to
everyone. Things we would normally use as evidence of
enslavement, were that to happen in the United States, may be
present for everyone on that base, as far as not being able to
come and go.
This opportunity to also use the fraudulent recruiting and
take that step back and really have the protections in there
seems to be a good one. I will defer our colleagues at the
Department of Justice as to what their official response is to
that provision, but I would have very much appreciated having
that when I was a prosecutor.
Mr. Lankford. Mr. Kelly is recognized.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I really would just like to take this opportunity, first of
all, to thank you for H.R. 4259. I think one of the things in
being elected and coming to Congress is that you start to find
out about things you never would have known about in your
private life. I thank the panel for being here today too.
These hearings really give us an opportunity to present a
picture that most of our fellow citizens have absolutely no
idea even exists, almost to a point that we have become naive
or believe that the rest of the world really operates at a much
higher level of decency than what I have come to know. I know
we share a lot of these same concerns.
I-90 in the upper part of the district that I represent is
one of the areas where a lot of this trafficking takes place. I
know we are talking now about DOD and labor people being
brought in but the frequency and the overwhelming number of
people involved in this is so appalling to me and the fact that
it has become such a huge part of a business model where people
are used as chattel property throughout the world is appalling,
appalling to most of us as Americans and yet it happens with
such great frequency and has such a cost in the human
condition.
I applaud you for what you are doing, I thank you for
having this hearing and Mr. Connolly, these are the things that
we really can make a difference in, and what you are doing
really makes a difference to the rest of the world. Those the
United States is taking a lead in, we are starting to talk
about these things in such an open forum and from a platform
that really needs to be spoken from much more often.
Again, I just wanted to take the opportunity to thank you,
Mr. Chairman, for your piece of legislation and Mr. Connolly,
thank you, and to say this is something that keeps you up at
night. It is one of those things where you get really tired and
fall asleep but you wake up in the middle of the night and say,
we have to be able to fix this, we have to be able to do
something. It is not just something we need to do, it is
something we absolutely have to do.
I thank you all for being here and for being on the panel
and making more Americans aware of what is going on.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Lankford. Thank you.
It is a reminder that the American value is not the same as
the rest of the world so when we hire a foreign contractor or
subcontractor to be able to come in and provide labor, we have
to be diligent to make sure they share our values and how they
bring in a workforce. I do appreciate that.
Talk is cheap and we have had multiple moments of
discussing it to death. I am glad to be able to hear the
actions you all have already taken and will continue to take.
We are looking for a partnership from you to say you are going
on the ground working on this all the time, you are face to
face with the people and have the accountability for it. I
appreciate your diligence and focus on it.
We need to know what we can do to help to continue to send
the message and also provide legislation that says we do want
to help support this and make sure we are exporting our values
around the world when we interact with people from around the
world who work with us.
With that, thank you very much for your testimony and your
time.
We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:34 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


