- OVERSIGHT OF PRUDENTIAL REGULATORS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF PRUDENTIAL REGULATORS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 15, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-57

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-096 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
November 15, 2023............................................     1
Appendix:
November 15, 2023............................................    43

WITNESSES
Wednesday, November 15, 2023

Barr, Hon. Michael S., Vice Chair for Supervision, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed)..................     4
Gruenberg, Hon. Martin J., Chairman, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC).............................................     6
Harper, Hon. Todd M., Chairman, National Credit Union
Administration (NCUA)..........................................     9
Hsu, Michael J., Acting Comptroller of the Currency, Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)..........................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Barr, Hon. Michael S.........................................    44
Gruenberg, Hon. Martin J.....................................    52
Harper, Hon. Todd M..........................................    78
Hsu, Michael J...............................................    90

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

McHenry, Hon. Patrick:
Letter to Fed Chair Powell, FDIC Chair Gruenberg, and Acting
Comptroller Hsu re: Basel III Endgame, dated November 15,
2023.......................................................   100
Sessions, Hon. Pete:
Wall Street Journal article, ``Strip Clubs, Lewd Photos and a
Boozy Hotel: The Toxic Atmosphere at Bank Regulator FDIC,''
dated November 13, 2023....................................   103
Barr, Hon. Michael S.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Barr........................................   118
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Beatty......................................   134
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Donalds.....................................   137
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Fitzgerald..................................   141
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Garbarino...................................   145
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Gonzalez....................................   149
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Gottheimer..................................   152
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................   156
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Kim.........................................   160
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Luetkemeyer.................................   165
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nickel......................................   168
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nunn........................................   172
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Sherman.....................................   185
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Steil.......................................   189
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Timmons.....................................   193
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Vargas......................................   196
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nikema Williams.............................   199
Gruenberg, Hon. Martin J.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Barr........................................   202
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Beatty......................................   229
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Donalds.....................................   221
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Fitzgerald..................................   216
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Gonzalez....................................   218
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................   231
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Kim.........................................   223
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nickel......................................   213
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nunn........................................   239
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Sherman.....................................   235
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Timmons.....................................   214
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Tlaib.......................................   250
Harper, Hon. Todd M.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Barr........................................   253
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Beatty......................................   256
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Gonzalez....................................   255
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................   257
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Kim.........................................   260
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nunn........................................   261
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Sherman.....................................   259
Hsu, Michael J.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Barr........................................   267
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Beatty......................................   282
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Donalds.....................................   280
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Fitzgerald..................................   276
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Gonzalez....................................   278
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................   284
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nickel......................................   273
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nunn........................................   291
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Sherman.....................................   288
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Timmons.....................................   274

OVERSIGHT OF PRUDENTIAL REGULATORS

----------

Wednesday, November 15, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:36 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick McHenry
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives McHenry, Lucas, Sessions,
Posey, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Wagner, Williams of Texas, Hill,
Loudermilk, Davidson, Rose, Steil, Timmons, Norman, Meuser,
Fitzgerald, Kim, Donalds, Flood, Nunn, De La Cruz, Ogles;
Waters, Velazquez, Sherman, Meeks, Scott, Lynch, Green,
Cleaver, Himes, Foster, Vargas, Casten, Pressley, Horsford,
Tlaib, Garcia, Williams of Georgia, Nickel, and Pettersen.
Chairman McHenry. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Oversight of Prudential
Regulators.''
And just for everyone's situational awareness, we have
votes here at roughly 10:30 this morning, so we will get as far
into this hearing as we possibly can, and when one Democrat and
one Republican return to the committee after those votes, we
will commence questioning once again. We are going to try to
get in as many questions with the time we have for these four
important regulators, for them to submit to their oversight
function, obviously, but to also be able to get back to work at
their agencies, because there is much work to be done.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
Good morning. I appreciate our witnesses being here today.
The last time you appeared before this committee, we were
facing significant turmoil in our regional banking system.
Since then, you have employed a never-let-a-crisis-go-to-waste
mantra. Attempting to use recent uncertainty to justify your
sweeping rewrite of regulations for U.S. financial institutions
doesn't go unnoticed; nobody is buying that spin, by the way.
The most significant proposals, including the Basel III
Endgame, are overwhelmingly dominated by provisions that have
nothing to do with what happened in March. Rather, it appears
that the onslaught of your agencies' regulatory proposals are
intended to turn private banks and financial institutions into
public utilities. This would put unelected bureaucrats in
charge of balance sheets, credit flows, and evaluation of what
is and is not considered risky.
Let's start with the Basel III Endgame proposal, which
involves hundreds of billions or even trillions of dollars of
resource allocation. This initiative was put forward with no
convincing rationale, no credible motivation, and a shocking
lack of supportive quantitative economic analysis. Even worse,
the Basel III Endgame would stifle economic growth both here in
America and globally, limiting lending and hindering the
American Dream of homeownership for families across the
country.
Additionally, banking regulators appear to have abandoned
even the slightest notion of promoting American interests.
Instead, you have ceded your authority over U.S. financial
regulation to opaque, unelected, and unaccountable global
governance bodies and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs),
allowing European counterparts to set the agenda and put our
financial system at a competitive disadvantage.
One need only look at the recently-proposed Principles for
Climate-Related Risk Management for Large Financial
Institutions. These principles align closely with those being
pushed by global governance bodies rather than the best
interests of our financial system, or even the effects of
climate change here in the United States. Regardless of whether
you call it guidance or regulation, these principles are
significant and did not go through the appropriate process, as
governed by the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). That is why
I will ask the Government Accountability Office (GAO) to
examine whether these principles constitute a rule and would be
subject to the Congressional Review Act (CRA).
Similarly, and a win for consumer protection, the GAO
recently ruled that the SEC's Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 121
(SAB 121), does meet the Administrative Procedure Act's
definition of a rule, making it subject to the CRA. It seems
the only area where Biden financial regulators don't take their
cues from foreign counterparties is digital assets. While other
jurisdictions implement robust consumer protections and clear
regulatory frameworks, we continue to fall behind, especially
this Administration.
I will finish with this: There appears to be a desire to
remake the American financial system to better align with
regulators' political preferences rather than to dutifully
implement the laws enacted by Congress. These supposedly
independent regulators are blindly following orders from the
White House and political activists, leading to gross
mismanagement of their agencies and the American economy. Just
this week, alleged widespread and entrenched misconduct by FDIC
employees was reported by The Wall Street Journal, which was
covered in yesterday's hearing. This misconduct is a severe
departure from the agency's operations to execute its mission.
We often hear in the halls of Congress that things will
happen because someone has the votes to make it happen.
Unelected banking regulators seem to be using a similar
political calculus to push their partisan agendas. Whether it
is at the FDIC or at the Federal Reserve for regulatory policy,
the stakes are way too high to take your eyes off the ball or
to play political games. You must focus on the long-term
safety, soundness, and stability of our financial system for
the benefit of the American people and American families and
American workers rather than focusing on partisanship,
misleading rhetoric, or short-term political gains.
This isn't about politics. This is about doing what is
right for the American economy for the long term. It is about
safety and soundness in the long run, and it seems like these
proposals we are seeing for bank capital are about policy
preferences, and not driven by economic analysis. That is
concerning, and, Vice Chair Barr, that should be concerning to
you at the Federal Reserve. I think the importance of the
Federal Reserve's independence for monetary policy cannot be
overstated, and you are jeopardizing it by your regulatory
actions. I yield back.
I now recognize the ranking member of the committee, the
gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, for 4 minutes for an
opening statement.
Ms. Waters. Good morning, and thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
holding this hearing, continuing the tradition that Democrats
started in holding semiannual hearings to provide oversight of
our prudential regulators. I want to take this opportunity to
applaud our nation's regulators. After the failures of Silicon
Valley Bank, Signature Bank, and First Republic Bank, which
marked the second-, third-, and fourth-largest bank failures in
our history, it was our nation's regulators and President
Biden's Treasury Department that protected our nation's
economy. Now, they are taking steps to address weaknesses in
our nation's banking system, including by strengthening capital
requirements, and this makes sense because well-capitalized
banks lend more.
Committee Democrats are also doing our part to prevent
another banking crisis. We have introduced a wave of bills to
address gaps exposed by the bank values, such as strengthening
bank executive accountability. Several of these bills are
advancing with broad bipartisan support in the Senate, and I
urge House Republicans to take them up as well. I am hoping we
can discuss legislation today to strengthen deposit insurance
to better protect small businesses and their employees.
I also want to applaud our banking regulators for
finalizing the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) rule, something
that had not been updated in nearly 3 decades. Under my
leadership, Committee Democrats led the way in protecting the
CRA when the Trump Administration tried to gut it, including by
crashing FDIC board meetings, so I am pleased that the
regulators are taking action to combat modern-day redlining. I
look forward to learning more about how our regulators will
implement this final rule and stand ready to craft legislation
that may be necessary to bolster this effort.
Finally, before I conclude, I want to say that I am very
troubled by recent reports of sexual harassment and a toxic
workplace culture at the FDIC. All of our nation's regulators
should provide safe work environments that are free from
discrimination, harassment, and unfairness. So, I look forward
to learning more today about what is being done at the FDIC and
the other banking agencies to ensure that everyone feels safe
and respected in their place of work, and that wrongdoers are
held to account. I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back. I will now
recognize the ranking member of our Subcommittee on Financial
Institutions, Mr. Foster, for 1 minute.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As many of our
witnesses said before the Senate yesterday, and in their
written testimony for this hearing, the American banking system
is sound and resilient. The bank failures earlier this year
were contained, but they demonstrated that the risk taken on by
a small number of firms, if not appropriately managed, can
result in contagion at financial businesses across the economy
and, consequently, the Americans who depend on them for
essential financial services.
While the stress from these bank failures earlier this year
has seemingly, to both traditional and emerging risk,
persisted, traditional financial risks like interest rate risk,
and developing risks such as rising geopolitical tension, cyber
risks, climate change, artificial intelligence, and emerging
technologies present new risks that must be managed
appropriately. Our prudential regulators have advanced
proposals in recent months meant to address lessons learned
from both the global financial crisis and from recent bank
failures. These proposals will have an effect not only on the
banking system but on the overall U.S. economy, and it is our
job to understand them. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back.
Today, we welcome the testimony of the Honorable Michael S.
Barr, Vice Chair for Supervision at the Federal Reserve Board
of Governors; the Honorable Martin J. Gruenberg, Chairman of
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; Mr. Michael Hsu,
Acting Comptroller of the Currency at the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency; and the Honorable Todd Harper,
Chairman of the National Credit Union Administration. We thank
each of you for taking the time to be here.
We will recognize each of you for 5 minutes for an oral
presentation of your testimony, and without objection, each of
your written statements will be made a part of the record.
We will begin with you, Vice Chair Barr. You are now
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MICHAEL S. BARR, VICE CHAIR FOR
SUPERVISION, BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
(FED)

Mr. Barr. Thank you, Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Waters, and members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve's supervisory and
regulatory activities.
Our banking system is sound and resilient. The acute stress
that occurred in March has receded, and banking organizations
continue to report capital and liquidity ratios above minimum
regulatory levels. However, some banks have recorded sizable
declines in the fair value of certain assets as interest rates
have increased, putting pressure on tangible capital. These
banks are actively managing the resulting set of risks, but
these risks could take some time to address. Additionally, some
banks that have a high reliance on uninsured deposits are using
more-expensive funding sources to manage their liquidity.
Looking forward, preserving a sound and resilient banking
system requires continued attention to address identified
vulnerabilities, and vigilance to changing conditions, starting
with supervision.
Since the bank failures earlier this year, the Federal
Reserve has been moving forward with ways to improve the speed,
force, and agility of supervision as appropriate. In
considering improvements to supervision, we are very mindful of
the differences in size, risk, and complexity of supervised
institutions, and the importance of maintaining the strength
and diversity of banks of all sizes that serve communities
across the country. Furthermore, supervisors have been focused
on addressing material risks presented by the current economic
environment. This includes conducting targeted reviews at banks
exhibiting higher interest rate and liquidity risk profiles,
and monitoring for potential credit deterioration, particularly
within the consumer and commercial real estate (CRE) lending
segments.
A key component of this resilience is capital. Capital
allows banks to absorb losses on those assets while continuing
to serve households and businesses. In the global financial
crisis, the effects of woefully-undercapitalized banks had a
devastating impact on our economy and resulted in the worst
recession since the Great Depression. It took 6 years for
employment to recover, more than 10 million people fell into
poverty, and 6 million families lost their homes to
foreclosure, and these costs occurred even with substantial
support from the government. In the years following the global
financial crisis, the Board adopted a set of capital reforms
which greatly strengthened our banking system, and capital
ratios of the largest banks have more than doubled since 2009.
At the same time, the U.S. banking system has grown from
$12 trillion in assets to $23 trillion today, while showing
strong profitability and overall market valuation. U.S. banks
have enhanced their position as leaders in global capital
markets activity. Importantly, these reforms have served the
U.S. economy well. Our economy has grown substantially with the
continued support of robust lending from a stronger banking
system. The reforms to the capital requirement framework that
the banking agencies proposed earlier this year are the last
stage of these post-crisis capital reforms. It has long been
recognized that work remains to improve how banks measure risk,
which is critically important because the riskier a bank's
assets are, the more capital it needs to protect against those
risks.
The proposed rules would apply to banks with at least $100
billion in assets, which is fewer than 40 of the over 4,000
banks in our banking system. Community banks would not be
affected by this proposal. The effects for each bank would vary
based on its activities and risk profile. Notably, the
increases would be most substantial for the largest and most
complex banks, the global systemically important banks (G-
SIBs), and the bulk of the estimated rise is attributable to
trading and other non-lending activities.
The comment period is an important part of the rulemaking
process. We are providing the public nearly 6 months to review
the proposal so they can provide meaningful comments. We
welcome all comments that provide the agencies with additional
data and perspectives to help ensure the rules accurately
reflect risk.
I would also like to briefly highlight our long-term debt
proposal. In August, the agency proposed a rule that would
expand long-term debt and resolution planning requirements to
additional large banks. The proposal's goal is to increase the
potential options available for resolving depository
institutions and to enhance overall financial stability.
Importantly, the proposed requirements would be calibrated at a
lower level relative to the largest and most-complex banks in
recognition of the lower systemic risk profiles of applicable
banks. As with the capital rules I mentioned above, I would
like to emphasize that these are proposed rules, and we look
forward to reviewing the public comments.
Thank you, and I am happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Vice Chair Barr can be found on
page 44 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. I will now recognize Mr. Gruenberg.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARTIN J. GRUENBERG, CHAIRMAN,
FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION (FDIC)

Mr. Gruenberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman McHenry,
Ranking Member Waters, and members of the committee, I am
pleased to appear at today's hearing on oversight of prudential
regulators.
The U.S. banking industry has proven to be quite resilient,
despite the period of stress earlier this year. In the second
quarter, key banking industry measures of performance remained
favorable. Net income remained high by historical measures,
asset quality measures were stable, and the industry remained
well-capitalized. However, banks reported lower net interest
margins and higher funding pressures for a second consecutive
quarter. Higher market interest rates caused market values for
debt to generally fall during the second quarter, resulting in
higher unrealized losses on securities.
In the second quarter, uninsured deposits declined by 2.5
percent. That is a significant slowing from the 8-percent
decline reported in the first quarter. By contrast, insured
deposits increased by 0.8 percent during the second quarter,
and also, in the second quarter, depositors sought higher
yields, often at non-bank financial institutions, particularly
money market mutual funds. Many banks have increased deposit
rates to compete, resulting in a higher cost of funds.
The banking industry continues to face significant downside
risks from the effects of inflation, rising market interest
rates, and geopolitical uncertainty. The economic outlook
remains uncertain, despite relatively solid growth and low
unemployment so far this year. These risks could cause credit
quality and profitability to weaken, loan growth to slow,
provision expenses to rise, and liquidity to become more
constrained. Commercial real estate loan portfolios,
particularly loans backed by office properties, face challenges
when loans mature as demand for office space remains weak and
property values continue to soften. Banks have tightened
underwriting standards over the past year across a range of
household and business loans, and they may continue to tighten
further this year.
The failure of three large regional banks this spring
demonstrated the risk to financial stability that large
regional banks can pose. The FDIC, along with the Federal
Reserve, and the OCC, proposed rulemakings that would enhance
the resilience and improve the resolvability of large regional
banks. These include a long-term debt proposal that would
require a layer of loss-absorbing capacity at large banks to
take losses before uninsured and insured depositors, thus
decreasing the incentive for uninsured depositors to run, and
mitigating the need for a systemic risk exception in a future
failure.
In July, the banking agencies issued a notice of proposed
rulemaking (NPRM) for Basel III. The proposal is a continuation
of the Federal banking agencies' efforts to revise the
regulatory capital framework for our largest financial
institutions following the global financial crisis of 2008.
Notably, it does not apply to community banks. The NPRM would
make important changes to address capital weaknesses identified
in the 2008 financial crisis, enhance the resilience and
stability of the banking system, and enable the system to
better serve the U.S. economy.
In addition, the FDIC is undertaking a comprehensive review
of a supervision program with a focus on interest rate risk,
unrealized losses on securities and loans, uninsured deposits,
rapid growth, and the need, when necessary, to escalate
supervisory matters and take action to compel compliance. In
October, the banking agencies adopted a final rule to
strengthen and modernize the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA),
and in my written statement, I provide an overview of the
Deposit Insurance Fund and an update on our resolution on asset
sale activities.
In closing, I would like to address a recent news report
regarding incidents of sexual harassment and misbehavior at the
FDIC. As I have indicated, I am personally disturbed and deeply
troubled by the report. The FDIC is conducting a comprehensive
review, including engaging an independent third party, to
ensure that we understand the nature of the issues, and we will
take all appropriate actions to address them. Let me underscore
that I have no higher priority than to ensure that all FDIC
employees are in a safe environment where they feel valued and
respected.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I will be glad to answer
questions.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Gruenberg can be found
on page 52 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. I now recognize Mr. Hsu.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. HSU, ACTING COMPTROLLER OF THE
CURRENCY, OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY (OCC)

Mr. Hsu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman McHenry, Ranking
Member Waters, and members of the committee, I am pleased to
testify today to provide an update on the activities underway
at the OCC.
Despite the significant market stresses earlier this year
and a challenging interest rate environment, the overall
condition of the Federal banking system is sound. OCC-
supervised banks, in the aggregate, have strong levels of
regulatory capital and healthy levels of profitability, while
maintaining sufficient liquidity buffers. The OCC engages
directly with the institutions it supervises to ensure that
they are being vigilant in managing their risks.
Our recently-released Fiscal Year 2024 Bank Supervision
Operating Plan summarizes the agency's examination priorities
for next year and highlights asset liability management, credit
risk and allowance for credit losses, cybersecurity,
operational risk, and consumer compliance risk, among others,
as key areas of focus. My written statement provides an update
on the agency's work in advancing its key priorities: guarding
against complacency, reducing inequality, adapting to
digitalization, and managing climate-related financial risks at
the largest banks. I will highlight some of these efforts.
Despite the relative calm in the market today, the OCC has
urged the bank's supervisors to stay on the balls of their feet
with regards to risk management. To assist banks, the OCC has
updated guidance for the industry. For example, in response to
increasing risk in commercial real estate, the OCC and other
regulators published the Policy Statement on Prudent Commercial
Real Estate Loan Accommodations and Workouts, which updates
existing interagency supervisory guidance on CRA loan workouts,
and reminds banks to work prudently and constructively with
creditworthy borrowers during times of financial stress,
ensuring that financial services are offered responsibly and
fairly, which requires continued effort and vigilance by banks,
regulators, and other stakeholders.
On October 24th, the Federal banking agencies issued an
interagency final rule implementing the Community Reinvestment
Act (CRA). The CRA was enacted in 1977 to prevent redlining and
encourage banks and savings associations to help meet the
credit needs of the communities in which they operate,
especially low- and moderate-income individuals and
neighborhoods.
The final rule modernizes the CRA by recognizing banking
activities that take place beyond the physical branches and
ATMs, being significantly more data-driven and objective, and
providing for greater transparency. It strengthens the CRA by
addressing concerns related to grade inflation and CRA ratings
by better incentivizing CRA lending and investments in low- and
moderate-income (LMI) communities. The rule tailors evaluations
and data collection to bank size, so that community banks do
not have additional burdens.
Banks' relationships with third parties, including
financial technology companies, continue to expand. The use of
third parties has significant potential benefits, but poor
third-party risk management can hurt consumers, weaken banks,
and contribute to an unlevel playing field. Recently, the OCC
and other regulators jointly issued interagency guidance on
third-party risk management, reminding banks of their
responsibility to operate in a safe and sound manner, and in
compliance with applicable laws and regulations, regardless of
whether their activities are performed in-house or outsourced.
The OCC also recognizes the considerable interest by the
banking industry in artificial intelligence (AI). To date,
banks have generally approached machine learning and AI
cautiously across a range of use cases. The potential benefits
of more widespread adoption of AI are significant, but so are
the risks, which is why we expect banks to continue to manage
it appropriately. In the digital asset space, attention is
shifting from crypto to the tokenization of real-world assets
and liabilities. In contrast to crypto, tokenization is driven
by solving real-world settlement problems, and can be developed
in a safe, sound, and fair manner. Next February, the OCC will
host a public symposium on tokenization to take stock of
developments, help enable strong foundations, and promote
public discussion.
This fall, the OCC, along with the Federal Reserve and the
FDIC, approved the Principles for Climate-Related Financial
Risk Management for Large Financial Institutions. The
Principles are focused exclusively on risk management and do
not tell bankers what customers or businesses they may or may
not bank, but simply clarify how large banks can maintain
effective risk management and keep their balance sheet sound so
they can continue to be a source of strength to their customers
and communities in a range of severe weather scenarios.
In closing, the OCC continues to be engaged in a range of
efforts to ensure that OCC-supervised banks operate in a safe,
sound, and fair manner, meet the credit needs of their
communities, treat all customers fairly, and comply with laws
and regulations now and in the future. Thank you. I would be
happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Acting Comptroller Hsu can be
found on page 90 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. I will now recognize Chairman Todd
Harper.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE TODD M. HARPER, CHAIRMAN, NATIONAL
CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION (NCUA)

Mr. Harper. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and
members of the committee, thank you for the invitation to
discuss the recent work of the National Credit Union
Administration. My remarks here will focus on the state of the
credit union system and two legislative requests.
During the last year, the credit union system has largely
remained stable in its performance and resilient against
economic disruptions. At the end of the second quarter, the
system had $2.2 trillion in assets and $1.5 trillion in loans
outstanding, and the system's aggregate net worth ratio was
10.6 percent, well above the 7-percent well-capitalized
leverage ratio required by statute. The Share Insurance Fund
also continues to perform well, with no premiums expected at
this time. And to better position the Fund's liquidity in the
current economic environment, the NCUA has increased overnight
investments to $4 billion.
Nevertheless, we should pay attention to several emerging
issues and trends. Net charge-off ratios at credit unions have
risen over the last year and the annualized returns on average
assets have declined slightly. Increasing liquidity, interest
rate, and credit default risks have also led to a drop in
composite CAMELS (capital adequacy, asset quality, management,
earnings, liquidity, and sensitivity) code ratings to 3's, 4's
and 5's. Assets and CAMEL codes at three institutions, for
example, increased sizably in the second quarter, especially
among complex credit unions with more than $500 million in
assets.
Ultimately, the data from the first half of the year reveal
a tale of two types of credit union members. The first type are
those who have shifted their share-saving deposits to share
certificates to capitalize on better rates, and all-time
deposits have increased approximately 70 percent during the
last year. Unless carefully managed, this switch from low-
paying to higher-yielding accounts can expose credit unions to
greater interest rate and liquidity risks.
And the second type of members are those with growing
financial difficulties. Delinquency rates amongst most loan
types are rising. Credit card balances are elevated and higher
than what we should expect in the typical second quarter, and
balances on home equity lines of credit and other second liens
have increased by a third during the last four quarters. In
some cases, those increases may indicate household financial
stress. Consequently, credit unions must carefully manage their
credit risks going forward. Early intervention at the onset of
a delinquency can improve the credit union members' financial
footing and prevent a charge-off.
The current economic environment also underscores the
importance of the NCUA's Central Liquidity Facility, or CLF for
short, as a liquidity shock absorber. As of September 30th, the
CLF had $19.8 billion in lending capacity. This figure
contrasts sharply with 9 months earlier, when the CLF had $27.5
billion in lending capacity. This sizable contraction resulted
from the exploration of temporary statutory enhancements that
facilitate the agent member access of corporate credit unions.
To address this exploration and growing liquidity risks, the
NCUA Board has unanimously requested that Congress restore the
CLF's corporate credit union and agent member provisions, which
the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) has scored at no cost to
the taxpayer.
Additionally, it remains the policy of the NCUA Board to
restore the NCUA's authority to examine and supervise third-
party vendors. The Government Accountability Office (GAO), the
Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), and the NCUA's
Office of Inspector General have all recommended this reform.
Vendor authority would allow the NCUA to gain a better
understanding of the risks present in the credit union system
and to close a growing regulatory blind spot. And such
legislation would reduce the compliance costs, due diligence
burdens, and future Share Insurance Fund premiums for credit
unions.
In sum, the NCUA stands ready to address the impact of the
evolving risks within the credit union system, including
growing liquidity, interest rate, and credit risks. The NCUA
will also continue to coordinate with other financial
regulators to ensure the overall resiliency and stability of
our nation's economy.
That concludes my remarks. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Harper can be found on
page 78 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you all for your testimony. We will
now turn to Member questions, and I will recognize myself for 5
minutes.
I reached out to all of your agencies via letter about the
influence of global governance bodies, in particular, the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), the Bank for
International Settlements (BIS), and the Network for Greening
the Financial System (NGFS).
Vice Chair Barr, are Federal Reserve officials and staff
from the Board and from district banks compensated when they
attend these meetings abroad?
Mr. Barr. Sorry, sir. I couldn't hear the last part of your
sentence. Are officials what?
Chairman McHenry. Compensated.
Mr. Barr. The staff at the agencies who conduct all of the
activities on behalf of the agencies receive their----
Chairman McHenry. Let me ask this again: When you attend
any of these three international governance bodies, meetings
with them, are you compensated, and are Board Members of the
Fed compensated?
Mr. Barr. We are compensated by the Federal Reserve for
conducting all of our----
Chairman McHenry. But not from these global bodies? You
would not receive a payment from the Basel Committee or from
the Bank for International Settlements?
Mr. Barr. No. When we participate on behalf of the Federal
Reserve, we are compensated by the Federal Reserve.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. So, there is no additional income
that would come from those meetings?
Mr. Barr. No.
Chairman McHenry. Acting Comptroller Hsu, how is Treasury's
and your office's work with global governance bodies
documented?
Mr. Hsu. How is it documented? I am not sure. We keep
track, obviously, of what people are doing in terms of
participation in these bodies, and all of that goes through the
appropriate procedures internally, making sure it is all
appropriate and aligned with our mission, which is focused on
safety and soundness and fairness. I apologize--I am not sure
what you are asking.
Chairman McHenry. So, you attend the Basel meeting?
Mr. Hsu. Correct.
Chairman McHenry. You make decisions there. What is the
reporting mechanism for Congress to know your actions there?
Are there reports held internally?
Mr. Hsu. The agendas of the meetings are something that are
actively discussed and shared within the agency and across
agencies to the extent that we attend these things together. I
think that may be the closest to what your----
Chairman McHenry. Yes, is there paperwork, and where would
that paperwork be held?
Mr. Hsu. We have records retention requirements, and we
abide by all of those.
Chairman McHenry. And is that the same for you, Mr. Barr,
for the Fed?
Mr. Barr. With respect to retention of records, yes, we
retain all government records.
Chairman McHenry. Of meetings with these international
bodies?
Mr. Barr. Of any activity----
Chairman McHenry. So, if we had document requests, you all
would provide those to us?
Mr. Barr. We would be happy to work with you and your staff
on any document requests, as we usually do.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. Is there compensation for your
participation in these international bodies, Mr. Hsu?
[Nonverbal response.]
Chairman McHenry. These are the things that we don't know.
They have not been attested to previously.
Vice Chair Barr, about the Federal Reserve Board's
announced results of the 2023 stress test in June of this year,
you concluded, and the report confirmed, that the banking
system remains strong and resilient. What economic analysis did
you conduct to support the significant change in capital
requirements that you are proposing?
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The preamble to the rule
and the rule itself discusses in detail the analysis that went
into each provision of the rule with respect to risk
calculation. The rule is designed to improve the calibration of
risk for things like trading activity and operational risks,
and improve the calibration of our standardized approach with
respect to credit risk, and the details of that are discussed
in the rule.
Chairman McHenry. But those are objectives, and you
outlined the objectives. I am asking for economic analysis.
When we met, this is what I said I was going to ask you about.
Mr. Barr. Yes, in the rule itself, we went through in
detail for each calibration why we thought the calibration was
appropriate. And then for the rule as a whole, the rule
addresses the economic costs and benefits of the approach and
finds that the economic benefits of reducing risk----
Chairman McHenry. Certainly they do, as all agencies do.
They conduct an economic analysis and say the benefits far
exceed the costs, but there is no math you provide in that
report that justifies your actions. These are political
decisions you are making--that is my view of it--without any
backup economic analysis. That is what the public is to
conclude.
Mr. Gruenberg, there is a lot of discussion about your
agency. I was just wondering, since you have run the agency,
have been there for 20 years, have you ever been investigated
for inappropriate conduct during your time at the FDIC?
Mr. Gruenberg. No, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. Well, I appreciate your candor. I believe
the workplace culture starts at the top.
With that, I will go to the ranking member, Ms. Waters.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Chairman
Gruenberg, it was troubling to learn of the sexual harassment
reports stretching back more than a decade at the FDIC, with
many of those harmed feeling like they had nowhere they could
turn to get help. It was reported that you have launched a
comprehensive review, and you had an independent firm
contribute to that effort. But what other steps is your agency
taking today to ensure that all employees understand that it
really is a top priority to provide a safe work environment,
and to hold individuals who engage in these shameful acts of
harassment, misogyny, and discrimination fully accountable for
their misdeeds?
Mr. Gruenberg. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question.
This is the top priority for the FDIC now to get a handle on
these issues and address them effectively. As I indicated, I
was deeply disturbed and troubled. It is quite clear that there
have been FDIC employees who have experienced horrendous
treatment, and it needs to be addressed because it is
completely unacceptable. You indicated we have engaged an
independent third party to do an agency-wide review, both of
our Washington offices and our regional and field offices. And
in addition, we will be looking at all of our policies and
procedures to ensure that they are as easy as possible for any
employee who believes that they have experienced improper
conduct to file a complaint, and file it securely, and to know
that they will be protected, as well as looking at our
processes for holding individuals who engage in misconduct
accountable based on the facts and the law.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Chairman Gruenberg. Would you commit
to providing us with a detailed written plan on the steps the
FDIC plans to take to address this issue in the next 15 days,
as well as a written report of the findings from your
comprehensive review of the matter when that concludes?
Mr. Gruenberg. Yes, Congresswoman, we would be glad to do
that, and to be entirely transparent with you and the committee
as we proceed here.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. I fear we would be naive to think
these cases are isolated to the FDIC. So, Vice Chairman Barr,
Chair Harper, and Acting Comptroller Hsu, would you each commit
to developing a written plan that you will send to us in 15
days describing how your agency will review your sexual
harassment policies and procedures, as well as engage with your
workers and outside experts to identify steps your agency can
take to better ensure that you have a safe workspace where all
workers are respected, and have meaningful ways to get help
when they have been harmed?
Vice Chair Barr?
Mr. Barr. We would be happy to provide the committee with
our detailed policies and procedures. We have strict procedures
on these matters, and we would be happy to provide those to the
committee.
Ms. Waters. In 15 days?
Mr. Barr. Yes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. Chair Harper?
Mr. Harper. In recent years, the NCUA has worked to
strengthen its anti-harassment policies, including for sexual
harassment, and we will provide those policies and procedures
and look at what more we can do.
Ms. Waters. In 15 days?
Mr. Harper. In 15 days.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. Acting Comptroller Hsu?
Mr. Hsu. Yes. Absolutely, yes.
Ms. Waters. And you will do what?
Mr. Hsu. We will do everything that you requested in terms
of the commitment to review everything that we have----
Ms. Waters. In how many days?
Mr. Hsu. In 15 days.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. Fair enough.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. Well, it is good to know these agencies
can comply quickly with oversight requests, if only universal.
We will now go to the Vice Chair of the committee, Mr. Hill,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Gosh, that is so
inspirational. I may start straight away with Chairman
Gruenberg. You have bank merger and acquisition applications
pending before your agency. Could you provide us a list of
those pending applications?
Mr. Gruenberg. We would be glad to, Congressman.
Mr. Hill. And also just note on there how long since their
application was accepted; I just want to know the length of
time. Thank you so much.
And, Mr. Harper, on the same sort of topic of just
information, I was looking at the statistics last year, and
there have been 16 banks bought by credit unions in the last
year. That is of interest to both sides of the dais up here on
what that means. Are these taxpaying companies that are now
converted to non-taxpaying cooperatives? Do they convert their
deposits to shares? I don't think there is enough information
for this committee. Could you send me a memo on that?
Mr. Harper. We would be happy to.
Mr. Hill. That would be very helpful. Thank you.
Comptroller Hsu, you are aware the committee has been
working on stablecoin legislation under Chairman McHenry's
leadership and Ranking Member Waters' leadership for a couple
of years now, and your staff has been really helpful, and I
want to say thank you for that. Congress gave the OCC the
authority to charter non-depository trust banks that limit
operations to just those of a trust company and related
activities. Under existing laws, a national trust bank can
issue stablecoins, and the OCC clearly has the legal authority
to charter such a bank. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Hsu. I agree with the authority. It has to be done in a
safe, sound, and fair manner. Those are the standards for any
national bank, Federal savings association.
Mr. Hill. Right. There are 60 or so of those non-depository
trust companies under your charter authority. Isn't that right?
Mr. Hsu. I would have to look at the details, but that
sounds about right.
Mr. Hill. Yes. And as the primary Federal regulator for
those, do you think the OCC staff, exam team and supervisory
team, are capable of supervising if they were to issue
stablecoins? Do you think you are competent at doing that?
Mr. Hsu. The staff is extremely capable, yes.
Mr. Hill. Very good. I think you do have that obligation to
make sure they operate in a safe and sound manner, but I have
heard some controversy that somehow you can't do that
effectively. And I think you probably can, so I wanted to
verify that with you.
Let me stick with you. The SEC has a new custody rule,
which has concerned, again, Members on both sides of this dais.
And under that rule, bank custodians now have to hold client
cash off-balance sheet. Isn't that a fundamental shift in
practice with the material impact on bank balance sheets, if
that were to be implemented?
Mr. Hsu. Yes. It would be a shift.
Mr. Hill. Have you considered how mandatory cash
segregation as proposed by the SEC would impact bank
operations?
Mr. Hsu. We have looked into it, yes.
Mr. Hill. Do you agree with the SEC's approach?
Mr. Hsu. We have some concerns.
Mr. Hill. You have some concerns.
Vice Chair Barr, do you share those concerns with the SEC's
approach to this custody rule?
Mr. Barr. I think it would be a significant change in
custody practices at banks. We have shared that with the SEC.
Mr. Hill. Yes. I think many here on this panel have. We
just don't really understand, and we know they are all chasing
their concerns about digital assets, but they have swept up the
whole common law and State statutory and Federal statutory
custody practices, and I personally oppose it quite
significantly. I think it is, I would use a technical term,
``dumb,'' the way they describe their rule.
Vice Chair Barr, in August, Mr. McHenry, Mr. Huizenga, and
I sent a letter about the novel activities rule, and you were
very prompt in helping send your staff up to brief our staff on
how that is working. I want to talk a little bit about the
intent of that. First, does the Fed plan on responding to our
letter that we sent you?
Mr. Barr. Mr. Hill, if we haven't responded to your letter,
then we will certainly respond. I am not aware of the status of
the correspondence.
Mr. Hill. Okay. Tell me about this nonobjection status. If
it proves to disincentive member banks from participating in
stablecoin activities or other fintech activities, isn't that a
problem? We want innovation in our banking system.
Mr. Barr. We definitely want innovation in our banking
system. Innovation has been critical to having a thriving
financial sector and a thriving economy. We want to do that in
a way that makes sure we provide clarity and certainty to banks
participating in novel activities, with clear guardrails on
safety and soundness and consumer protection.
Mr. Hill. I would ask you to follow up with the letter and
follow up with this idea of the justification you have for the
risk to the safety and soundness. There were no footnotes.
There was no detail. Obviously, it was a very short letter to
Members, so if you could follow up in writing, I would
appreciate it. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. We will now go to the gentlewoman from
New York, Ms. Velazquez, who is also the ranking member of the
House Small Business Committee, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Vice Chair Barr,
you and I spoke recently about the Basel III proposal's
potential impact on small business lending. While I am
supportive of the reforms, I am always concerned about the
ability of small businesses to access capital. What economic
analysis has the Fed conducted to ensure small business lending
won't be constricted or that the cost of origination won't
dramatically increase because of this proposal, particularly in
a high interest rate environment?
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the question. We
agree that we want a thriving small business sector. Small
businesses are the lifeblood of their local communities. The
rule that we have proposed would not make significant changes
with respect to the cost of credit for small businesses. Under
the proposal, small businesses would have, generally speaking,
the same risk weight that they have under current rules, but it
would provide the ability for small businesses to have a lower
risk weight if they meet specified criteria.
Ms. Velazquez. And have you factored in the interest rate
environment today?
Mr. Barr. We are trying to develop a proposal and then
finalize a rule that would be appropriate throughout the
economic cycle.
Ms. Velazquez. Have you met with any financial institutions
covered by this proposal about the potential impact on their
small business lending portfolios?
Mr. Barr. We do welcome comments from all banks. We have
met with banks on the proposal, and we have met with other
members of the public, and we welcome those comments.
Ms. Velazquez. And if presented with credible evidence from
these institutions about any potentially negative effects when
it comes to their small business lending portfolios
specifically, would the Fed be open to adjusting the proposal?
Mr. Barr. We are open to all kinds of improvements to the
rule. We welcome comments on the rule. We want to make sure we
get the proposal right. We would welcome that input.
Ms. Velazquez. Vice Chair Barr, as you know, 40 percent of
all small business loans are originated by community banks, and
just to be clear, so there is no disagreement, community banks
are exempt from this proposal, correct?
Mr. Barr. That is correct. Community banks are exempt from
this proposal. It only covers the top 37 banks in the country.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you. Chair Gruenberg, when you and
your colleagues appeared before this committee in May, you
stated that it was realistic to believe that a notice of
proposed rulemaking on Section 956 of the Dodd-Frank Act would
be released by the end of the year. Is that still your
expectation?
Mr. Gruenberg. Congresswoman, I don't know if we are going
to be able to act on that by the end of this year. I will tell
you that this is a joint rulemaking involving six agencies. It
has had intense principal-level attention of all six agencies.
I think we are in general alignment, and I think we are going
to move toward a re-proposed rule. It may not come until the
early part of next year to get everybody----
Ms. Velazquez. Hasn't that been the case for the last 12
years?
Mr. Gruenberg. Yes. No, I understand, believe me.
Ms. Velazquez. As I have said to each of you before, the
statute requires a completed rulemaking within 9 months, and it
has been 12 years. And just so you are all aware, I will
continue asking for updates on this at every future hearing
until the rule is written. It is well past time you get this
done.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. We will now go to the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Sessions, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Mr.
Chairman, there has been a lot of discussion this morning about
the integrity of these organizations that sit in front of you.
I would like to put into the record a copy of a Wall Street
Journal article that more specifically outlines----
Chairman McHenry. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Sessions. ----what this is, and I find it
incomprehensible that someone would really not be able to
understand this and put an immediate response out, but, rather,
to hire somebody outside and ask that they look at the whole
organization. It may take months and months rather than issuing
a direct response to that. And, Mr. Chairman, I do know that
Ranking Member Waters was most explicit to ask for that back in
15 days. I want to thank her for that because I think she, like
this whole committee, is disgusted at that performance level.
Not making friends and success with your employees is a
difficult task.
Gentlemen, I am looking at the OCC Bulletin 2023-29, issued
August 29, 2023, ``Long-Term Debt Requirements for Large Bank
Holding Companies, Certain Intermediate Holding Companies of
Foreign Banking Organizations, and Large Insured Depository
Institutions: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking.'' And as I go
through this, not for the first time, but the first time in a
couple of days--as I look at this, it is rather extensive. You
are telling them how to run their bank. You are even giving
them, in some instances, several years to get where you want to
go. I have a problem with this, when I believe the
organizations that might be the Fed and the FDIC Boards might
not even agree with this. What was their feedback for you
before you issued on August 29, 2023, Mr. Gruenberg?
Mr. Gruenberg. The feedback from the institutions?
Mr. Sessions. From the FDIC Board?
Mr. Gruenberg. Oh. I believe our Board actually voted
unanimously in favor of this proposal. It had been the subject
of a long, deliberative process. We actually had an advance
notice of proposed rulemaking, I think back in 2022, to seek
comments on the whole concept before initiating a rulemaking
process.
Mr. Sessions. So, this long discussion was back in, let's
say, March?
Mr. Gruenberg. No, it actually preceded that, Congressman.
Mr. Sessions. It actually preceded that, and the catalyst
for moving forward from these discussions was in March?
Mr. Gruenberg. No. I think it perhaps reinforced the value
of considering the proposal, but I think it is something that
the three agencies, certainly the Fed and the FDIC, have been
focused on previously. We were concerned before the events this
spring.
Mr. Sessions. Concerned because of instability?
Mr. Gruenberg. No, about the challenges relating to the
failure of a large regional bank. We had been very focused on
that in the past.
Mr. Sessions. Did your regular reviews of these banks also
come up with that conclusion? You are in institutions every
day.
Mr. Gruenberg. Yes.
Mr. Sessions. You started seeing something when you would
come in and your examiners would be there, and that is what led
you to this conclusion?
Mr. Gruenberg. It was an issue really relating to the
resolvability of these institutions and how they could be
resolved in an orderly way, minimizing costs to the Deposit
Insurance Fund, and focused, prior to the events of this
spring, on the risks related to concentrations of uninsured
deposits at large regional banks, and the value of having a
buffer of long-term debt held at these institutions because----
Mr. Sessions. That would mean they would then move back on
their lending ability and save more, in essence, as a buffer
against what might be that risk?
Mr. Gruenberg. No, we didn't see an impact on lending. What
we did see was replacing----
Mr. Sessions. But if you are requiring them to hold more,
wouldn't that mean that there is less available for them for
growing the economy?
Mr. Gruenberg. Again, Congressman, this is not capital. It
is a debt instrument and, in effect, long-term debt would
replace some of the uninsured deposits that have a higher
liquidity risk. This would be longer-term debt, and then
longer-term debt would take losses ahead of uninsured and
insured deposits----
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman will finish the answer in
writing for the record.
Mr. Gruenberg. If I may, and had reduced the run risk of
the uninsured deposits, which we actually obviously saw earlier
this year and also would reduce the resolution process.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. The gentleman's time has expired.
We will now go to Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. Chair Gruenberg, if you would finish
answering in writing for the record, we would appreciate that.
We will now go to Mr. Sherman of California, and then, I
think we will get one or two more questioners in before we have
to go to the Floor. Mr. Sherman?
Mr. Sherman. I am surprised to hear Republicans criticizing
you for visiting Europe, because European standards are lower
than American standards and more in tune with what they are
advocating for you to adopt. If our standards are too low, we
end up with bailouts and bankruptcies, but if our standards are
unnecessarily high, we slow economic growth. It concerns me to
hear your opening testimony when you describe how these
regulations are a response to the 2008 crisis. It is a little
late to be writing regulations in response to the 2008 crisis.
The question is, will I still be alive when you write
regulations responding to the 2023 crisis? And that 2023 crisis
is a direct result of you underestimating the problems of
interest rate risk. You worked hard on these regulations, but
as I will point out to you, they discriminate against the
environment, they discriminate against first-time homebuyers,
and they discriminate against small businesses. One of the ways
they discriminate against small businesses is that with a small
business, the bank has very little interest rate risk, their
short-term loans, or their adjustable rate. You buy a 30-year
bond that might be very creditworthy, might not have any credit
risk. It has all that interest rate risk.
I am flabbergasted that it has taken until now for you to
propose regulations to say that banks have to recognize
unrealized losses on held-for-sale securities. It is
flabbergasting to think that you would take an asset that the
bank paid a million dollars for, that the market tells you it
is worth only $600,000, and count it as a million dollars, but
half of the securities are in that hold-to-maturity account.
And you are not doing anything about it or any of you thinking
of causing banks to recognize unrealized losses. And I urged
this when you were here back in March, just a few days after
Silicon Valley Bank, on all mark-to-market, the losses on all
securities. Are any of you considering that? Mr. Barr?
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Sherman. You raise an important
question. First of all, as I said at the beginning, we are open
for comments on all of the issues that you have raised,
otherwise----
Mr. Sherman. You have just heard my comments.
Mr. Barr. And with respect to unrealized losses, the
proposal is focused on available-for-sale securities, as you
point out; it is the rule we have for G-SIBs. We don't have
that for other large banks. This would apply that approach to
other large banks.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. You are doing a tiny step forward when
you had a massive crisis thought to be a risk to our entire
economy, and you invoke that law, and you are taking this tiny
step. And you are leaving on the balance sheet assets at a
million dollars that you know are worth $600,000, but in doing
so, you are discriminating against small businesses. Every time
a bank is incentivized to buy that long-term debt on a
securities market, that is money they can't lend to a local
pizzeria.
Speaking of discriminating against, I mentioned first-time
homebuyers, and first-time homebuyers often need mortgage
insurance. Your current rules recognize that mortgage insurance
may not be perfect, but it is useful. Can any of you raise your
hand if you want to defend the idea of having a zero value for
mortgage insurance?
[No response.]
Mr. Sherman. I see no hands going up.
Mr. Barr. Mr. Sherman, just to clarify, under the proposal
our treatment of private mortgage insurance doesn't change, so
it is the same approach now. Under our guidelines, private and
mortgage insurance can be one factor----
Mr. Sherman. Can be one factor.
Mr. Barr. ----of several factors that contribute to a
mortgage being considered prudently under----
Mr. Sherman. I would hope that you would write your
regulations more clearly, because many people have written
them. I believe that you are going to assign a zero value and
if you intend to do otherwise, Congress spends a lot of money
providing these clean energy credits, and you undermine their
value. You undermine congressional policy. With the tax equity
investments, you are going to go from 100 percent to 400
percent, making them far less valuable to banks. Is there
anyone here who thinks that is in the interest of the
environment? Yes?
Mr. Gruenberg. If I may just comment, Congressman, that is,
in essence, the reason we have a comment period. We have
received a lot of thoughtful comments on this subject, and we
are going to give them careful consideration in the final rule.
Mr. Sherman. I am glad you are hearing our comments, and I
hope that you would have stress tests that look at interest
rates going up and down. That is the lesson of 2023. I yield
back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. A novel
concept of both up and down. We will now go to the gentleman
from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to
our guests this morning. Perhaps the greatest threat to our
financial stability is our economic ties to China and the
Chinese Communist Party (CCP). Recently, I met with a market
expert about this unlikely scenario that China will invade
Taiwan by 2027 and the U.S. sanctions that will immediately be
put on those folks, and will follow that action. His analysis
shows that our market will immediately drop 50 to 80 percent. I
understand none of you are directly responsible for U.S.
sanctions policy, but the effects of those sanctions will have
a direct impact on the American institutions that you regulate.
Mr. Hsu, how often do you meet with Treasury Secretary
Yellen, Department of Defense officials, intelligence
officials, and leaders of industry to develop a plan that will
mitigate the fallout from this apparent inevitability?
Mr. Hsu. There are regular conversations at different
levels to assess risks to the banking system, and those span a
range of topics. Sometimes, it is through discussions about
cybersecurity, which is often the focus for a lot of those
kinds of interactions, but they also span some of the issues
that you are talking about.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Do you put together a plan? Are you
working with our allies with regards to a set of sanctions that
will be put in place whenever the Chinese invade?
Mr. Hsu. Our expectation is that banks are prepared for a
range of scenarios, especially those banks with global
operations that may be impacted by issues such as----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. My question is, and I have asked
this question to Treasury Secretary Yellen and Fed Chairman
Powell in this committee, and we talked to the Under Secretary
of the Treasury the other day about this as well--should this
happen, have we decided and are we working with a set of allies
on the kind of sanctions that we put in place, as per what
happened with Russia? It took us 2 or 3 months to put our
sanctions in place. If we don't have this ready immediately, 3
or 4 weeks is going to be too late. It is all going to be over.
So my question is, and you have answered it with regards to
having some discussions across-the-board, but are you putting
in place a set of plans or a set of sanctions that you will put
in place immediately when that action takes place?
Mr. Hsu. Sanctions policy is not in our jurisdiction.
Communication and coordination for the kinds of events that you
described are critical, and we focus a lot of attention on
ensuring that we have those channels of communication and
coordination.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Mr. Harper, are you involved in
those discussions at all?
Mr. Harper. No.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Are you concerned at all about the impact
that would have on credit unions across this country whenever
that action takes place?
Mr. Harper. Certainly, I am concerned about all material
actions, regardless of the source of them.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Gruenberg, are you concerned about it
at all? Are you involved in discussions about this?
Mr. Gruenberg. You raise a critical issue, Congressman.
There are contingency plans, but for me to respond, if you
don't mind, I would like to get back to you. I want to be----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Because, as you all know, the interest
rate risk problem that you dealt with back in March is going to
be a teeny-tiny thing compared to what this would be. So, I
think we need to be thinking about this in terms of how we can
address this for the protection of our whole system, not just
individual banks.
Okay. Mr. Barr, last year, the Durbin debit rule was cited
by the Government Accountability Office as causing significant
damage to checking account access. Research is conclusive that
merchants never lowered consumer prices in response to the
Fed's rule, and community banks and credit unions have borne
the brunt of this harmful regulation. I believe the number is
98 percent of the money did not go back to consumers as they
had promised, and, in fact, I have, from February 2011, in an
investor call, the Home Depot CFO reported that the rule would
increase their profits by $35 million in that year. Obviously,
they didn't intend to give the money back either. Are you
concerned by the result of consumers paying more for services
and small banks having to merge or close as a result of losing
this income stream?
Mr. Barr. Thank you very much for the question. The rule
does not affect community banks. The rule, as Congress
provided, affects institutions over $10 billion in asset size.
The Congress has directed the Federal Reserve to ensure that
debit card interchange fees are reasonable and proportionate to
a set of specified costs.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. We are looking now at regular credit
cards, sir. And with all due respect, I just got done talking
to a bank recently that said the examiners were telling him
that. Yes, I realize it doesn't apply to you, but it is a good
idea if you start working on rural and start thinking about
that. The next time I have a story like that, I want to come
back to you, sir.
Mr. Barr. Please, do.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. This has to stop. Mr. Harper, are you
concerned about that rule at all with regards to the impact on
credit unions?
Mr. Harper. I am not familiar with the study that you
cited, but certainly we look at everything that does affect
credit unions. Generally, as Mr. Barr pointed out, the rule
applies to those institutions of $10 billion----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. No, there is going to be a discussion
about this. People are trying to put it together in the Senate.
It is going to come over here. We have to put a stop to this.
It is not the panacea that people think it is. It is going to
be a direct cost to the consumers, and it is going to hurt the
small banks especially, regardless of whether you think it is
only going to be the ones over $100.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. We will now go
to the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, who is also the
ranking member of the House Agriculture Committee, for 5
minutes, and then we will break for votes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Vice Chairman
Barr, I want you to know that I have some serious concerns with
the bank capital requirements that you are proposing, not only
with the impact it will have on our smaller farmers and their
ability to access capital, but also on the increases to the
costs of derivatives transactions, meaning higher prices for
everyday consumers.
Vice Chairman Barr, also, American companies such as
manufacturers and airlines, in addition to our small farmers
and retailers, all rely on derivatives to responsibly hedge
their risk for commodity fluctuations for fuel costs, and
interest rates increasing. This is deep into the very soul of
our business and our total economy, and all of these inherent
costs and imbalances impact the average consumer, so we have a
big problem here. I fear that making these hedges more costly
for all of these major industries--airlines, the manufacturers,
as I mentioned--will only make the cost of goods and services,
food prices and our grocery stores, airline tickets, gasoline
at our station, our very everyday American households more
expensive. So you see, I have some very pressing concerns about
your proposal.
Vice Chair Barr, did your analysis for the Basel III
Endgame proposal include the impact on the broader economy if
American companies cannot afford to hedge their risk with the
variable tool of derivatives?
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Scott. We do think that the
derivatives proposals, as part of this package of capital
reforms, will improve the resilience of banks that need to
provide the kinds of services that you have just described. It
is important for the economy, it is important for farmers, it
is important for businesses, and it is important for those who
rely on derivatives that banks can be healthy and strong in
providing those services, and that is the reason for increasing
resilience of the banking sector in that way.
Mr. Scott. I have received some very pressing concerns
about the impact of what you are doing, and are you aware of
this? And if so, are there adjustments that you might make in
your proposal?
Mr. Barr. We are open for any comments on the rule,
including with respect to derivatives and users that would help
us better understand the costs and the benefits of the rule,
and we are open to improving the rule in all ways.
Mr. Scott. I hope so. And as our chairman mentioned, I am
the ranking member of the House Agriculture Committee, as you
may know, and our farmers are very concerned about this. I
think you are aware of this, but it is good to hear that you
are willing to make some adjustments, because this is of great
concern to many people in our nation. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. We will now
recess until votes end, which will be close to noon, but when
two Members reappear, we will consult with both staffs and try
to get things rolling as quickly as we can when we get back.
With that, the committee stands in recess.
[recess]
Chairman McHenry. The committee will come back to order.
Thank you all for accommodating our vote series. That should be
the end of the vote series today.
Chairman Gruenberg, I understand that you would like to
correct the record?
Mr. Gruenberg. If I may, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. You asked
me a question earlier, and just to be specific and for
clarification, in 2008 I was interviewed pursuant to a review
done in response to a concern raised by an employee, and I am
not aware of anything that came out of that review. But since
you asked the question earlier, I just wanted to respond
clearly for the record and would be glad to provide you with
any additional information related to that.
Chairman McHenry. Thank you, and thank you for consulting
with counsel and coming back and correcting the record. Anybody
else? I am trying to be lighthearted. Okay. We will get back to
order here.
Next up is the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, who
is also the Chair of our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Gruenberg, I
appreciate that clarification. You have had a long career at
the FDIC, and a long career in Congress as a staffer on the
Senate side. As a former staffer myself, I know sometimes that
is both good and bad. But I was going to ask, and I am going to
continue to ask, because many of those incidents that were
reported in The Wall Street Journal happened under your watch--
2011 to 2018 was your first go-round at the FDIC as Chair, and
the article listed incidents in 2013, 2015, 2017, and 2018.
Were you made aware of the misconduct that was going on at the
time referenced in those articles when you were Chairman?
Mr. Gruenberg. No, Congressman. When cases like that come
up in which there is a complaint filed and then a review done,
an investigation done and disciplinary action taken, that will
be done through our legal division in----
Mr. Huizenga. So, the legal division does not talk to you
at all? Does that seem right to you? It seems a little odd to
me.
Mr. Gruenberg. I think the notion is that to the extent
these were adjudicatory matters between employees, the Board is
generally kept out of that.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. I think the real question and the
assertion behind this article is the systemic element of this.
You initiated an independent review after that article came
out. That was kind of interesting. In your opening statement,
you said you have no higher priority than ensuring that FDIC
employees work in a safe environment and feel valued. To
Ranking Member Waters, you responded that you want to hold
individuals accountable and, ``we will be entirely
transparent.'' You weren't really transparent earlier, but you
have corrected the record now on that.
I am not going to ask you some of the salacious things that
Senator Kennedy did, but I do intend to ask you to clarify and
amplify what happened, I think, as you said, in 2008, because,
Mr. Chairman, my experience is that culture starts at the very
top. And you are saying that there were some accusations and
reviews and presumably a report of some behavior, is that
correct? Was there a report that was issued?
Mr. Gruenberg. I believe so, Congressman.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. And you would be willing to share that,
have us be able to go to the legal department, and Human
Resources, and the Inspector General, and whomever else we need
to talk to?
Mr. Gruenberg. Yes, sir.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Was there a non-disclosure agreement
(NDA) signed with that or a settlement that was a part of that?
Mr. Gruenberg. No, sir.
Mr. Huizenga. So, there was no cash settlement? There was
no nondisclosure that came out of that?
Mr. Gruenberg. No.
Mr. Huizenga. So, we can talk to whomever made the
accusation as well?
Mr. Gruenberg. Yes.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. I appreciate that. We intend to do
that, so thank you for that clarification. In my remaining
time, I want to turn to Mr. Barr. Yesterday, along with my
colleagues, Representative Meuser and Representative Mooney, we
sent you a letter about the totality of the rules currently
being proposed or finalized by the Federal Reserve and other
regulators. This is something that we talk about with the Chair
of the SEC on a regular basis.
As a quick example, the Basel III rule is more than 1,000
pages long, with very little of it focused on the aggregate
effect of these proposals on the ability of financial
institutions to serve their customers and to support economic
growth. Do you, or anyone at the Fed, for that matter, have a
sense of the cumulative impact that the massive number of
regulations that have been recently finalized or that are in
the pipeline will have on consumers' access to bank loan
products? And if you are not familiar with the letter, I have a
copy here; I know it was sent yesterday.
Mr. Barr. I did take a look at the letter very quickly, so
I don't have a detailed response for you, but we do look at the
overall effect of our rules. We don't anticipate that the
capital rules that we proposed are going to have a significant
effect on credit conditions, on lending in the United States.
Mr. Huizenga. Who is actually doing that? Who is giving
serious thought to all of these changes that are going to
happen at the same time, how they will affect banks, and how
they will fit into the economy? Is that you? Do you have
economists who are looking at it? Who is actually providing
that analysis?
Mr. Barr. I am ultimately responsible for that. I do have
many staff people who are working on analysis of all----
Mr. Huizenga. And I think this was something that was
pursued yesterday at the Senate. Will you share that analysis
with us, not just what you put in the report, but the actual
analysis that leads you to those conclusions? Will you provide
that to us? That is what we have asked for repeatedly.
Mr. Barr. The analysis that is in the proposal is the
analysis that supported the rule. We will, of course, continue
to do that work. We are gathering comments and information. We
will analyze that, and we will make that information----
Mr. Huizenga. That is not the answer, but I am glad to hear
we are going to have 15-day responses, Mr. Chairman, as with
the ranking member, and we look forward to receiving those.
Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. Well, the ranking member set the tempo.
We will now go to the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Cleaver, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You probably don't
get a lot of this, but I would like to thank the Federal
Reserve, the OCC, and the FDIC for the work that you have done
on the CRA. I have had a chance to meet with all of you to
discuss my concerns and also look for ways in which CRA could
be updated and be more of a factor in affordable housing. And I
appreciate all of the work that you have done, the
collaboration that has occurred, and I am excited about it.
As you know, the Trump Administration, or the OCC, had
attempted to unilaterally impose a harmful rule that would have
undermined the Community Reinvestment Act, and it would have
been just a paper tiger in terms of its ability to combat
modern-day redlining, so thank you very much for all of the
hard work that you have done. I appreciate it very much.
I am probably the foremost monster expert in Congress. I
have studied them all, and Frankenstein, of course, is unique.
Mary Shelley created him in the early 1800s, it is a gothic
novel, but I won't go into too much detail. I know you are
interested, but I am not going to go into detail. And Mary
Shelley talks about how this monster was created and made, and
then turned on the villagers. And about 15 years ago, the
chairman, the ranking member, and I were here when Frankenstein
walked through that door--this one--and told us we were on the
verge of a worldwide economic collapse.
And we had created that monster by lackadaisical views of
what was going on with the big banks, and so, he came in to
wreak havoc. And then, a few months ago, the Silicon Valley
Bank caused me to think that people are trying to piece back
together Frankenstein again. I think if banks are
insufficiently capitalized, particularly banks that are just
dealing with these tech companies, these startups, they can
create Frankenstein. I just want to find out from you if you
think that banks are sufficiently capitalized, and that
Frankenstein is not going to return. The next book was, ``The
Return of Frankenstein.'' You probably didn't know that, but--
--
Mr. Barr. Thank you very much for the question. I do think,
overall, that the banking system is sound. We have identified
areas that are in our capital proposal where we think banks
should be more resilient even than they are now. We hope to see
these proposals through the comment process to gather
information, and to learn more about what people think about
the capital rules. But in general, we think these risks are not
appropriately addressed with risk calibration in our current
approach, and they could be improved.
Mr. Cleaver. Are you saying that the Silicon Valley issue,
those three large regional banks that, in my estimation, could
have brought down or are bringing down this economy again, are
you all saying that is not going to happen, that everything is
now at a level, even though the large banks, as you probably
know, are on the low end of what is socially optimal in terms
of the costs and benefits to prevent such a thing in the
future? So even though they are dropping, you are still
comfortable?
Mr. Barr. In the case of Silicon Valley Bank, the
depositors looked at the bank and judged it to be insolvent.
And one of the steps they were taking in this capital rule is
to provide a rule that says unrealized losses on available-for-
sale securities need to be included in capital, so that
provision of this package would address the concerns in that
particular case.
Mr. Cleaver. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. Thank you, and we will now go to the
gentlelady from Missouri, Mrs. Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Vice Chair Barr, your
Basel III Endgame proposal would significantly increase capital
requirements on the capital market activities of the largest
U.S. financial institutions. These increases will negatively
impact U.S. banks' ability to conduct critical market-making
activities, further harming the U.S. economy. Considering that
the largest U.S. banks make up roughly 50 percent of securities
underwriting, what specific analysis did you conduct to
determine the impact that your proposal would have on
securities underwriting?
Mr. Barr. Thank you very much for the question. The
analysis and the rule supports a better risk calibration of a
range of trading activities that the largest banks conduct. The
risk calibration would make those banks more resilient so that
they are able to actually provide the services that you
described that are so vital for our economy. We are open to
comments from banks and from the public. If they believe that
the risk calibration is not correct, we very much welcome
comments on that.
Mrs. Wagner. I think that everyone thinks it is not
correct. Your proposal would also limit U.S. banks' ability to
participate in derivatives, securitization, and securities
lending. Why place these punitive capital requirements on the
trading desks of banks?
Mr. Barr. Thank you very much for the question. What we
have learned over the course of seeing the experience of how
banks manage these risks is that some of these risks can cause
serious losses to the banking sector and harm the American
economy, as we saw in the global financial crisis. We want to
make sure that all of the activities a bank undertakes,
including the activities that you described, are done in a safe
and sound way. And capital is the absolutely essential element
to have to make sure that banks are operating safely.
Mrs. Wagner. And your proposal is going to limit that
greatly. Access to credit or loans essentially is a key driver
of the innovative and competitive nature of the American
economy. Credit helps start businesses. It allows them to grow
and to invest in everything from new equipment, to facilities,
to technology. It helps create jobs that would not have existed
otherwise.
Chairman Gruenberg, do you agree that the Basel III Endgame
proposal will lead, as we have even heard from left-leaning and
progressive commentators, to higher costs of credit and less
credit availability for low-income and traditionally-
underserved communities?
Mr. Gruenberg. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
First of all, I think it is important to recognize that this is
a proposed rule, that we are receiving comment on a range of
these issues, and we will certainly give them careful
consideration. And I certainly expect----
Mrs. Wagner. I am aware of that. Could you answer my
question, please?
Mr. Gruenberg. I think we are going to address some of the
concerns raised, specifically on the credit side in the final
rulemaking----
Mrs. Wagner. I'm very concerned about the credit side and
availability for the low-income and traditionally-underserved
communities.
Mr. Gruenberg. And that has been, if I may say,
particularly raised in regard to the risk weights for
mortgages. We have received comments on that. We actually have
language in the preamble discussing that issue, with
alternatives to be considered that we are seeking comments on,
and that will be a focus of attention in the final----
Mrs. Wagner. I hope so. Vice Chair Barr, the U.S.
implementation of the Fundamental Review of the Trading Book
(FRTB), along with the global market shock component of the Fed
stress tests are essentially a double count of capital
requirements, forcing U.S. banks to have enough market risk
capital to survive two financial crises in a row, whereas
European banks only must have enough market risk capital for
one. Does the Federal Reserve believe that U.S. markets are
twice as risky as Europe or that European banks are
undercapitalized?
Mr. Barr. Thank you for the question. The proposal does not
double count risks in the banking system. The risk-weighted
asset proposal that we use under this proposal is used to set
minimum capital levels, and the stress test is used to set a
stress capital buffer. Those are done independently. It is not,
in my judgment, a double count.
Mrs. Wagner. But cumulatively, it is a double count. You
have the Fed stress test, along with the FRTB, so it is a
double count for U.S. banks and puts us at a competitive
disadvantage, sir.
Mr. Barr. As under our current rules, the risk-weighted
approach, the static approach is used to set minimum
requirements, and the stress test is used to measure the stress
capital buffer, not double counting.
Mrs. Wagner. My time has expired, but I hope you are going
to take this into consideration, because you are putting us at
an extreme competitive disadvantage with Europe. I yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. And if the witness would answer for the
record, we would appreciate it.
We will now go to the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Casten,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Vargas, for your perennial graciousness. I appreciate the work
that all of you were doing on the Basel proposals. Obviously,
we are keen to see the final details, but I am generally
supportive of a robust and well-capitalized banking sector. But
I do have some concerns I want to raise about the tax equity
provisions, specifically as they relate to clean energy. I see
some heads nodding, so, hopefully, this is not new information
for any of you, but just for the millions of viewers we have
right now.
The proposed rule would quadruple the capital requirements
for banks that make tax equity investments, and I am
particularly concerned about that as it may frustrate the
intent of the Inflation Reduction Act, since the clean energy
provisions relied so heavily on tax credits.
Chairman Gruenberg, Mr. Hsu, Vice Chair Barr, I think I see
you all nodding, but are you all familiar with this provision
of the proposal? Yes? Okay.
The record will show vigorously nodding heads.
Can any of you speak to whether you contemplated the
renewable energy development consequences when you were
developing those provisions of the clean energy tax equity
credits?
Mr. Barr. I would be happy to address the question. We
don't have special provisions in the capital rules for
different kinds of either renewable energy credits or other
types of things. The tax credits are treated the same as other
private equity investments. Now, we are open to receiving
public comment on this. We have heard a lot already about it.
The kinds of comments people have been saying to us, which are
the kinds of comments that are appropriate for us to take into
account, is that these types of instruments have lower risk
than other equity investments because the investor is repaid
through the proceeds of the tax credit.
Mr. Casten. Okay.
Mr. Barr. That is the kind of evidence that we would
consider in thinking about whether the calibration is
appropriate.
Mr. Casten. I want to agree with the second half of what
you said and just challenge the first half a little bit,
because under the proposal, if you use tax equity to fund tax
credits for low-income community housing support, there is no
change in the risk weighting from the current 100-percent
level. If you use tax equity to fund tax credits for clean
energy development, there is a 4 times increase in risk
weighting. So, I would challenge the assertion that all tax
equity is treated the same way. There are some differences
within the tax equity universe.
Mr. Barr. Yes, there is a separate statutory provision with
respect to low-income housing tax credits that are treated
differently under the rule for that reason.
Mr. Casten. Okay. Let me come back to that because, Mr.
Hsu, I just want to clarify something with you. In 2021, the
OCC established specific criteria for tax equity which said
that tax equity investments are, ``the functional equivalent of
a loan in order to qualify under OCC guidance.'' Do I have that
right, from the 2021 OCC guidance?
Mr. Hsu. I think so, but I would like to get back to you on
that.
Mr. Casten. I am reading from a report that the OCC issued
which essentially said that in order for tax equity to be
treated, it had to be the functional equivalent of a loan. So,
it seems like under OCC guidance, that has already been
established as the comparable point.
Mr. Gruenberg, you had something you wanted to add?
Mr. Gruenberg. I just wanted to comment that in terms of
the renewable energy tax credit, I think this is a pretty good
example of the value of a comment period. I am not sure that
when crafting the proposed rule, we fully appreciated the
impact here, and I think the feedback we have received has been
helpful and I think will----
Mr. Casten. That is great.
Mr. Gruenberg. ----influence the final one on that.
Mr. Casten. I am glad to hear that, and I just hope you
will all commit to considering alternatives that accurately
reflect the risk and are consistent with prior OCC guidance. I
see heads nodding on that as well, so I am glad to hear that.
The last thing I want to raise in the little time I have
left is in talking with clean energy developers and talking
with banks, we are hearing that banks are already starting to
slow down their investments in clean energy in this space
because they are anxious about the potential need to build
capital reserves. I am curious if you all are hearing that in
the pushback, because we are certainly hearing it from the
industry.
Mr. Barr. I don't know the answer to that question.
Mr. Gruenberg. For what it is worth, I have not heard that,
but we can----
Mr. Casten. Okay. I hope that shows up in the comment
record then and not just people calling their friendly Member
of Congress to push back on it, but I raised that because I
understand you have a process, I understand there is a phase-in
to go through, but given the slowdown already, an affirmative
statement of intent earlier on would be very helpful.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. We will now go to the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Williams, who is also the Chair of the House Small
Business Committee,
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
all of you for being here today. I am a small business owner
from Texas, and I have been in business for 52 years. I am a
car dealer. Every day I have been involved, I owe money to a
bank every single day for all that period of time, and I am
really worried about where we are taking our banking system
that would affect Main Street. I am worried about my bank being
able to loan me money when I need it.
Over the last year, our nation's Federal banking agencies
have been bombarding our financial system with excessive
regulations and dangerous proposals like Basel III, long-term
debt requirements, and climate risk management standards. It is
also alarming that our banking agencies are rolling out these
types of proposals in a rushed fashion without considering how
these combined regulations and requirements might impact
innovation, limit access to capital for Main Street, for small
business, and threaten economic stability.
Vice Chair Barr, you claim that Basel III proposals contain
meaningful analysis. However, from what I see, the Basel
proposal is over 1,000 pages long, and less than 20 of those
pages cover an economic analysis. Given that the proposal will
overlap with numerous other existing requirements, I find these
20 pages insufficient for a complex proposal like Basel. So,
why do you keep ignoring Congress' request for a full economic
analysis?
Mr. Barr. I believe that the proposal contains economic
analysis that supports the rule. We obviously are open for and
welcome comments, and we're happy to receive analysis if people
disagree with us, and to take that into account in our normal
notice-and-comment rulemaking process.
Mr. Williams of Texas. I have been actively working with
members on this committee and the Committee on Small Business
to be the voice for Main Street in the rulemaking process, Main
Street America, what our country is all about.
Mr. Barr, earlier this year I sent you a letter with my
colleague from Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser, which expressed our
legitimate concerns that Basel III will significantly impact
Americans' ability to access reliable credit and will increase
overall borrowing costs. In a time where interest rates are
already making it harder for small businesses to access
capital, this proposal would be disastrous, and coupled with
the economy we have now, it would stop things. Again, to you,
Vice Chair Barr, will you abandon the provisions calling for
elimination of banks' use of supervised internal models in
determining capital requirements?
Mr. Barr. Thank you for the question. We do not believe
that the proposal will have a significant effect on credit
conditions. Most of the proposal deals with trading and other
non-lending activity. Small banks are not part of this
proposal. They are responsible for doing lots of small business
lending. And even with respect to the small business lending
that big banks are doing, the proposal keeps the current
approach with respect to capital treatment for small banks and
provides some opportunities to get a lower risk weight if small
bank lending is part of a diversified portfolio, for example.
We do not anticipate the kind of effects that you are
describing, but we are, of course, open in the comment period
to hearing that. If we need to make adjustments to our
approach, we are very open to doing that if it is supported by
the analysis that we get.
Mr. Williams of Texas. The good analysis is talking to Main
Street America. The banks are nervous. The banks are already
getting scared to death of this. The Federal Reserve recently
released the Community Reinvestment Act Rule, which was nearly
1,500 pages. This is a massive overhaul for smaller banks in my
district that do not have the legal and compliance teams to
deal with the undertaking that comes with a 1,500-page rule.
Community banks are already struggling under the current
regulatory agenda. We should not be adding more burdensome
rules that will increase compliance costs. They are hiring more
compliance officers than loan officers. Again, it affects Main
Street. We should be focused on allowing these banks to thrive,
not trying to regulate them to death, and, frankly, let them
compete.
Quickly, Mr. Gruenberg, could you explain how Federal
banking agencies are working to educate smaller community banks
on compliance and not just throw a thousand-plus page rule at
them and expect them to perfectly comply, because what will
happen is, like all small businesses, they will decide to get
smaller rather than bigger because they fear all of these
regulations. And again, that affects Main Street, that affects
me, and it affects being able to hire people, et cetera. Could
you please answer that question?
Mr. Gruenberg. Yes, Congressman. Thank you. Thank you for
the question. We were quite sensitive in the Community
Reinvestment Act rulemaking to its impact on community banks.
So, all community banks with assets under $600 million, which
is over 3,000 community banks, will have no regulatory change
from their current treatment under CRA. The new rulemaking will
not impact them at all. And for banks between $600 million and
$2 billion, which, frankly covers most of the additional
community banks, they would have only a marginal change and no
additional recordkeeping. I think as a general proposition, for
banks under $2 billion, which is the large majority of
community banks in the United States, there should not be a
consequence----
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Time is up. Thank you very much.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Connecticut, Mr.
Himes, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Himes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
being here. Vice Chair Barr, it is good to see you again. You
are sensing and hearing a lot of confusion on the part of
Members around the proposed rule. I want to limit my comments
to the question of additional capital, and I am going to hand
you the bulk of my time, but I want to guide how you answer
this.
We are in a world of confusion here. We saw a Governors'
vote that was split. We heard the Chair himself elucidate some
very serious concerns. The first line of your testimony today
was that our banking system is sound and resilient. So, a lot
of us are struggling to see the clear need for additional
capital. And, by the way, having lived through 2009-2010, if
that need isn't clear, you will have an ally sitting right here
on that issue, but we are struggling to see the need. And I
heard what you said to the chairman. It is there in the
preamble. I have read the preamble a whole bunch of times. It
refers both to quantitative impact studies as well as to the
preponderance of literature.
We deal with flood insurance. I am struggling for analogies
here. This committee is used to seeing proposed FEMA flood
maps, where in a hundred-year flood, and we get what a hundred-
year flood is, the water gets to here, and that is bad, because
this house is there. I think we need that kind of specificity.
You will have, I guess, run scenarios, and I am thinking of
those flood maps. And what we really need to hear is that if we
saw conditions that mimic 75 percent of the adverse change in
2008, this is what would happen.
Again, just to guide the 3 minutes I am about to hand you,
it would really be great to hear, described in terms that we
can understand, the quantitative indications, but also save a
little bit of time to talk about the academic literature.
Academic literature can be chosen to support lots of things.
Give us a sense for how we can have confidence that the
academic literature also supports the case for additional
capital?
Mr. Barr. Thank you very much for the question and the
opportunity, and I will start with the broad frame. As you
know, capital is really key to a resilient banking system, one
that can serve households and businesses both in good times and
in bad times. Banks with strong capital lend more throughout
the economic cycle, and capital helps to prevent financial
crises and to mitigate their impact. Financial crises can crush
American households and shatter American small businesses. The
costs of a financial crisis range from 20 percent to 100
percent of GDP, or $5 trillion to $25 trillion for the United
States.
The proposal we put forward focuses on stronger capital
rules for trading and other non-lending activities where banks
have had large losses. Operational risk capital covers risks
from the loss, for example, from rogue traders, from fraud,
from other illegal activity and securitizations, illegal sales
practices, brokerage, and other activities where banks have had
large losses.
On the trading side, banks have had significant losses from
trading and other derivatives activities. In the global
financial crisis, as you know, for example, in just one quarter
of the global financial crisis, banks lost $38 billion from
their trading and derivatives activities. On the credit side,
the approach takes a standardized but risk-sensitive approach
to credit. We don't believe that will result in significant
changes overall on the credit side of the house.
If you look overall at the proposal, it is about a 2
percentage point increase in required capital, and 30 basis
points, or 0.3 percent of that, relates to credit. That would
translate, for an average loan, to about a 0.03 percentage
point increase in funding if all of the cost of that additional
capital were passed through, if there was no competition at
all. That is what the result would be.
Overall, we think that this approach is a reasonable one.
Because of management buffers, most banks already meet the
capital requirements today. The ones that don't could build
capital within 2 years while maintaining dividends. So in our
judgment, the proposal makes the capital system more
consistent, more transparent, and more risk-sensitive. At the
same time, we recognize that people have different views. That
is why we are all here today.
Mr. Himes. Mr. Barr, let me cut you off, because I only
have 20 seconds left. I hear everything you just said and I
understand--I have been through a bunch of these crises--that
more capital will make a safer system, and to some extent, the
burden is on the regulator. If you start your testimony with,
``our banking system is sound and resilient,'' period, no
comma, we didn't hear it articulated, but we are so hungry for,
which is why the optimal capital proposal involves considerably
more capital. And I would just ask you please to sort of try to
resolve some of the arguments here, to provide whatever
quantitative analysis indicates that more capital would be
better. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Ohio, Mr. Davidson, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the chairman, and I thank all of our
witnesses for your patience as we were voting. I am glad this
resulted in me getting to make it this far into the queue.
We spent a little bit of time already talking about the
amount of reserves that are being required, but, Mr. Barr, my
question is for the Federal Reserve. Do you consider payment of
interest on excess reserves a monetary policy or regulatory
policy?
Mr. Barr. Just to clarify, the proposal we have in front of
us with respect to Basel is not a proposal that would increase
reserves in any way.
Mr. Davidson. That's not my question.
Mr. Barr. I'm sorry.
Mr. Davidson. My question is, when the Federal Reserve pays
interest on excess reserves, which they do over and above what
they are requiring, they pay interest on it for the deposits,
do you consider that monetary policy or regulatory policy?
Mr. Barr. It is clearly monetary policy.
Mr. Davidson. Okay. Thanks for your interpretation. What is
the status of your work on a central bank digital currency
(CBDC)?
Mr. Barr. We are in a very early phase of research,
exploring different aspects of a central bank digital currency.
We have not made any decision at all about whether to recommend
a retail central bank digital currency. If we were to have such
a recommendation, we would come see the Congress and the
Executive Branch to get your authorization to proceed.
Mr. Davidson. Yes. I guess I took notice and a lot of
people did when the Federal Reserve was actually hiring
developers to write code. Is there a design for what you are
trying to build? Is this, ``Death Star,'' already built, or is
it just under consideration?
Mr. Barr. As I said, we have made no decision to move
forward with a retail CBDC. If we did, we would seek
authorizing legislation for that. We are conducting basic
research to try and understand the technology and to make sure
that we can wrap our arms around it.
Mr. Davidson. Okay. Thank you.
Acting Comptroller Hsu, you clarified your position that
banks may provide digital asset custody services, hold
stablecoin reserve deposits, and allow banks to use ledger
technology and stablecoins to engage in payment activity. The
OCC provided several firms with conditional approvals, which
have now expired under your leadership. Can you comment on the
impact of these expirations? What kind of impact have they had
on banks and firms that invested in developing the ability to
provide services to digital asset companies?
Mr. Hsu. Sure. Thank you very much for the question. Our
mission and our job is to ensure that all activities done in
the Federal banking system by national banks or Federal savings
associations is safe, sound, and fair, and that includes any
crypto-related activities. Crypto, as you know, has a number of
risks associated with it, so part of that interpretive letter
was just to highlight that there are some risks with that. If
you or a national bank are going to engage in that, you have to
demonstrate that it can be done safely and soundly and fairly.
Mr. Davidson. Okay. We will continue to have input on that.
Obviously, our committee has done some work on digital assets.
We would like to provide more clarity, but frankly, I would
have liked to have seen the continuity that was there in the
space, and I think it would have been great for our markets.
When you look at things that are good for our markets, the FDIC
and the Fed have both been busy shoring up some of the credit
risk that has been out there. My State of Ohio is home to
almost half of the privately-insured credit unions. Are there
plans to give them access to the Bank Term Funding Program that
is available for banks but not credit unions currently?
Mr. Barr. We do not have any plans to change the terms of
the Bank Term Funding Program at this time.
Mr. Davidson. Thanks. I think the last thing I will
conclude on, Mr. Barr, is that certain things that the Federal
Reserve is involved in heavily are the regulatory lane, of
course, your lane, and this is a prudential bank regulator
hearing. The four of you are lined up there.
And I really feel like the function of the prudential
regulatory activities of the Fed should be separated from the
monetary policy functions. I think it should be clearly subject
to appropriations. We are working on the Federal Reserve
Oversight Accountability Act that would do just that. And
historically, folks who have held your role haven't favored
that approach because it will provide more accountability to
Congress, and an actual appropriations process and whatnot, but
what is your take on that as a path?
Mr. Barr. I think congressional oversight is absolutely
essential, but I would not pursue the particular legislation
that you have described.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you. My time has expired, and I yield.
Chairman McHenry. I now recognize the gentleman from New
York, Mr. Meeks, who is also the ranking member of the House
Foreign Affairs Committee.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am concerned about
the impact that the Basel III Endgame proposal will have on
access to mortgage options for first-time minority and low- to
moderate-income homebuyers.
Vice Chair Barr, during your testimony before the Senate
Banking Committee yesterday, you acknowledged that you are
mindful of the concerns raised about the impact that risk
weight proposals could have on mortgage access for prospective
Black and Brown homeowners who may be creditworthy but may not
be able to afford the traditional 20-percent down payment. How
do you plan to address the potential intensification of unequal
access to mortgage credit for minority and low- and moderate-
income (LMI) households brought on by the proposal?
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Meeks. We are in the middle of a
proposal phase, and we are gathering public comments. We are
open to looking at all of the ways that the rule might be
improved, including the ways that you have described. We very
much welcome public comments. We asked for particular questions
in the preamble of the rule to make sure that we got good
public comments on how to address that. We will have to wait
and see the actual comments and make an analysis and evaluation
of those comments before making any decisions about how the
final rule should address it, but I very much hear the concerns
and appreciate the public comments on them.
Mr. Meeks. I just want to bring up other issues that could
come up that is a less obvious aspect of the proposal that
could have, similarly, a dramatic effect and consequences to
mortgage access, because I am concerned about mortgage access
completely. I will give this as an example. Banks which often
make affordable mortgages and go on to sell them to Government-
Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs) for a fee will be punitively
treated by operational risk capital requirements associated
with that income. Can you speak to that issue?
Mr. Barr. The proposal does require operational risk for a
range of market activities, including securitization
activities. The underlying credit with respect to mortgages
sold to Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac does not change from current
law. And we are, of course, open to hearing concerns in this
space, as we are throughout the rule, and if there need to be
adjustments, we know how to make those adjustments, so I
appreciate the comment.
Mr. Meeks. Yes, and I hope that you will commit to
conducting a truly holistic review that considers the impact of
the proposal's risk weights and the operational risk
requirements posed for affordable mortgage lending. I think
that is tremendously important. Can you do that?
Mr. Barr. Yes, we are committed--I can speak for myself. We
are open to all kinds of comments on all aspects of the rule,
including the one that you just made.
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Hsu, you and Vice Chair Barr both referenced
the modernization of the CRA in your testimony. And I am
curious how you view the intent of the new CRA interacting with
the proposed changes to capital requirements?
Mr. Hsu. I think about them separately in the sense that
the purpose of the CRA is really to address redlining. As you
know, the law was passed in 1977, and the modernization is
really to catch that up to where the banking system is today
and how it operates. And I think we feel pretty good that this
final rule that we recently adopted will help do that. I want
to echo what Vice Chair Barr said with regards to the Basel
proposal; we hear the concerns with regards to mortgages, and
we are open to all the comments on that and making improvements
as warranted.
Mr. Meeks. I just want to just say it is absolutely key and
essential. There are so many individuals, low- and moderate-
income families with great credit ratings who just can't afford
the 20-percent down payment. And to deny them that is to deny
them the American Dream and the access to create wealth,
because for most people, a home is the greatest investment that
they will make, and it is something that helps reduce the
income gaps and helps build wealth. I would hope that we make
sure that you take every consideration as you are looking at
the proposal to make sure that is included and not bypassed and
not looked at because it is absolutely key for many Americans.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman McHenry. I now recognize the gentleman from
Tennessee, Mr. Rose, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman McHenry, and thank you to our
witnesses for taking the time to be here with us today. Mr.
Barr, as I am sure you are aware, there are multiple Chinese
entities that are members of the Basel Committee, such as the
China Banking Regulatory Commission. Given that Chinese
entities sit on the Basel Committee, how can we be sure that
the Government of China is not playing an outsized role in
setting international standards that could ultimately be
adopted by the Biden Administration-appointed U.S. regulators
like yourself?
Mr. Barr. Thank you for the question. The United States
participates in these organizations. In general, those
organizations operate by broad consensus. If we found that
there were any issues with respect to international approaches
to an issue that we didn't think makes sense in the United
States, we would not implement them in the United States.
Mr. Rose. Thank you for that perspective. Mr. Barr, the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision uses peer-reviewed
processes to monitor whether jurisdictions are complying with
the Basel Committee's recommendations. The Federal banking
agencies participate in these reviews. For example, the Federal
Reserve is peer-reviewed by officials from some foreign
regulatory institutions for compliance, and the Federal Reserve
devotes resources to participate in the compliance regime. Are
you aware of any publications or reports from any of the
Federal banking agencies informing the public or Congress about
this peer-review process?
Mr. Barr. I am not sure I know the answer to the question.
I will have to get back to you.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. Please do.
It appears that the government has created moral hazard by
encouraging banks to take more risks with deposits they
receive, given the decision to provide blanket deposit
insurance for failed banks using the systemic risk exception.
Mr. Gruenberg, do you agree with that, and can you explain
why?
Mr. Gruenberg. Thank you, Congressman. It is a very
important question, if I may say so. I think the answer is,
yes. The decision to protect those uninsured deposits at the
two banks that failed in March was a consequential decision.
Those were uninsured deposits. Those depositors made those
deposits without an expectation of deposit insurance. The law
does provide authority to the Federal Reserve and the FDIC,
together with the Treasury, in consultation with the President,
to set that aside and protect those uninsured deposits if we
believe there is a genuine risk to financial stability.
And I think the fact is we had a tough judgment to make
back in March, whether or not to protect those uninsured
deposits and run the risk of a contagion effect impacting other
institutions with potentially additional failures, or to
intervene, utilizing this extraordinary authority in a limited
way for these two institutions. And I think the judgment at the
time was that the financial stability risk was real, that the
contagion effect was impacting other institutions, and that
this was the prudent thing to do.
In retrospect, I think that was probably the right call. I
think the system has stabilized since. I think there are
consequences to that decision, which is really why it is quite
important for us to follow up in regard to a number of
regulatory matters to try to offset the moral hazard created by
that decision. It was a tough call, but in retrospect, I think
it was the right decision.
Mr. Rose. In light of the regulatory failures that perhaps
were made evident by those failures, and so, hopefully, that
leads to better, more careful scrutiny going forward. But what
other things might you all do to limit that moral hazard?
Mr. Gruenberg. We learned some big lessons about liquidity
risk from this episode. I think we are now all quite focused on
supervisory attention to interest rate risk, to uninsured
deposits, to accumulations of unrealized losses on the balance
sheets of banks, and on rapid growth, and the need to escalate
supervisory matters and to compel compliance if the
circumstances require. I think there are a number of
supervisory actions we can take to mitigate the consequences of
the decision. I do think the long-term debt rule of----
Mr. Rose. Thank you. My time has expired, and thank you for
that answer. If you want to expand on it in writing for the
record, we certainly would appreciate it. Thank you. I yield
back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Foster,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses. Vice Chair Barr, I am going to have another stab at
doing something as quantitative as I can squeeze out of the
panel here having to do with the Basel III Endgame.
You gave a speech in Nashville to the American Bankers
Association recently where you had what I thought were very
interesting numbers on this. And you ended up by concluding
that the proposed increase in capital standards would only
amount to a rise of 1.5 to 3 basis points in the cost to fund
each dollar of a typical loan portfolio. Basis points are known
to scientists as 10 to the minus 4 is 1 basis point, so 3 basis
points is 0.03 percent, for those who deal in percentages.
And I was just wondering if you can sort of walk us through
the chain of logic and the numbers because I hear on one hand
that, oh, it is a 20-percent increase in the capital standards,
and then somehow, that ends up in the conclusion of your speech
to be 1.5 to 3 basis points. So if you could sort of walk us
through those numbers slowly enough that we can follow the
numbers, that would be great.
Mr. Barr. Thank you very much for the question. If you take
overall the capital increases in the proposal, they amount to
about 200 basis points or 2 percent. Of that 2 percent, 30
basis points is----
Mr. Foster. Okay. Just a minute. So, the 20 percent that
gets quoted means it is 20 percent of the capital that is
sitting around 10 percent now?
Mr. Barr. Right. The overall average increase is 16 percent
of 12 percent, so about 200 basis points.
Mr. Foster. Right.
Mr. Barr. Of that 200 basis points, about 30 basis points
are associated either directly with credit or with the
operational risk that comes with credit provision, so that
together is 30 basis points. That would be the increased risk-
weighted assets, or you can translate it into capital terms. If
you assume that the cost of equity is about 10 percentage
points higher than the cost of debt, which is----
Mr. Foster. Okay. Now, is that a standard assumption, or is
that something you made up?
Mr. Barr. It is a conservative assumption. You could say it
is a little bit higher or a little bit lower, but it is a
conservative assumption.
Mr. Foster. Okay.
Mr. Barr. So, if debt were 4 percent, equity would be 14
percent.
Mr. Foster. Okay. And that pretty much just comes from the
fact that the bank can make the loan, but you can force them to
either issue equity instead of issuing debt to----
Mr. Barr. That is correct. It is just a choice.
Mr. Foster. And the banks prefer----
Mr. Barr. The loan is funded----
Mr. Foster. Yes. Banks prefer to issue debt because you pay
interest, whereas with equity, you pay dividends, and then
there are tax implications and so on. That is a generally
reasonable number, this 10-percent increase when you force them
to issue new equity instead of new debt to----
Mr. Barr. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Foster. That is the 10 percent? Okay.
Mr. Barr. That is correct. If you took 10 percent of 30
basis points, that is point 0.03 percentage points. So, an
average loan in that portfolio would cost 0.03 percentage
points more if there were no competition at all and the bank
fully passed through that increased cost to the borrower.
Mr. Foster. Okay. In reality, I guess, there are sort of
two numbers there, and this only applies to the largest banks?
Mr. Barr. Yes, the 37 largest banks.
Mr. Foster. Thirty-seven banks, three dozen, okay, and yes,
to a scientist's level of accuracy. Then presumably, some of
that business will just shift to smaller banks or to non-bank
entities?
Mr. Barr. It is possible. It could be that some of the cost
is passed through. It could be that competition forces the bank
to internalize that cost. It could be that some smaller banks
do more small business lending.
Mr. Foster. Right. And then, there is also the Modigliani-
Miller effect where presumably, if a bank is forced to carry
more capital, then whomever loans them money will charge them a
smaller interest rate. Is that included in this, or is that
another factor that will----
Mr. Barr. That is not included in this calculation. If you
took a pure view of the Modigliani-Miller theorem, you would
say that the bank should be indifferent between debt and
equity, and as equity grows, the debt becomes cheaper, but that
is not in this calculation.
Mr. Foster. Okay. And just in my last 20 or so seconds,
Acting Comptroller Hsu, you gave remarks talking about your
need to have visibility over not only third-party vendors, but
deeper into the stack. Can you just say a few words about that?
Mr. Hsu. Sure. The banking system and the provision of
banking services is evolving quite a bit, especially with
regards to banks and non-bank partners like fintechs, and then
the fintechs themselves also have partners. And currently, we
have a lot of good visibility into bank-fintech partnerships,
and we recently put out some guidance in our agency regarding
risk management practices for that. But as the system evolves
and this landscape evolves quickly, we do need to keep an eye
on these longer chains, if you will, almost like supply chains
for banking services, to make sure that the banking system is
safe, sound, and fair.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired, and we
are pushing up a hard stop, and 1:30 is a hard stop. We have
Members in the room who still want to ask questions, but we
will accommodate you in the next hearing. And we will now go to
the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Lucas, who is also the Chair
of the House Science Committee, for the last question.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And as a courtesy from
one committee chairman to another, I yield whatever time you
may need, to you from me.
Chairman McHenry. I thank you. Vice Chair Barr, I just
wanted to give you an opportunity, if you wanted to correct the
record about compensation. Have you attended any Bank for
International Settlements (BIS) meetings?
Mr. Barr. I have attended Basel Committee meetings, so that
is----
Chairman McHenry. Okay, Basel. We had an answer from Chair
Powell that said the Board does receive, in this answer, Bank
for International Settlements compensation related to
attendance at boards of directors meetings. I am just trying to
figure out what this is.
Mr. Barr. I apologize, sir. I don't know anything about
that.
Chairman McHenry. So, you didn't receive any compensation
for your participation at Basel? No reimbursements from them or
compensation from them?
Mr. Barr. Correct.
Chairman McHenry. Okay.
Mr. Barr. I don't know the BIS rules and procedure.
Chairman McHenry. We are trying to figure it out. That is
why we ask these questions. We will have follow up on that,
obviously. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas, I yield back to you.
Mr. Lucas. In my remaining time, the Federal Reserve has
maintained that the U.S. banking system is sound and resilient
with strong levels of capital liquidity. The Basel III Endgame
proposal is set to substantially raise capital requirements,
which has been discussed here, and that will increase costs and
reduce access to capital. Chairman Powell even discussed in the
Fed's Board meeting that the proposal exceeds what is required
by the international Basel agreement and goes further than
other jurisdictions around the world.
Vice Chairman Barr, since the Basel proposal has not been
directed by Congress, is there a particular weakness in the
banking system that this proposal is attempting to address?
What are we trying to fix?
Mr. Barr. Thank you very much. What we have experienced is
that the risk calibration that is used for certain bank
activities doesn't really match the kind of risks that we have
seen in the past through historical experience. That is
particularly the case for things, for example, like the trading
desks and derivatives activities where the risk calibration
doesn't really cover tail risk from extreme events like those
we saw in the global financial crisis. So, the rule is tailored
to try and address those kinds of risks.
Mr. Lucas. When financial regulators implement massive
policy changes under a new Administration, it creates
significant uncertainty with businesses and consumers. Again,
Vice Chair Barr, you have indicated that the final Basel
package will have broad support across the Board of Governors,
and you have reassured the public that the Federal Reserve is a
consensus-driven organization. After reviewing the comments and
doing the appropriate revisions, is it your intention that the
final rule will have unanimous support of the Board?
Mr. Barr. I can't promise what my fellow Board Members will
do. I hope to seek broad consensus across the Board. But each
individual Governor and, of course, the Chair, makes his or her
own decisions about whether to support a rule or not support a
rule.
Mr. Lucas. I would like to shift my focus to one aspect of
the Basel proposal, the impact on end users, like small
businesses and agricultural producers, that employ derivatives
to manage risk. The proposal would impose higher standardized
capital requirements on derivative transactions, despite
Congress and this committee consistently acting in a bipartisan
basis to protect derivatives end users from increased cost. My
colleague, David Scott, discussed this with you earlier today.
It seems like you are willing to study the impact on the
agriculture and energy sectors. Will you commit to coordinating
the analysis with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(CFTC) and engaging us throughout the process, and are you
willing to make the appropriate revisions?
Mr. Barr. We are very open to comments, including from
Members of Congress and from other agencies. We take those
comments very seriously.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Chairman, I believe I have gone as far as I
can go in the limited time, and I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. I thank the gentleman. And without
objection, I would like to enter into the record a letter
initiated by the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Fitzgerald, to
Chairman Powell, Chairman Gruenberg, and Acting Comptroller Hsu
regarding the Basel III Endgame.
And with that, I would like to thank our panel, Vice Chair
Barr, Chairman Gruenberg, Mr. Hsu, and Chairman Harper, for
their testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
I ask the witnesses to respond no later than December 15th.
And I encourage everyone in the room to take conversations
outside as we turn this room over for our 2 p.m. hearing.
I hope everybody has a nice Thanksgiving, and thank you all
for your testimony, and for your engagement. And I thank all
the Members for accommodating this very long 10-week stretch
that Congress has been in session. Hopefully, we will come back
in better stead.
With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:32 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

November 15, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
