- THE FEDERAL RESERVE'S SEMI-ANNUAL MONETARY POLICY REPORT

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FEDERAL RESERVE'S SEMI-ANNUAL

MONETARY POLICY REPORT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 21, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-33

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-199          WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
June 21, 2023................................................     1
Appendix:
June 21, 2023................................................    57

WITNESSES
Wednesday, June 21, 2023

Powell, Hon. Jerome H., Chairman, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.........................................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Powell, Hon. Jerome H........................................    58

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Horsford, Hon. Steven:
Las Vegas Sun editorial entitled, ``Economy, infrastructure
thrive when Dems have the reins,'' dated June 16, 2023.....    63
Powell, Hon. Jerome H.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Barr........................................    66
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Donalds.....................................    84
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Himes.......................................    88
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Luetkemeyer.................................    90
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Mooney......................................    92
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Sherman.....................................    95
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Roger Williams..............................    97

THE FEDERAL RESERVE'S SEMI-ANNUAL

MONETARY POLICY REPORT

----------

Wednesday, June 21, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick McHenry
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives McHenry, Lucas,
Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Wagner, Barr, Hill, Emmer, Loudermilk,
Mooney, Davidson, Rose, Steil, Timmons, Meuser, Fitzgerald,
Garbarino, Kim, Donalds, Flood, Lawler, Nunn, De La Cruz,
Houchin, Ogles; Waters, Velazquez, Sherman, Lynch, Green,
Cleaver, Himes, Foster, Beatty, Vargas, Gottheimer, Gonzalez,
Casten, Horsford, Tlaib, Torres, Garcia, Nickel, and Pettersen.
Chairman McHenry. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``The Federal Reserve's Semi-
Annual Monetary Policy Report.'' Not the most inventive title,
but traditional; we call it the Humphrey-Hawkins hearing.
I will note at the outset that this hearing has a hard stop
at 1:00 p.m., which we will strictly observe. The Chair would
further announce to committee members that the Chair's
intention is to, in the second week we return in July, have a
markup, and that markup will include two important bills: the
first is giving digital assets a market structure and Federal
regulatory remit; and the second is on a Federal stablecoin
regime. It is the intention of the Chair to have that as two
pieces of our committee markup in the second week we return in
July.
I now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Thank you, Chairman Powell, for joining us today. Inflation
remains broad-based and persistent, two troubling trends the
Fed expects will continue. As you said last week, the process
of getting inflation back to 2 percent has a long way to go. So
even though the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) did not
recommend a rate increase at last week's meeting, it is fair to
say that the Fed will continue to make additional increases in
the months ahead. We would like to hear your thinking on those
matters.
As the FOMC again pointed out last week, the labor market
still appears tight, with Fed policymakers projecting a rise in
the unemployment rate to a still-low 4.1 percent at the end of
the year. Despite pressure from the left, the Federal Reserve
must remain committed to eliminating this stealth tax on
American workers and families, and I urge you to continue that
resolve.
A few weeks ago, Congress took the first step toward
getting our fiscal house in order through the Fiscal
Responsibility Act. Republicans will continue fighting for
sensible spending reductions to combat inflation. This stands
in stark contrast to the Democrats' spending spree that poured
nearly $2 trillion into a supply-constrained economy that was
already flush with trillions of dollars in savings provided by
earlier bipartisan COVID rescue efforts.
And after keeping interest rates too low, for too long, the
Fed was slow to address the problem. In a stunning about-face,
the Fed then raised interest rates by 5 percentage points in a
little over a year, the fastest spike in modern history. This
approach introduced accelerated interest rate risk for which
companies, workers, and families across the country were not
prepared.
The bank runs we saw earlier this year are an example of
the consequences. Now, we are told these runs represent a
systemic threat to the stability of our financial system. Add
in the commercial real estate exposure facing financial
institutions, and it becomes very easy to understand the
mounting anxiety consumers and job creators share, and I share
their anxiety as well. The rapid rise in interest rates,
coupled with knock-on effects of the bank failures, have led to
signs of a credit crunch across the economy. This would have a
damaging impact on consumers and job creators alike.
To top it off, Fed Vice Chair for Supervision, Michael
Barr, is undergoing a so-called holistic review of capital
requirements, and something interesting that he mentioned in
the press yesterday is a new approach to stress tests that I
can't quite understand. If reports are accurate, he is pursuing
a massive increase in capital standards for medium and large
institutions. This would limit banks' ability to lend money,
exacerbating the looming credit crunch, and starving families
and small businesses of the capital they need. Financial
markets will also bear the strain as they will be forced to
absorb nearly $1 trillion in new Treasuries. This has led many
to believe the Fed may be called on to help, perhaps through
its repo or other facilities.
Clearly, our economy is in a precarious position, from
inflation, to a potential credit crunch, to substantial balance
sheet risks for financial institutions. There is a great deal
of uncertainty on the horizon. Uncertainty from the Fed's
supervision and regulation is the last thing the well-
capitalized banking system needs now. Following numerous
supervisory failures and a new Vice Chair for Supervision in
the Federal Reserve injecting politics into policy, it has
become clear that Congress may need to again examine separating
supervision and regulation out of the Fed and gaining greater
oversight and control by Congress and the elected branches.
With that, Chairman Powell, thank you for being here today.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the committee,
the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, for 4 minutes for
an opening statement.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Chairman McHenry. Chairman Powell,
welcome back. First, I would like to start by acknowledging
that the Federal Reserve made the right decision to pause
interest rate hikes. As you know, since last November, I have
cautioned against any approach to monetary policy that ignores
the Fed's maximum employment mandate and results in a recession
with millions of people losing their homes and jobs. While we
have had strong job growth thus far, experts contend that this
trend will not persist with more rate hikes, especially in
light of new challenges. For example, the recent bank failures
have resulted in the banking industry further restricting
credit, making it even more important for the Fed to move with
caution.
The progress that we have made in reducing inflation is
borne out in the latest Consumer Price Index (CPI) data. In
fact, it has been 10 months since the passage of the Inflation
Reduction Act, and inflation has successfully been cut in half.
Every single Republican Member of Congress voted against the
bill and chose to cozy up to the wealthy tax cheats instead of
working with Democrats to bring down costs for middle-class
families.
However, the only way we will fully combat inflation is to
address the primary driver of inflation: soaring housing costs.
Congress must invest more in fair and affordable housing. Under
President Biden, unemployment is also at a historic low and job
growth is on the rise. So far, there has been 29 straight
months of strong job growth. In fact, a record 13 million jobs
have been created since President Biden took office.
Democrats are working to build on this progress and grow
the middle class so that everyone can share in this economic
growth. Republicans, however, just can't seem to get their
house in order. On the heels of almost blowing up our economy
by forcing a national default, they are now picking a fight
over a teeny-tiny fee of less than 1 percent of total housing
costs, ignoring the costs homebuyers are paying with 7 percent
interest rates, appraisal fees, and title insurance. Instead,
they are fighting about gas stoves. In fact, just a week ago,
Republican disarray got so bad that it halted business on the
House Floor for the first time in 20 years.
Lastly, as we continue to monitor the banking system
following the recent bank failures, the Fed must act to correct
the supervisory and regulatory failures identified by our
committee's oversight. Committee Democrats recently introduced
11 bills, including 3 of my own, to strengthen the safety and
soundness of our banking system and hold executives accountable
for their misdeeds. The Senate Banking Committee is holding a
markup this morning on a bipartisan bill on bank executive
accountability. So, I urge Chairman McHenry to join us in
advancing sensible reforms to strengthen our nation's banking
system
With that, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back. I now
recognize the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, who is also
the Chair of our Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and
Monetary Policy, for 1 minute.
Mr. Barr. We expect proposals from the Fed's Vice Chair for
Supervision that could increase capital for financial
institutions as much as 20 percent. Our already well-
capitalized banks withstood the COVID shock and severe Fed
stress tests as the economy is facing headwinds from the Fed's
own rapid rate hikes. Now is not the time to be engineering
massive new regulatory changes or hindering regional banks,
which have already been under stress. New, onerous, one-size-
fits-all regulation by the Fed needs proper vetting and
transparency. I would ask you today to commit to providing us
with analysis done so far by the Fed on the Vice Chair's new
proposals.
I also respectfully ask that Chairman Powell revisit
Section 1107(a)(1) of the Dodd-Frank Act to observe that the
Vice Chair for Supervision is authorized only to develop
recommendations for the Board and oversee supervision and
regulation. The law does not give the Vice Chair special
abilities to unilaterally write his own preferred regulations.
It does not say that the Vice Chair should unilaterally write
public-facing book reports on bank failures or results of
climate scenario experiments. Consensus is----
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Barr. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. We will now recognize the ranking member
of our Financial Institutions and Monetary Policy Subcommittee,
Mr. Foster, for 1 minute.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Chairman McHenry, and thank you, Mr.
Powell, for being here today. In the wake of what seemed to be
endless novel problems and disruption, I believe the Fed and
Congress have done a reasonable job given the cards that we
have been dealt. And indeed, it looks like the widely-
anticipated recession from the endgame of COVID disruptions, if
it occurs at all, will continue to be more of a soft landing
than a disaster for our economy.
While there is certainly more work to be done, in the
immediate term, we can reflect with satisfaction on the
historically-low unemployment, and 11 straight months of
slowing inflation since the passage of the Inflation Reduction
Act. However, I recognize that the necessary monetary policies
put forth to combat inflation have not been without stress,
including on the fraction of our banks that chose to ignore the
Fed's clear forward guidance that interest rate hikes were in
the pipeline.
We on this committee remain committed to alleviating the
financial stress on everyday Americans to pay rent and get food
on the table. And I look forward to discussing how recent
policies have performed and what else we should do going
forward to ensure a strong economic rebound. Thank you, and I
yield back.
Chairman McHenry. Today, we welcome the testimony of the
Honorable Jerome H. Powell, Chair of the Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System. Chair Powell, we thank you for your
time and for being here. We will recognize you for 5 minutes to
give an oral presentation of your written testimony. And
without objection, your written statement will be made a part
of the record.
Chairman Powell, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JEROME H. POWELL, CHAIRMAN, BOARD OF
GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

Mr. Powell. Thank you, Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Waters, and other members of the committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to present the Federal Reserve's semi-annual
Monetary Policy Report.
Chairman McHenry. Chairman Powell, if you will pull the
microphone closer.
Mr. Powell. Thanks. We at the Fed remain squarely focused
on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable
prices for the American people. My colleagues and I understand
the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain
strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2-
percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the
Federal Reserve, and without it, the economy does not work for
anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not
achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions
that benefit all.
I will review the current economic situation before turning
to monetary policy.
The U.S. economy slowed significantly last year, and recent
indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to
expand at a modest pace. Although growth in consumer spending
has picked up this year, activity in the housing sector remains
weak, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest
rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on
business fixed investment.
The labor market remains very tight. Over the first 5
months of the year, job gains averaged a robust 314,000 jobs
per month. The unemployment rate moved up, but remained low in
May at 3.7 percent. There are some signs that supply and demand
in the labor market are coming into better balance. The labor
force participation rate has moved up in recent months,
particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54. Nominal wage growth
has shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined
so far this year. While the jobs-to-workers gap has narrowed,
labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of
available workers.
Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2
percent. Over the 12 months ending in April, total personal
consumption expenditures (PCE) prices rose 4.4 percent.
Excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE
prices rose 4.7 percent. In May, the 12-month change in the CPI
came in at 4.0 percent and the change in the core CPI was 5.3
percent.
Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last
year. Nonetheless, inflation pressures continue to run high,
and the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has
a long way to go. Despite elevated inflation, longer-term
inflation expectations appear to remain well-anchored, as
reflected in a broad range of surveys of households,
businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial
markets.
With inflation running well above our longer-run goal of 2
percent, and with labor market conditions remaining tight, the
FOMC has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy.
We have raised our policy interest rate by 5 percentage points
since early last year, and we have continued to reduce our
securities holdings at a brisk pace. We have been seeing the
effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most-
interest-rate-sensitive sectors of the economy. It will take
time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be
realized, especially on inflation.
The economy is facing headwinds from tighter credit
conditions for households and businesses, which are likely to
weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, and the
extent of these effects remains uncertain. In light of how far
we have come in tightening policy, the uncertain lags with
which monetary policy affects the economy, and potential
headwinds from credit tightening, the FOMC decided last week to
maintain the target range for the Federal funds rate at 5- to
5.25 percent, and to continue the process of significantly
reducing our securities holdings.
Nearly all FOMC participants expect that it will be
appropriate to raise interest rates somewhat further by the end
of the year. But at last week's meeting, considering how far
and how fast we have moved, we judged it prudent to hold the
target range steady to allow the Committee to assess additional
information and its implications for monetary policy. In
determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be
appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, we will
take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy,
the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity,
and inflation, economic, and financial developments.
We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting
based on the totality of incoming data and their implications
for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as
the balance of risks. We remain committed to bringing inflation
back down to our 2-percent goal and to keeping longer-term
inflation expectations well-anchored. Reducing inflation is
likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some
softening in labor market conditions. Restoring price
stability, again, is essential to set the stage for achieving
maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run.
Before concluding, let me briefly address the condition of
the banking sector. The U.S. banking system is sound and
resilient, as detailed in the box on financial stability in our
Monetary Policy Report. The Fed, together with the Treasury and
the FDIC, took decisive action in March to protect the U.S.
economy and to strengthen public confidence in our banking
system. The recent bank failures, including that of Silicon
Valley Bank, and the resulting bank stress have highlighted the
importance of ensuring that we have the appropriate rules and
supervisory practices for banks of this size. We are committed
to addressing these vulnerabilities to make for a stronger and
more-resilient banking system.
We understand that our actions affect communities,
families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do
is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do
everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price
stability goals. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Powell can be found on
page 58 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you, Chairman Powell. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Chairman Powell, as I laid out in my opening statement,
inflation continues to be broad-based and persistent, both of
which are concerning. Last week, the Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) decided to pause rate increases, and at the
same time, the Committee alluded that it would raise rates more
later in the year. So, how should the FOMC's posture at the
June meeting be interpreted? Will the Committee continue to
raise rates later this year?
Mr. Powell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You are right. Of
course, we did decide to maintain the Federal funds rate at its
current rate at this meeting. At the same time, participants
submitted personal forecasts. Almost all of them thought there
will be additional hikes, and I just want to say those two
things are entirely consistent, the point being that the level
to which we raise rates is actually a separate question from
the speed with which we move. Earlier in the process, speed was
very important. It is not very important now. The sense of the
summary of economic projections and the decision really is just
that, given how far we have come, it may make sense to move
rates higher, but to do so at a more moderate pace. That is
really it.
We were at 75 basis points for several meetings, then we
were at 50 basis points, then 25 basis points at 3 consecutive
meetings, and now we are monitoring that pace as much as you
might do if you were to be driving at 75 miles an hour on the
highway, then 50 miles an hour on a local highway, and then as
you get closer to your destination, as you try to find that
destination, you slow down even further.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. So, more data is necessary for the
Fed to make these decisions, and that is one interpretation,
but thank you for a broader view there.
I also want a broader view on this question. The Vice Chair
for Supervision is performing his own personal holistic review
of the Fed's regulatory framework for bank capital and
liquidity. In an interview yesterday, he discussed some version
of a new type of stress test, even striking complete confusion
in his description of it.
And at the same time, we have testimony from you, and even
from the Vice Chair for Supervision, saying that we have a
sound banking system that is well-capitalized. You will sit in
judgment of this proposal that the Vice Chair for Supervision
will bring to the full Board on this holistic review of
capital. There are a lot of discussions about the amounts of
capital he is talking about. The concern that this is pro-
cyclical at a time where our economy with higher rates is you
are measuring what is happening in the broader economy. And at
the same time, we are going to have a major piece of capital
required by financial institutions, which will further restrict
lending. So, how can you tell us to think about that, given
your seat on the Federal Open Market Committee and your
position as a Fed Governor? How would you interpret that?
Mr. Powell. I guess I would say that you are right. There
are a significant number of proposals that are kind of in the
works. They haven't been finalized, let alone brought to the
Board yet, so I can't really get into specific details today.
Chairman McHenry. But we would like your thinking, Chairman
Powell. That is what we would like.
Mr. Powell. What I can share is principles and how I will
think about this. Regulatory proposals go to the Board. Every
person on the Board--that is six Governors now--has an
obligation to evaluate and vote on those, and I am one of those
people. I also chair the Board.
There are a couple of things I would point out. First, I
think regulation should be transparent, consistent, and not too
volatile, particularly as it relates to capital requirements. I
do note the central importance of capital. We want banks to be
resilient to shocks. We want them to be able to lend in both
good and bad times. We want, in particular, the global
systemically important banks (G-SIBs), which are the 8 largest
banks, to have very high levels of capital and liquidity.
Indeed, we have spent years raising those levels over a long
period of time. And I think there is broad agreement, as you
point out, that capital is strong, and the question there will
be what sorts of increases will be justified? That is what we
will be looking at.
The other thing to point out is the tradeoff between higher
capital--the benefit of it, of course, is to have stronger
banks that can lend and maybe survive more kinds of crisis
environments, but there are costs as well there. And I think it
is going to be, as always, a question of weighing and balancing
those costs, and that is what I will be thinking about. The
last thing I will say about that is just we benefit from having
banks of all different shapes and sizes in our system, and we
want to be careful not to regulate the smaller banks to the
point where their business models are challenged for all but
the largest banks.
Chairman McHenry. This committee would expect to see a
quantitative analysis of whatever the capital charge is going
to be. We expect that from the Fed, as we do from other
regulators.
With that, we will now recognize the ranking member of the
committee, Ms. Waters, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. Chair Powell, at this
committee's last hearing on digital assets, my Republican
colleagues proposed a stablecoin bill that would create 58
different licenses, with Federal regulatory approval over only
2 of the licenses. The remaining 56 licenses could be issued by
each State, Territory, and Washington, D.C., with little or no
Federal oversight, regulation, and enforcement.
This proposal takes State preemption to a whole new level.
It effectively allows every State to preempt another State.
D.C.-based coins, for example, would be sold to individuals
nationwide, and New York or North Carolina regulators could do
nothing to protect their own residents, while even the Fed
would be severely hamstrung in providing any oversight. I have
argued that we should allow States to be part of this process,
but we must have a strong, enforceable Federal floor with a
role for the Federal Reserve to approve and provide oversight
of payment stablecoins issued by nonbanks in order to ensure
that consumers are protected. Such a framework is similar to
our dual banking system, and it would ensure that nonbanks and
banks are treated the same.
We should also bear in mind that payment stablecoins are a
new form of currency intended to allow individuals to pay for
things with them. As such, do you agree that it is important
for the Fed, as our central bank, to have a chance to approve
or decline any State-licensed non-bank entity before it starts
issuing payment stablecoins nationwide?
Mr. Powell. First of all, let me say we appreciate that we
have been able to offer our views on these things to your staff
and also the Majority staff, and we appreciate the
consideration that is given to our views. We do see payment
stablecoins as a form of money, and in all advanced economies,
the ultimate source of credibility in money is the central
bank. And we believe that it would be appropriate to have quite
a robust Federal role in what happens with stablecoins going
forward, and that leaving us with a weak role, and allowing a
lot of private money creation at the State level, would be a
mistake. But nonetheless, again, I do appreciate that we have
been able to be heard and share our views with the committee.
Ms. Waters. Thank you so very much. I am appreciative for
that clear answer. The next question I have for you is a bit
unusual, but one of the reasons we push diversity is because
issues of people of color, et cetera, have not been dealt with.
I am going to throw you something that you would not expect.
Earlier this week, our nation celebrated Juneteenth, which
Congress recognized as a national holiday for the first time in
2021. This holiday celebrates the day enslaved African
Americans in Texas heard that they were free, 2\1/2\ years
after the Emancipation Proclamation was issued. To this day,
Black Americans grapple with enduring racial and economic
inequality that has its roots in slavery, as evidenced by the
Black-White gap in net worth and homeownership rates. My bill,
the Federal Reserve Racial and Economic Equity Act, would
require the Federal Reserve to carry out its duties in a manner
that supports the elimination of racial and ethnic disparities
in employment, income, wealth, and access to affordable credit.
Now, the Fed has a number of duties: to pursue maximum
employment in monetary policy; to supervise banks for
compliance with our fair lending laws; and to ensure that the
Community Reinvestment Act is administered in a way that puts
an end to discriminatory redlining practices by banks. Do you
agree with me and Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank President,
Raphael Bostic, among others, that the Fed has a role to play
in addressing racial and economic inequality as it carries out
its work until Congress passes this bill? What steps can you
take to address racial and economic inequality?
Mr. Powell. We do consider inequality in the economy as
part of our thinking about decisions, and those are certainly
highly-valuable social goals to pursue. I would say our ability
to take part in addressing those issues is fairly limited. We
have one Federal interest rate that we set. We do try to keep
in mind, as you know, not just the aggregate national level of
unemployment or employment, but also that for different ethnic
groups, so we take that into account. And I think that is just
part of making sure that we feel like we have all Americans in
the room with us when we are making decisions on monetary
policy. I will say, though, I think other agencies are better
suited to address these deep issues.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. We must have this continued
discussion on racial equality. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back. We will now
go to the Vice Chair of the committee, Mr. Hill of Arkansas,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. I thank the chairman of the committee, and,
Chairman Powell, it's great to have you back before the
committee. This morning, you have reiterated, and certainly
Vice Chair Barr has reiterated a number of times that the
banking industry here in the United States is well-capitalized.
And, in fact, capital levels have remained robust despite
COVID-19, with a 20-plus percent unemployment rate increase,
and a 9-percent output gap. They have remained stable through
government shutdowns. They have remained stable through severe
stress testing. And maybe more importantly, just in the last
few months, since the first week of March, you have seen strong
capital come into play as we have grappled with the reality of
a 40-year increase in short-term interest rates and that impact
on banks.
But as Chairman McHenry said, Vice Chair Michael Barr
continues to say he wants to increase capital requirements on
certain financial institutions. And in March, you testified
that, ``I will do everything I can possibly do to bring people
together--meaning on the Board of Governors--in consensus, and
have a capital framework that could be broadly supported.'' To
what extent have you and the other Governors been involved in
this so-called holistic review by Vice Chair Barr? Has he
briefed the other members of the Board of Governors thus far?
Mr. Powell. Yes, and we have all been briefed by staff on
the proposals, but as I mentioned, they are still somewhat in
motion, but, yes, we have been briefed.
Mr. Hill. So, you would say those proposals are still under
consideration and that there is no final decision that has been
made by the Board?
Mr. Powell. Well, no. Once the proposals really do settle
down and are written up, they will come to the Board for a full
discussion and a vote.
Mr. Hill. Has the Fed Board reconstituted the Committee on
Supervision and Regulation, the membership of it?
Mr. Powell. Yes. Oh, absolutely.
Mr. Hill. And who is on that Committee now?
Mr. Powell. That Committee is chaired by Vice Chair Barr,
and it also includes Governor Jefferson, and it includes
Governor Bowman.
Mr. Hill. When you look at capital in the U.S. and look at
the global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) here versus
other places in the world, would you say that the U.S. banks,
the U.S. G-SIBs are better capitalized than their global peers
in Europe or in Asia?
Mr. Powell. We are certainly at or near the top-of-the-
league table. I think there are a couple of other jurisdictions
that also have broadly similar levels of capital strength, but,
yes, we are at the top-of-the-league table.
Mr. Hill. I looked at it this morning, and the U.S. G-SIBs
have 11.3 percent capital without any kind of modification
compared to their European competitors at only 9.9 percent.
Would you say that we are better capitalized than the European
banks, the European G-SIBs?
Mr. Powell. I hate to call out the other jurisdictions, but
I would say our banks are very strongly capitalized and also
competing quite successfully globally outside the United
States.
Mr. Hill. Yes, I agree. And I think we have strengthened
capital and we have strengthened our supervision,
notwithstanding the problems that we saw this spring, which we
have talked about ad nauseam here, but I think that capital
standard does make American banks stand out. And as for the so-
called Basel III holistic reforms, wouldn't it be better if the
European banks did a holistic review and actually got their
capital up to American standards?
Mr. Powell. I think they are bound by the same--nobody is
bound by these, but they have agreed to follow the same
standards, and I think they are going through the same process
we are going through.
Mr. Hill. Same topic. The FDIC supervisory process and the
OCC supervisors, are they involved and engaged with Vice Chair
Barr in looking at this, ``holistic,'' review of capital
adequacy? In other words, are they providing their input to the
Vice Chair for Supervision and their own views on this topic?
Mr. Powell. On the regulatory proposals that are relevant
to them, yes. I think on the capital proposals, yes, I believe
so.
Mr. Hill. And you made a comment a minute ago, I think to
Chairman McHenry's question, that you would like to see rules
and supervisory rules consistent over time, and I think that is
frustrating. Here, we see change in Administrations. Sometimes,
we see change in rules, which is, I think, frustrating to the
private sector and to market participants. I note that the
Biden Administration says that the Financial Stability
Oversight Council (FSOC) should now base their decisions on
size as opposed to activities, and for several years now, we
have had an activities designation and a cost-benefit analysis.
Do you think the activities designation gives supervisors more
discretion at FSOC to select who should be deemed under their
supervision?
Mr. Powell. I actually think that one----
Mr. Hill. In other words, should we be looking only at
size, or should we look at cost-benefit analysis and
activities? My time has expired, so if you would answer that in
writing, I would appreciate it. I think this is an important
issue.
Mr. Powell. Okay.
Mr. Hill. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. We will now go to Ms. Velazquez of New
York for 5 minutes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chair Powell, at
your press conference last week, you stated, ``The Committee is
completely unified in the need to get inflation down to 2
percent, and we will do whatever it takes to get it down to 2
percent over time.'' Some analysts have interpreted this
statement as the FOMC's willingness to trigger a recession in
order to get inflation to 2 percent. How would you respond? Is
this is a fair and accurate interpretation?
Mr. Powell. Our statutory goals are price stability and
maximum employment, and we are dedicated to using our tools to
achieve those goals. In the case of employment, we still have
historically-low unemployment rates and high employment rates
now, a high participation, and a very strong labor market. We
are very far from our inflation target of 2 percent, and we are
very focused on getting back to 2 percent.
Ms. Velazquez. And how does the FOMC take into
consideration the impact of rising interest rates on low- and
moderate-income (LMI) communities and small businesses when
determining monetary policies?
Mr. Powell. We only have one main interest rate to raise or
lower, and it applies to everyone. But I would say that
inflation hits LMI communities and people generally at the
lower end of the income spectrum much harder than people in the
middle or at the high end because high inflation can get you
into trouble right away if you are living on a fixed income,
just to cover the basic necessities. So, it is for the benefit
of those people that we must get inflation under control. It is
for the benefit of all Americans, but particularly for those
people, and we keep that in mind as we are strongly committed
to getting inflation back down to 2 percent over time.
Ms. Velazquez. And they are the same people who are having
a hard time accessing loans, and it's the same with small
businesses. Chair Powell, Vice Chair Barr's report on the Fed's
review of Silicon Valley Bank states that while there was
regulatory tailoring conducted in response to S. 2155, there
was also--and this is the part that really concerns me--a
cultural shift at the Fed under the direction of the previous
Vice Chair for Supervision, Randy Quarles. According to the
report, this shift included pressure to reduce burdens on
firms, meet a higher burden of proof for a supervisory
conclusion, and a need to accumulate more evidence than in the
past. As Chair during that period, were you aware of this
cultural shift and the impact it was creating?
Mr. Powell. I think we learned from the Silicon Valley
failure and the others that there is going to be a need for
stronger supervision and also regulation for banks of that
size, and I am committed to learning the right lessons from
this exercise and to forthrightly implementing changes.
Ms. Velazquez. But were you aware of the cultural shift?
Mr. Powell. I can't really characterize it that way.
Certainly, I was aware that we were trying to avoid excessive
regulatory burden. That is always inappropriate----
Ms. Velazquez. Do you disagree with Vice Chair Barr's
report in that respect?
Mr. Powell. I am sure that the people who wrote the report
were accurately reporting what they heard from back in the----
Ms. Velazquez. How often were you meeting with Vice Chair
Quarles?
Mr. Powell. Reasonably frequently. We sat quite near each
other.
Ms. Velazquez. And never discussed a cultural shift?
Mr. Powell. I didn't say that. The way you are describing
it is not what I recall. I recall Vice Chair Quarles talking
about things like focusing on the really important issues and
not getting diverted into other----
Ms. Velazquez. So, the way it was described by Vice Chair
Barr is not what you recall?
Mr. Powell. I had no part in----
Ms. Velazquez. What steps----
Mr. Powell. I said I had no part in preparing the report. I
am confident that the staff who worked on the report reported
accurately what they heard. I am sure that is right.
Ms. Velazquez. What steps did you take proactively to meet
with regulatory and supervisory staff?
Mr. Powell. I think we are taking significant steps now. As
you know, under Vice Chair Barr's leadership, we are looking
carefully at these events and asking ourselves what we need to
do with supervision. I think there is a point to be made that
there are situations in which we need to be more forceful and
more proactive, not in all situations, but in some. In
regulation, I think we are learning that we need to update our
thinking around liquidity regulation, which was based on a
certain speed of bank runs, which now looks to be outdated.
Ms. Velazquez. My time has expired.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired. We
will now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Powell,
thank you for being here. I just want to start off by asking a
few yes-or-no questions. Was the Silicon Valley Bank failure a
result of a liquidity issue?
Mr. Powell. I'm sorry?
Mr. Garbarino. Was the Silicon Valley Bank failure the
result of a liquidity issue?
Mr. Powell. Among other things, yes.
Mr. Garbarino. Was the Signature Bank failure the result of
a liquidity issue?
Mr. Powell. Yes. There were also a lot of very bad
management decisions being made there.
Mr. Garbarino. Was the First Republic Bank failure the
result of a liquidity issue also?
Mr. Powell. Among other things, yes. I wouldn't say just
liquidity.
Mr. Garbarino. Okay. Were any of them a failure of having
too-low capital levels?
Mr. Powell. Let's go to Silicon Valley Bank. The issue that
triggered the run initially was the presence of significant
losses in their securities portfolio.
Mr. Garbarino. Yes.
Mr. Powell. And that is a capital issue.
Mr. Garbarino. So, they had too-low capital.
Mr. Powell. As you know, they weren't required to take that
into account in their capital. If you remember, what people
were focusing on was these portfolio losses, and then what
people weren't focusing on was the fact that they had in excess
of 90-percent uninsured deposits, and that is what caused the
run.
Mr. Garbarino. Would increasing capital requirements for
Silicon Valley Bank or any of these other banks have stopped
these banks from failing?
Mr. Powell. That is a hypothetical, unknowable question. I
think it might have helped, but----
Mr. Garbarino. Increasing it by how much would have helped?
Mr. Powell. It is very hard to say. Clearly, the main issue
there was a failure of management to follow up, a failure of
supervision to require them to follow up, and really, the
liquidity regulation was not appropriate. We needed to have
stronger regulation around liquidity and uninsured deposits.
Mr. Garbarino. Last year, you said the banking system is
very strong, well-capitalized, and highly liquid, and it does a
much better job of understanding the risks that it runs and
managing them, and just today, you said the banking sector
seems to be strong. Do you still stand by those things? I mean,
you just said it today.
Mr. Powell. Yes.
Mr. Garbarino. Yes. And last month, Vice Chair Barr
appeared before this committee, and he agreed with you and
said, overall, banks have strong capital and liquidity.
Treasury Secretary Yellen has said similar things. Even though
you have all said that banks need to have strong capital, you
seem to leave us today by saying the bank is considering what
increase would be appropriate of capital requirement. Has the
Board already decided that an increase will happen, and they
are just deciding what the size is of the increase for capital
requirements?
Mr. Powell. No. What I thought I said was that any increase
above these levels would need to be shown to be justified.
Mr. Garbarino. Do you personally think that an increase is
necessary at this time?
Mr. Powell. Do I think----
Mr. Garbarino. That an increase in capital requirements is
necessary at this time.
Mr. Powell. Look, I am going to react to whatever the
proposal turns out to be in the end and give it my best
assessment. That is what I will say.
Mr. Garbarino. Okay. You just also say that credit is
tightening. Won't increasing capital requirements further
tighten credit?
Mr. Powell. The thing about capital requirements is if we
put a proposal out this summer, let's say, it will be quite a
while before that proposal is agreed to among the agencies and
voted on, and then it will take some years to come into full
effect. Whereas interest rates, for example, have immediate
effects on financial conditions and reasonably quick effects on
economic activity, capital requirements are a much more sort of
medium-term, longer-term thing.
Mr. Garbarino. I would like to move on to what impacts
raising capital requirements would have. According to academic
literature by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, a 1-
percent-point increase in capital requirements could
potentially reduce annual GDP by up to 16 basis points, showing
that higher capital requirements come at a cost and could have
a significant impact on the U.S. economy. I discussed this with
Vice Chair Barr last month and expressed my concerns about the
impact of increased capital on the real economy, but he didn't
answer the question directly.
We are hearing from all sorts of industries that these
increased capital requirements at any level would have a
further tightening on lending, and I am hearing that from
everybody. If that happens, it is going to be a real disaster.
So, I think for anything that the committee proposes, if you
could come back and brief us on before it is finalized, we
would appreciate that very much, sir.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Cleaver, is now recognized.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, Chairman
Powell. Thank you very much. This is probably Economics 101,
but a lot of people in my district are misunderstanding
Economics 101, along with me.
In May of this year, unemployment remained at 4 percent for
the 16th consecutive month, and at 3.7 percent. This means that
unemployment remained at or below 4 percent for the longest
stretch in 50 years. In the U.S., the job openings rate has
fallen by more than 1.5 percentage points from its peak while
the unemployment rate has crept slightly lower. In other words,
job openings declined but so did joblessness, and I am
wondering if there was any expectation that this would occur?
Mr. Powell. The ratio of job openings to unemployed people
has been in historic territory, all-time highs for a while now
in the last year or so, and there is an expectation that it
will come down. A while ago, there were two jobs for every
unemployed person. Now, we are down to 1.7, I believe, or 1.6,
and that still speaks to a historically-tight labor market
where the demand for labor still very substantially exceeds the
supply of available workers. And by the way, that is a way that
the labor market can become less tight without having
unemployment go up.
Mr. Cleaver. I am sure you are hearing this all over, as I
am. I have a good friend who has a number of barbecue
restaurants in Kansas City, and he is constantly telling me how
difficult it is to find workers, to the point where he did
something that he would never do: He put a sign out in front of
his restaurants of job openings. Are there particular
industries or sectors of the economy where we would expect this
sentiment to be particularly true?
Mr. Powell. No, and that is right. There is still a
significant labor shortage. The surveys at the aggregate level
show that it is not as bad as it was 2 years ago. And
gradually, businesses are reporting that they are better able
to find workers. And workers are reporting that they are not
quitting their jobs as much as they were. A really good sign of
how tight a labor market is, is how much people feel free to
quit their jobs voluntarily. So, those things are all
suggesting a gradual cooling and gradually getting supply and
demand back into alignment, but we are not there yet. We still
have a significant excess of demand over supply.
Mr. Cleaver. Are we also finding that--I know in Missouri,
in spite of the fact that there is some jelly-like movement
with the economy, people are still willing to go out and buy
homes. We are not having difficulty in terms of people going
out and getting loans, even with the interest rates rising. If
the consumers are constantly paying whatever the interest rates
might be, are we going to get stuck just continually going up?
Mr. Powell. No, I don't think so. The housing sector
nationally has flattened out and maybe ticked up a little bit,
but at a much lower level from where it was with rates as high
as they are. Supply and demand are getting back into alignment.
And I do think that housing inflation is set to come down as we
move forward. There is a particular way that the inflation is
calculated there so that you are waiting for leases to come due
and roll over at much lower levels of increase. So, we think
housing inflation will be coming down significantly over the
course of the rest of this year and next year.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentlewoman from California, Mrs. Kim, is recognized.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you for recognizing me, Mr. Chairman, and
Chairman Powell, thank you for joining us. I appreciate your
comment to price stability and commend your efforts to reduce
inflation and make life more affordable for all Americans.
Thank you for that.
The 10,000 Small Businesses survey of 2,000 small
businesses found that 77 percent were concerned about their
ability to access capital. With that in mind, do you think it
is appropriate for the Federal Reserve to increase capital
requirements at this time? And I know this was discussed
earlier, but what specific analysis has the Fed conducted so we
can determine the impact of this warrantless regulatory action
on small businesses and other marginal borrowers?
Mr. Powell. With capital standards, it is always a
tradeoff. More capital means a more stable, more sound, and
more resilient banking system, but it also, at the margin, can
mean a little bit less credit availability, and also, the price
of credit can be affected, and there is no perfect way to
assess that balance. Obviously, the answer is not zero capital
and it is not 100 percent capital, so it is somewhere in the
middle.
Mrs. Kim. Yes. Thank you. There are estimates that about
$1.5 trillion of commercial real estate loans that are maturing
in the next 3 years, and a decline in demand in the prevalence
of work-from-home policies are putting a strain on the
commercial real estate market. The bulk of commercial real
estate loans are held by smaller and regional banks. Is the Fed
thinking about policies that could provide time for commercial
real estate loans to be refinanced, and could an increase in
capital requirements reduce liquidity in the commercial real
estate loan market?
Mr. Powell. We are very focused on the commercial real
estate situation. You are right, of course, that a good portion
of the commercial real estate loans are held in smaller banks.
And supervisors are very much engaged with those banks, and it
is particularly banks that have a high concentration. That is
what we look for among the smaller banks, and there are some of
those. But there is a playbook for working your way out of
these loans, and it is particularly in the office sector where
working from home is still a pretty material factor in some
areas, as you know.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. The next question has to do with the
Board's processes and procedures. What are those procedures
that govern consideration and potential adoption of matters
like the proposals that Vice Chair Barr is about to present to
the Board?
Mr. Powell. On regulation as opposed to supervision, on
regulation, the Board of Governors votes on regulatory
proposals, and it is a majority vote. We now have six voters.
So, when there is a proposal, it will be briefed carefully,
then we will have a meeting, or it can actually be done
virtually, and it probably will be done that way, as most of
our meetings are, and then we have a vote. On supervision, it
is different. Most supervisory matters are really under the
authority of the Vice Chair for Supervision under the law, so
most of them don't have to go to the Board for a vote.
Mrs. Kim. What percentage of the Governors must vote in
favor?
Mr. Powell. A majority.
Mrs. Kim. The majority of them?
Mr. Powell. Yes.
Mrs. Kim. Okay. The California Governor, prior to the
depositor bailout for Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), reportedly
identified that he had been in touch with the highest levels of
leadership at the White House and the Treasury. The Governor
also, on Sunday, March 12th, when the bailout was announced,
issued his own statement praising that action. There have also
been reports that the Governor and his wife, with respect to
their business and perhaps other interests, may have had
depositor interest in SVB. So when the Federal Reserve Board,
the FDIC Board, and Secretary Yellen, in consultation with the
President, recommended invoking the systemic risk exception for
SVB, and then decided to provide blanket insurance even on
uninsured balances, did the Fed or any others, to your
knowledge, perform any conflict-of-interest due diligence?
Mr. Powell. No. We were in an emergency situation. On
Monday morning, there was going to be and there was a run on
banks that had high uninsured depositors.
Mrs. Kim. Looking back, do you think there was any----
Mr. Powell. We carried out our duties.
Mrs. Kim. Yes.
Mr. Powell. I am pretty sure we did the right thing.
Mrs. Kim. And you don't think there was any conflict of
interest, even looking back on that?
Mr. Powell. I have nothing. I have absolutely no knowledge
on that.
Mrs. Kim. Okay. Thank you. Thanks for being here. I yield
back the balance of my time.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back. The gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Gonzalez, is recognized.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters. And thank you, Chairman Powell, for being here with us
this morning.
The June Federal Open Market Committee report indicates
inflation in the U.S. and abroad continues to ease but remains
elevated. In response to the proposed interest rate increases
up until June 14th, the recommendation is to pause interest
rate hikes for the first time this year. Research has shown
that the effects of monetary policy decisions like raising
interest rates can take, on average, 42 months to be realized
fully in the United States, meaning we may not fully understand
the effects of this first increase in rates of March 2022 until
next fall. With that in mind, how have our recently-tightened
monetary policies impacted the strength of the U.S. dollar and
how it is valued globally?
Mr. Powell. Let me say that there is a lot of uncertainty
around how long it takes monetary policy to affect real
activity. There is no agreement on 42 months or any particular
time, and I think most people would say shorter than that. Are
you asking how it would affect the dollar?
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Mr. Powell. First of all, the Treasury Department has
responsibility for the level of the dollar and the stewardship
of the dollar as a currency. We don't actually comment on that.
We don't look at any particular level. To us, it is a financial
condition. A stronger dollar means certain things and a weaker
dollar means certain other things.
Mr. Gonzalez. It continues to be a concern here in this
committee. Also, Chairman Powell, as you are aware, the Federal
Reserve's core mission is to keep employment up and inflation
down. Although I understand the calls for climate-related
financial risk management from my colleagues, we should be
focusing on the economic state of our country. The credit of
the U.S. dollar is at jeopardy. And as you know, we have had
global pressure recently, and we need to be sending a clear
message that the world can rely on the full faith and credit of
the United States dollar. We should be focusing on mitigating
the calls to reduce dependency of the U.S. dollar. Monetary
policy changes implemented in the U.S. are likely to cause a
ripple effect throughout the global economy.
With that said, would you agree that monetary policies to
directly address climate change should be made by Congress and
not the Federal Reserve, and implementing monetary policies and
supervisory tools to exclude energy leaders from capital and
financial institutions would have a grave impact on local,
State, Federal, and even global economies?
Mr. Powell. I strongly agree that we have quite a narrow
role in climate change, and really, the important decisions
about climate change need to be made by elected people, not by
the Fed.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Florida, Mr. Donalds, is recognized.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Powell,
thank you for being here. I really appreciate you being here.
I have to say, first of all, it was good to hear from the
other side of the aisle that the Federal Reserve should not
even be engaging and using its tools with respect to climate
change, or climate mitigation, or whatever the case might be.
You have a big enough job as it is, so adding anything like
that to your job, I think, would be wholly detrimental to the
American economy, so I, for one, am glad to hear that coming
from the other side of the aisle.
You have had a couple of questions already on capital, bank
capital, et cetera. Look, some of the current views are that
continuous raises of bank capital will increase costs to our
economy anywhere from $50- to $200 billion. What is your view
of the current desire or mode of Vice Chair Barr to fully
implement the Basel III capital standards?
Mr. Powell. I think that is the next thing. Vice Chair
Quarles was working on that. It didn't get completed for
various reasons. I think that is an international capital
standard that we should go ahead and complete. As to the right
level of capital, that is a discussion we are about to have.
Mr. Donalds. At the Fed, are you kind of concerned about
the fact that it now seems like the European regulators are
starting to pull back from that, that they are starting to
think about capital standards being too much for European banks
and that they are starting to recede from what was, I assume,
kind of a handshake agreement in years gone by?
Mr. Powell. I am not hearing that exactly. We will be
watching that carefully, though.
Mr. Donalds. We have, in my view, aggressively gone through
this process of increasing capital standards and capital
requirements on Tier 1 capital for banks. In retrospect, do you
think that has been a net positive to the overall banking
environment, or do you believe it has been a negative to the
overall banking environment?
Mr. Powell. I think it has been a net positive. And as I
pointed out earlier, U.S. banks have competed very, very
successfully through this period, despite what were pretty
significant capital increases that we put in a few years back.
So, it really has led to a very strong and also made it well
through the pandemic period, I thought, and I think that was a
pretty good test. So, even though the government did do a lot
to support the economy, I still think that those capital hikes
we made in the last cycle come through looking pretty good.
Mr. Donalds. Do you guys at the Fed--I say, ``you guys,''
because I know you are the Chairman, but there are other
members as well--have a view of the concern about community
banking in the United States or lack thereof of community
banking? It has been shrinking quite significantly over the
past 10 or 12 years.
Mr. Powell. Very much so. It is a focus for us. We
understand the importance of community banks, that they provide
a different service and a really important service to smaller
businesses and communities. And community banks have been
consolidating for 30 years now, so it is really a secular trend
as people have moved to bigger cities and things like that, but
we don't want to do anything to move that along. We think that
the world is not a better place with fewer community banks, and
we try to keep that in mind in all of the regulatory and
supervisory things that we do.
Mr. Donalds. Do you think that Federal regulatory policy,
apart from Congress, has led to a supercharging effect of
diminished community banking in the United States?
Mr. Powell. It has probably been a factor, but I do think
there have been important demographic factors as well, and also
having interstate banking. Interstate banking only became legal
quite recently, and that also has led to consolidation. You can
look back, again, look back 30-plus years, and you will see a
very steady decline, so I think there are demographic and other
factors driving it. But regulation can fall as a fixed cost,
which means that institutions need to be bigger, and I think
that is probably part of the story.
Mr. Donalds. I don't disagree with your conclusion. I am
just concerned about the trajectory. I think just having larger
financial institutions, larger banks, overall, with a
diminishing smaller community bank infrastructure is
detrimental to lending to small businesses, mom-and-pop
businesses. It also could be parochial. I started my career in
community banking, so I saw heartfelt situations.
Last question, since I'm running out of time, the SEC has
proposed a rule that would, among other things, require banks
to segregate client cash held in custody, pending, custody bank
balance sheets, and by extension to the bank custody model. Are
you guys at the Fed concerned about this proposed rule from the
SEC?
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Chairman Powell can respond in writing.
Mr. Powell. I will respond in writing.
Mr. Donalds. Okay. Fair enough.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman from New York, Mr. Torres, is now
recognized.
Mr. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Chairman Powell. As you know, the U.S. has foreign adversaries,
particularly the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) that seem intent
on de-dollarization. How seriously should the threat of de-
dollarization be taken, in your view?
Mr. Powell. The status of the dollar as the world's reserve
currency is a very important thing to us. I think the reason we
have that status is largely due to our great democratic
institutions, the rule of law, and the fact that we have,
generally speaking, had strong levels of price stability. And I
think that the dollar will remain the reserve currency as long
as those things are in place.
Mr. Torres. I want to explore that answer, because
commenters often speak of the dollar as the world's reserve
currency as the cause of America's economic dominance. Do you
think of it as the cause of America's economic dominance or as
a consequence of it?
Mr. Powell. To me, it is more of a consequence. And also,
there tends to be an equilibrium where one currency becomes the
accepted global standard, and that has been the dollar for some
time, and I expect that it will continue to be for some time.
Mr. Torres. It is often said that the Fed has a dual
mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Do you view
these mandates as equally binding upon the Fed or does one
supersede the other?
Mr. Powell. They are perfectly equal under the law.
Mr. Torres. And I am curious to know what it means in
practice to have a 2-percent inflation target. The latest pause
notwithstanding, does it mean the Federal Reserve will continue
raising interest rates until the 2-percent target is reached,
even if doing so comes at the expense of maximum employment as
well as financial stability?
Mr. Powell. No, it doesn't mean that. It does not. The way
we think about it is, most of the time, the two goals are
aligned in the sense that if you are achieving one, you are
achieving the other, and if you are a little bit off, the other
one, they move in the same direction. Today's situation is
unusual in that we are overachieving in effect the maximum
employment goal, but we are far from achieving the inflation
goal.
In our system, we have a constitutional document, and what
it says is that when that is the case, you look at how far you
are from the goal, and you look at the speed with which you
would move back to the goal. And that would tell you today that
we should focus heavily on inflation. But as it becomes closer,
as the two things become more aligned, then then they go back
into perfect equality under the law.
Mr. Torres. So, the Fed engages in a delicate balancing act
between employment and inflation?
Mr. Powell. Yes.
Mr. Torres. To what extent do you factor in financial
stability, safety, and soundness when raising interest rates?
Mr. Powell. You are right. We do have a financial stability
mandate, but we try to----
Mr. Torres. You have a financial stability mandate with
respect to your role as a bank regulator when it comes to----
Mr. Powell. Also, just generally, we are the lender of last
resort. Central banks were originally created to support the
financial system in times of stress and to make sure that you
don't get into times of stress. Sorry. What was your question
before that?
Mr. Torres. To what extent do you factor in safety and
soundness when setting interest rates?
Mr. Powell. Sorry. We really try hard to use our financial
stability tools for financial stability purposes and our
monetary policy tools for monetary purposes. The reality on the
ground is much messier than that. They are very much entangled
and one affects the other. So, the separation is not at all
perfect, but we do think of these as separate things with
separate tools.
Mr. Torres. Do you think that the Silicon Valley Bank
failure revealed a deeper tension between the safety and
soundness mandate of the Fed as a bank regulator and the
mandate of the Fed as an administrator of monetary policy?
Mr. Powell. I would say no, and I will tell you why.
Interest rate risk is one of the most basic banking risks, and
we supervise for it. Overwhelmingly, U.S. banks did manage
their interest rate risk. Silicon Valley Bank didn't, and even
though the supervisors were pointing that out to them, the bank
didn't take action quickly enough. I would have thought that
you can say that it was interest rate hikes that caused
portfolio losses, but it was management that failed to hedge
against those losses and failed to hold appropriate liquidity.
Mr. Torres. In the pre-COVID world, we had the best of both
worlds: low unemployment and low inflation for decades. Do you
believe that we could return to that best of both worlds, or
are high interest rates the new normal in the American economy?
Mr. Powell. We will return to 2-percent inflation and
maximum employment. What will be the level of interest rates
there? That is a really good question.
Mr. Torres. Do you suspect it is going to settle at a
higher level than we have known historically?
Mr. Powell. I think it is really hard to know. It is a
great question. We talk about this a lot. The people who argue
that rates will move back down just point to the fact that it
was really global factors that drove rates down in the first
place. Maybe the truth is somewhere in the middle. It is hard
to know.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The gentleman
from Nebraska, Mr. Flood, is recognized.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Powell, I
would like to discuss the continued efforts to unwind years and
years of quantitative easing and what it has done to our
Federal Reserve balance sheet. If you take a look at the size
of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet since the 2008 financial
crisis, we have seen an alarming increase from around $800
million to today's $8.3 trillion in assets.
Back in 2018, you did start the work of winding down the
balance sheet. You managed to offload roughly $700 billion of
assets between the beginning of your time as Federal Reserve
Chair and August 2019. The problem was, shortly after your
efforts began, we had another major economic shock, the COVID-
19 pandemic, that caused the Fed to once again return to
quantitative easing as a form of economic relief. Pretty soon,
the Federal Reserve's balance sheet had increased another $4
trillion in size. That is how we made it to the balance sheet
level that we are at today.
I understand you have started working to shed some of the
Federal Reserve's balance sheet, and I appreciate that work.
That being said, the scale involved here, to me, is startling.
My concern, Chairman Powell, is that efforts to shed assets
from the Fed's balance sheet have never been anywhere as quick
as efforts to build it back up. Our economic cycle does go
through recessions from time to time. It is not always boom,
but some bust, too. If we continue a pattern of rapidly
building up the Federal Reserve's balance sheet in bad times
and slowly shedding assets in good times, we are going to see
the balance sheet grow significantly over time.
Chairman Powell, is this a concern of yours? And to pair
with that question, long term, how can we avoid an environment
where any effort to unwind the Federal Reserve's balance sheet
is undone anytime there is an economic shock?
Mr. Powell. It is a concern. This time, the balance sheet
roll-off is much, much faster than it was back in the first
episode. We also know more. We hadn't grown our balance sheet
like that, and we hadn't shrunk it before. Now, we have
experience with that, so we are moving back down to a level
that will be appropriate for our new framework. By the way, we
won't go back to a framework where we were dealing with scarce
reserves. We like the administrative rate framework that we are
in now, but it is important that the balance sheet not just
grow with every cycle, and I think I am very conscious of that.
Mr. Flood. Chairman Powell, do you have an optimal Fed
target for the size of what the balance sheet should look like,
a number?
Mr. Powell. I will give you the idea, and that is, you find
the number, but the idea is that it is smaller than now. It is
a place where reserves are abundant and also have a little bit
of a buffer on top of that so that we don't accidentally run
into reserve scarcity. Demand for reserves can be volatile, and
you don't want to find yourself, as we did a few years back,
suddenly finding that reserves were scarce, and we didn't see
it coming. And we then had to put more reserves into the system
at a time when we didn't want to be doing that. I think you
want to have a level where we have ample reserves plus a
buffer, and that will be a percent of GDP that we get down to,
and we are moving in that direction pretty, pretty smartly.
Mr. Flood. Chairman Powell, realistically, how quickly can
the Federal Reserve unwind its balance sheet? What is the
threshold beyond which an asset sell-off by the Federal Reserve
would disrupt our markets?
Mr. Powell. We don't sell assets. What we do is we allow
them to mature and passively roll off, and that is what we are
doing to the tune of about a trillion dollars a year, and we
are in the middle of that process. Now, as it is an empirical
question, you are going to find a level that is still ample
plus a bit of a buffer, and that is how we are thinking about
it.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just reiterate
my concern on this issue. I fear that having the Federal
Reserve backstop so much of our economy through the holding of
Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities is not sustainable
long term. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
Nevada, Mr. Horsford, is recognized.
Mr. Horsford. I thank the chairman and the ranking member
for holding this important hearing, and thank you, Chair
Powell, for appearing before the committee today.
Before I begin, I would like to ask permission to enter
into the record an editorial by the Las Vegas Sun, entitled,
``Economy, infrastructure thrive when Dems have the reins,''
dated June 16, 2023.
Mr. Barr. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Horsford. During this time of increased economic
uncertainty, it is more important than ever that the Federal
Reserve fulfills its dual mission of maximizing employment and
supporting price stability. There is no doubt that it is
difficult, and the needle that has to be threaded is very
specific. However, the human cost is simply too great for us to
get this wrong. Sometimes, we need to be reminded that there
are real people behind the economic data, and that the actions
taken by both Congress and the Fed have real consequences for
everyday Americans, everyday Americans who want to know that
myself and my colleagues are dedicated to creating an economy
that actually works for them, which is why I was pleased that
last week the Federal Reserve decided to pause your interest
rate hikes and take stock of the overall economic picture.
Now, don't get me wrong, there is certainly more work ahead
of us, but with 13 million jobs added since President Biden
took office, we should be rooting for America to succeed and
not to fail. The strength of the labor market continues despite
the multiple concurrent shocks that continue to reverberate
throughout the global economy. And I believe our economy
remains resilient, thanks to the historic investments that were
included in the legislation passed last Congress and signed
into law by President Biden. The beneficiaries of these
investments were the people, the middle class, not special
interest.
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law is creating construction
jobs and projects that will help ease supply chain challenges
and ensure safer transportation for everyone. President Biden
and congressional Democrats are investing in technology that
will define the 21st Century, components to generate solar and
wind energy, semiconductors, and electric vehicles that will
all be made here in America.
Just last week, Treasury Secretary Yellen was before this
committee and described how the transformational investments
from the Inflation Reduction Act are ushering in a renaissance
of domestic manufacturing. These are good-paying jobs, union
jobs that are expanding our production capacity here at home,
while reducing our reliance on goods imported from abroad. As I
indicated, the editorial by my hometown newspaper, the Las
Vegas Sun, remarks that annual investments in manufacturing
construction has more than doubled its pre-pandemic levels.
Furthermore, when we narrow the focus to the region
including Nevada, the U.S. Census Bureau estimates that in just
2 years, private manufacturing construction increased almost
tenfold. So, if we want to rebuild the American middle class,
we must do so from the middle out, by investing in modern
infrastructure and modern manufacturing facilities. But this
does not mean that everything is improving equally. I have
heard time and again from my constituents about the cost of
housing being one of their biggest pain points. Our Monetary
Policy Report points out that housing services prices have
risen a shocking 8.5 percent over the 12-month period ending in
April, and in my district, it is even worse.
So, Chair Powell, at a time where it has become
increasingly difficult for working Nevadans to purchase a home,
I worry that rising mortgage rates will put working families
even further behind on accessing the wealth and equity that a
house provides. While higher rates have cooled some housing
markets across the country, what do you see as the biggest
remaining upward pressure on housing services, and what can we
do in Congress to incentivize new home starts to hopefully
moderate the imbalance between supply and demand in the housing
market?
Mr. Powell. I think you are talking about largely longer-
run factors here, and I think there has been for some time a
shortage of housing. It is harder to get lots, it is harder to
get workers, and in the pandemic, it had been harder to get
materials and things like that, so there is certainly a need
for more housing. I think during the pandemic, you had people
wanting to live in houses rather than downtown in apartments
because of COVID. You had low rates, and so you had 2 or 3
years of very, very high price increases for housing, and now
that has flattened out a lot as we have raised rates and----
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The gentleman
from New York, Mr. Lawler, is recognized.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Powell, you,
the Fed's Vice Chair for Supervision, and many others have
indicated that the banking system is well-capitalized. Bank
capitalization remained robust during the COVID shock and
related shutdowns of economic activity, and in severe Fed
stress testing.
Nonetheless, the Vice Chair for Supervision wants to
increase capital and other requirements on financial
institutions. This will have substantial economic effects that
will begin immediately, while you are still focusing on
bringing inflation back to the Fed's 2-percent target.
Excessively-high capital requirements will constrain credit
provision to the economy, costing jobs, incomes, opportunities,
and living standards. As my colleague, Mr. Garbarino, pointed
out, a 1-percent increase in capital requirements could
potentially reduce GDP by up to 16 basis points, based on the
Basel Committee literature.
On January 21, 2021, a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage had an
interest rate of 2.77 percent. Now, for the same loan,
individuals are looking at a 6.69 percent interest rate for a
30-year fixed-rate mortgage. For the median home valued at
$436,800, the difference from less than 2\1/2\ years ago to now
equates to over $300,000 more over the course of the loan. For
the median household making around $71,000 a year, that extra
$10,000 a year out-of-pocket in mortgage costs is crushing.
Some areas, like my district, are even harder hit due to the
high cost of living and the lack of housing. Combine that with
inflation at or above 4 percent, and these factors are taking a
real toll on the average American family, including in the
Hudson Valley. Further decreasing the availability of credit to
households and businesses across the country would likely only
worsen this crisis.
So, Chairman Powell, do you agree that excessively-high
capital levels constrain banks' lending capacity, with
spillover effects on jobs and living standards for Americans,
and that effects would begin immediately independent of any
proposed phase and timing?
Mr. Powell. I do think that, as I mentioned earlier, there
is a tradeoff between safety and soundness and availability of
capital, and you want to get that balance right.
Mr. Lawler. But respectfully, you have testified that there
was more than enough capital in these banks. Where are we
unsafe and unsound, that we would require more capital
requirements?
Mr. Powell. As I mentioned, that is the question we are
going to be asking, as we review the proposals when they do
come forward. We don't have a proposal in front of us at this
point. And I think, as I mentioned, any increase in the capital
for the large banks will need to be justified. I don't know
that there will be much in the way of capital increases
proposed for banks, other than the very large banks, but we
will have to see.
Mr. Lawler. So, you don't believe regional and community
banks will face the same requirements?
Mr. Powell. Very different requirements, I would think, as
they do now.
Mr. Lawler. But you are not looking to increase the
requirements on them?
Mr. Powell. We will have to see what the proposals turn out
to be, honestly. They are still, to some extent, in motion, and
once they are out, we can have lots of conversations about the
specifics. But until they are, it is tough to do that.
Mr. Lawler. And you will commit to providing this committee
with all such analysis before any proposals come out?
Mr. Powell. I think there will be a proposal that comes to
the Board sometime this summer, and the Board will vote on
that, and we will obviously share whatever analysis we have.
Mr. Lawler. Are you concerned that any significant increase
in capital could significantly jeopardize the Fed's efforts to
rein in inflation?
Mr. Powell. The thing about capital requirements is there
would be a 90-day comment period, roughly. Something like that
could be in that range, and then there would be a long period
of considering the comments that are made, and then there would
be movement toward coming to an agreement about what to
finalize, so that would take many months. And then, you would
be into a situation where there would be long phase ins, so I
don't really think capital requirements play into the near-term
economic situation the way interest rate hikes do.
Mr. Lawler. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistic's
CPI Inflation Calculator, it takes $1.16 today to buy the same
consumer goods and services as $1 purchased when President
Biden took office in January of 2021. Do you agree that the
outsized inflation we have seen since early 2021 has caused and
continues to harm workers, retirees, and families trying to
make ends meet and pay their bills?
Mr. Powell. I strongly agree with that, and that is why we
are taking the measures we are taking.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The gentleman
from North Carolina, Mr. Nickel, is recognized.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks, Chair Powell, for being here with us
today.
Back in 1995, I worked here in Congress as an intern for
Dick Gephardt. I was in his press office, and we had
newspapers, and my job was to clip out the articles and paste
them on a sheet. But when I was here in 1995, the Grateful Dead
were playing. It was one of Jerry Garcia's last concerts, and I
was just so disappointed that I missed that concert, but was
excited to see from public reporting that you were at the most
recent Dead & Company show. I have been to this version with
John Mayer and enjoyed it, but we weren't there. How was the
show? Did you like it?
Mr. Powell. Oh, it was terrific. What can I say? It was
great. I have been a Grateful Dead fan for 50 years.
Mr. Nickel. I have found one universal truth, which is that
I like people who like the Grateful Dead. Having said that, I
have limited time, but do you want any time to go back to some
of the questions that you had? Do you want to elaborate on
anything that you have said here so far today?
Mr. Powell. You are very kind to offer, but I am fine with
the answers I have given so far, I believe.
Mr. Nickel. Well, back to that show, a lot of people there
in Virginia, like my constituents, are very concerned about
this economy. They are worried about the cost of groceries,
rising inflation, and interest rates going up, and when we do
these hearings, it is always big news. Things you say move
markets and are very important, but Fed-speak is just so hard
for my constituents and the American people to understand. What
can you tell the American people who are concerned about the
economy in a way that they can really understand about where
this economy really is heading?
Mr. Powell. I guess I would say this economy is very
strong, and what is driving it now is just a very strong labor
market. There is still significant demand for workers, there
are more job openings than there are unemployed people, wages
are moving up, and that is really what is driving the economy
forward. People's disposable incomes are coming up. Inflation
is moving down gradually. The thing that troubles people, and I
think the thing that accounts for the surveys you see, where,
despite a historically-strong labor market, people are still
concerned about the economy, it is really inflation.
It is our job to bring inflation down. The way we do it, is
by raising interest rates. And while that can be painful, what
it does is it gradually slows down demand so that supply and
demand can get back into alignment and so that we can have
inflation running at 2 percent, and people can get on with
their lives and basically not have to think about inflation.
That is the definition of, ``price stability,'' from one
standpoint is just that people can live their daily lives
without thinking about inflation all the time. We want to get
back to that place, and we are on a journey to get there. We
have quite a ways to go, but we are making progress.
Mr. Nickel. I have always wondered this, and I think there
is a pretty simple answer, but if Congress was in charge of
setting interest rates and it became a political thing, do you
think that is something that we could handle as a legislative
body?
Mr. Powell. I wouldn't want to comment on that.
Mr. Nickel. That is a safe answer. And I do want to just
join in the chorus with a lot of my colleagues on both sides of
the aisle here about capital requirements for banks. I brought
this issue up with Vice Chair Barr, with Fed Governor Bowman,
and in your written questions from the last time you were here.
I didn't get a chance to ask questions because of my seniority
here on the committee, but you answered in writing, and you
said we have to be mindful of the tradeoffs associated with
adjusting capital levels as it could, ``cause banks to reduce
the availability of credit or to pass higher costs of credit on
to consumers.'' And you also said, ``Capital and liquidity
levels at our largest, most systemically important banks are at
multi-decade highs.''
My constituents sent me here to lower costs for working
families, so increasing borrowing costs really hits them hard.
As the Fed considers new capital requirements, how do you
intend to strike that balance between the tradeoff that you
talked about in your written response?
Mr. Powell. That is the balance. You said it very well.
Stronger capital requirements mean we have a stronger banking
system, and means it is more resilient to downturns and crises
and things like that, so banks can continue to lend during even
stressful times. That is very important, and we put a high
value on that. And yet, of course, we know that at the margin,
the cost of capital goes up for banks, and the cost of credit
will go up. So, it is a balancing thing, and there isn't any
one simple model or answer. You just have to make a judgment
call based on that, and that is what we will be doing as these
proposals are made and then assessed.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Nunn. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Thank you, Mr. Nickel. I look forward to joining you at the
next concert with Chairman Powell. We will see how that works
out.
Chairman Powell, thank you very much for taking the time to
be with us here today. I recognize, first of all, that you get
feedback from every sector on how you are doing your job. You
are charged with two mandates: price stability; and combating
unemployment. As my colleagues have discussed today, the labor
market is clearly very tight, and you should be credited with
succeeding in maximum employment and being a partner in this.
Unfortunately, as we have also heard and as the country is
experiencing, we haven't collectively been as lucky in terms of
price stability. Core CPI is still over 4 percent, and services
and housing costs remain very sticky.
Given the economic uncertainty on how the Fed will bring
inflation to its 2-percent mandate, can you quickly touch on
how the bank capital requirements Vice Chair Barr is
proposing--and I will be specific here. My Main Street
businesses, especially farmers, family farms, and Iowans back
in my district, really provide a backbone on this, and they
depend heavily on this area. Do you think that they will be
facing a more difficult and expensive credit environment as a
result of this?
Mr. Powell. I don't think so, particularly in the near
term. First of all, many of those people will be dealing with
regional and community banks rather than with the G-SIBs. But
even with the G-SIBs, as I mentioned, the phase in for higher
capital, the process of publishing and then getting comments
and evaluating those comments, and then coming to a broad
agreement and consensus on what to implement and over what time
period, that takes time, and so it will not be important.
During this period of the next year or two when we are getting
inflation back down to target and the economy is kind of
normalizing, I don't think the capital changes will have much
of an effect in the near term.
Mr. Nunn. Mr. Chairman, let me be sure that I am hearing
you correctly. Vice Chair Barr is engaging with small
businesses throughout the Midwest right now on potential knock-
on effects from this holistic review. Some economic studies
have found these knock-on effects will increase borrowing
between $50 billion and $200 billion. As we look to cut this in
half, is that the right thing to be doing?
Mr. Powell. Sorry, cut in half?
Mr. Nunn. The inflation rate.
Mr. Powell. Honestly, I don't think the two are really in
conflict. We have an obligation to bring inflation back down to
2 percent over time, and we will do that, and we will use our
tools to do that, but I think the question of bank capital is
real. I don't see it as a key factor in how we think about
inflation because, again, it will take quite a while to decide
what to do and then to implement. Some of the changes we are
talking about will have multiple-year phase-in periods, for
example.
Mr. Nunn. Mr. Chairman, let me ask you on that
implementation timeline, particularly for new capital
standards, you said it would be some years before it would go
into effect. According to a report published last year by the
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, in the case of the
implementation of Basel III, banks began to increase their
capital ratios, ``prior to the publication of specific language
applicable to U.S. banks, and the bank responses we estimate to
take place well before Basel III rules started to come into
force after 2014.'' Do you agree with the Cleveland Fed, and do
you believe that our banks will begin to adjust as soon as the
proposal is released?
Mr. Powell. Yes, I do, and it is not an absolute thing
where they will wait until the effective date. They will
certainly, and they may even be starting, but I would think the
earlier you start, the more gradual the path will be.
Mr. Nunn. Very quickly, I want to turn to a different
subject which has been brought up by a number of my banks back
home relating to a central bank digital currency (CBDC) or any
Federal-issued coin. We have seen how this Administration in
the last Congress wanted to require anyone who made more than
$600 on a third-party settlement organization like an eBay
purchase has to report that to the IRS. The existing threshold
before the law was modified was $20,000. That is how far this
Administration wants to peek behind the curtain of what my
constituents are spending their money on.
And $600 in Iowa doesn't go a long way. It is the
equivalent of a PlayStation or paying for your kid's dance
classes. I am a dad of six. I digress on this, but I do want to
know, specifically for my constituents back home, your thoughts
on creating a central bank digital currency that tracks
individuals, and if the Fed were to offer a direct individual
account to citizens, wouldn't that be a direct threat to the
financial privacy of many Americans?
Mr. Powell. Potentially, and that is why it is not
something we support. We would not support accounts at the
Federal Reserve by individuals. If we were to--and we are a
long way from this--support that at some point in the future, a
CBDC would be one that was intermediated through the banking
system and not directly at the Fed for exactly the reason you
point out.
Mr. Nunn. I am very happy to hear that. I think that is a
good partnership with the individuals there and a respect for
Americans across-the-board. With that, I yield back.
I now recognize the gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms.
Pettersen, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Chair Powell, for being with us again today.
I come from Colorado. I was in the legislature for 10
years, and when the pandemic happened, I was one of the people
who were unfortunately elected during that difficult time. When
I think about what our country was going through a few years
ago, where our economy was almost in free fall, completely shut
down, our local governments were slashing their budgets, they
were laying people off, and what that moment meant that we had
to do in stepping up at the national level to infuse dollars to
save our country's economy. My frustration here is that we
continue to talk about inflation as if it was spending just to
spend money, instead of acknowledging the urgent crisis that
this country and this world was in, and what we needed to do in
the moment to make sure that we were able to recover, keep our
small businesses afloat, our local governments, and ultimately
recover much more quickly than others.
Since we talk about this often. I would like to know, if
you look to other countries around the world who didn't infuse
dollars like we did, are there countries that we can look at to
compare what the outcomes would be and what their recovery is
like now?
Mr. Powell. Our recovery is by far the strongest of any
country, and I would say the inflation that we have--actually,
everybody has very high inflation, the United Kingdom, and many
countries within Europe as well.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you. That was my next question, how we
compare to other highly-developed economies on our recovery. It
sounds like in the emergency that we were in, the hopefully
once-in-a-century global pandemic, that the United States
ultimately met the moment, and that when the American people
look at what has been done, we should feel really good about
where we are, but we know we have a long way to go.
I also want to acknowledge something that comes up often,
that rising debt leads to higher rates of inflation. Doesn't
that also include tax cuts, trillions of dollars of tax cuts
that we couldn't afford, that went on our rising debt?
Mr. Powell. In terms of today's inflation? To your point, I
think if you look around the world, there is a common factor
that has driven inflation very high in lots of advanced
economies, and it is the pandemic and it is everything about
the pandemic: the closing of the economy; the reopening of the
economy; the fiscal support; the monetary support; all of the
things that happened went into high inflation. And inflation is
coming down. We will look back on this, and we will be able to
look back at a period of very high inflation, but I think it is
not just monetary and fiscal policy. It is also just things to
do with the pandemic, various shocks.
Ms. Pettersen. Absolutely. It is hard to believe where we
were a few years ago and where we are now, although we do have
challenges ahead. Another frustration that I have here is our
failed policies around immigration reform and providing legal
pathways for workers here in this country. When I talk to
business leaders across the country, they say that the number-
one thing that we could do to address inflation is to address
legal pathways for people who want to work here. You say your
job is to address inflation. You are still limited only within
the tools that you have. My question to you is, would an
increased labor supply help supply chain issues and inflation
in this country?
Mr. Powell. We are seeing that now very much. A little bit
to our surprise, we have seen a bounce-back in labor force
participation and also a significant return to the prior trend
in immigration. And that, we believe, and most analysts would
say, is part of why employers are finding the labor market to
be a little bit less tight now. It is still extremely tight,
but more labor supply is helping the labor market get back into
balance, including through immigration.
Ms. Pettersen. Great. Thank you. Another concern that I
have is our inability to address legal pathways toward the
United States and the consequences of not doing that to our
economy, I really worry about, in the long term, if we don't
address our labor shortage. I would like to know, if we are
unable to provide these pathways, looking at the needs of this
country, do you see this contributing to the rising costs and
inflation here in the United States in the long term?
Mr. Powell. I am not sure about the long term, but I would
say that, right now still, employers are reporting a very
significant excess of demand for workers over the supply of
workers, and so there is a lot of demand out there for people
to work.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The gentlelady's time
has expired.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. De La Cruz,
for 5 minutes.
Ms. De La Cruz. I thank the chairman for holding this
important hearing today. It is critical that this committee
continue to explore how the Biden Administration's ill-
conceived policy and regulatory approaches are harming our
nation's economy. And thank you, Chair Powell, for appearing
before us today.
I would like to lead off with a question that I posed to
Vice Chair Barr when he recently appeared before this
committee. As the Representative for a largely-rural district
where my constituents, of which 86 percent are Hispanic,
heavily rely on smaller institutions or community banking
institutions for their financial needs, I am concerned about
Mr. Barr's focus on factors that aren't necessarily material to
the recent bank failures. His report on Silicon Valley Bank
seemed to go out of its way to advocate for higher capital
levels as a cure for the recent bank failures instead of the
failures of regulators and bank mismanagement.
In fact, one of your other Federal Reserve colleagues,
Governor Bowman, echoed these concerns in recent remarks when
she said, ``The unique nature and business models of the banks
that recently failed, in my view, do not justify imposing new,
overly complex regulatory and supervisory expectations on a
broad range of banks. If we allow this to occur, we will end up
with a system of significantly fewer banks serving
significantly fewer customers. Those who will likely bear the
burden of this new banking system are those at the lower end of
the economic spectrum, both individuals and businesses.''
Just a couple of moments ago, Representative Donalds asked
you a couple of questions, and your response was that you
mentioned how important community banks are and that you are
keeping them in mind with all that you do. As I speak with my
local community and regional banks, they say that the increase
in regulations and in capital requirements will really hurt
them. With that being said, what I find being an outsider in
politics, new to the political arena, is I find that people
here in Washington, people who hold leadership positions, are
often out of touch. So I want to ask you, Chair Powell, do you
personally bank with a community bank?
Mr. Powell. I have, over time. Not currently, but yes, the
last mortgage that my family and I had was--you would like the
story; I can tell you someday--but we had a very large bank
which sort of failed at the last minute to come through with
our mortgage, and we went to the local community bank. And they
knew my family and they knew the house, and they were able to
give us a mortgage without any difficulty within a few days.
So, I have had a very positive experience with community banks.
Ms. De La Cruz. With your relationship with community banks
in the past, how do you feel that increasing regulatory burdens
would have consequences to these community banks?
Mr. Powell. I really think that the things we are looking
at are not about community banks. They are about the very
largest banks, and, to some extent, banks in the Silicon Valley
Bank range, sort of $100 billion to $250 billion. I would
consider a community bank to be under $50 billion and probably
under $10 billion in assets. Those are not the focus of the
regulatory reforms, I believe, that are going to be proposed to
the Board for consideration this summer.
Ms. De La Cruz. And I will also hope that to be true
because, as I said, in my district, we have a lot of community
and regional banks that would suffer with increased regulation
and capital requirements. I have very little time left, so I
will yield back to the Chair. Thank you.
Mr. Nunn. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I want to comment on one success story.
Several years ago, there were $16 trillion of London Inter-Bank
Offered Rate (LIBOR) instruments where the amount the debtor
was supposed to pay the creditor was to be determined by the
London Interbank Rate, and as of June of this year, that rate
will no longer be published. Something unusual happened here in
Washington. A year-and-a-half before the LIBOR hit the fan,
Congress acted. You published your regulations in February, and
the problem is solved.
I want to pick up on the ranking member's comment that it
is critical that we deal with housing. There is a lot we can do
in Washington, but we also need to get cities to allow the
construction of apartment buildings and condos. Someone here
has talked about the de-dollarization. We need to compete
against the euro and against the yuan, but one place where
Congress can act is with regard to crypto. The crypto
billionaires have told us they want to displace the dollar.
They are working for de-dollarization, and when billionaires
tell you they are trying to hurt your country, you should
believe them.
There has been a discussion here as to whether it is the
pandemic or Washington, D.C., policy that has caused the
inflation. We have a perfect test case. Our annual inflation
rate is now at 4 percent. The European Union--where Mr. Biden
is not President and Mr. Powell is not head of their Federal
Reserve--in May had 7.1 percent inflation. The unemployment
rate in the United States is 3.7 percent. The European Union is
at 6 percent. And since the pandemic began, GDP has grown in
the United States 5.3 percent, and in the European Union, only
3.1 percent. I think it is pretty apparent that our policy has
turned out to be actually better than Europe's policy.
Banks and bank regulators have said, oh, how could we
possibly have anticipated the inflation and interest rates of
2023. Today, we have 4-percent inflation. That is almost
exactly the average inflation rate over the last 50 years, much
lower than it was in the Reagan Administration when we had
13.5-percent inflation, and 16-percent interest rates. And that
is why I blame the management and also the regulators at
Silicon Valley Bank for telling us that, oh, this was an
unanticipated circumstance. It is certainly one of the things
they could have anticipated.
I will point out that the Congressional Budget Office and
the University of Pennsylvania Wharton School of Business'
models both show that the estimated effect of the Inflation
Reduction Act on inflation will be statistically
indistinguishable from zero. So, we will accomplish a lot for
the environment and not increase inflation. Of course, the
recent action by Republicans to take away IRS enforcement will
lead to higher deficits and higher inflation. The chairman of
the committee tells us we don't need regulation of our well-
capitalized banks. Why are they well-capitalized? Because of
our regulation, and I do want to focus on whether our banks
really are well-capitalized.
Mr. Powell, are our banks well-capitalized if you value
their assets at today's fair market value, where we have
experienced higher interest rates and the value of the debt
declines? And are they well-capitalized even if you assume that
depositors are not just going to leave their money lying in the
banks, but that the obligation the bank has to its depositors
is valued at full face value, but the marketable securities and
loan portfolio is priced at today's interest rates? Under those
circumstances, do we have a well-capitalized banking system?
Mr. Powell. I think you have to take the capital
requirements as they are for purposes of this question.
Mr. Sherman. That is the problem. Our capital requirements
hide the facts that are unpleasant.
Mr. Powell. Right.
Mr. Sherman. If you don't hide the facts, are we well-
capitalized?
Mr. Powell. Traditionally, as you know, a rising rate
environment has increased the value of the deposit franchise,
which more than, or at least, offsets any portfolio losses.
Mr. Sherman. So, we are well-capitalized if depositors
continue to be lazy and stupid?
Mr. Nunn. The gentleman's time has expired. Chairman Powell
can submit any additional responses for the record.
We now recognize the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Ogles.
Mr. Ogles. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Powell, as you
know, when the COVID-19 pandemic started, the Federal Reserve
began a round of quantitative easing referred to as QE4. Like
many COVID policies, this program dragged on, not ending until
March of 2022. To conduct this program, the Federal Reserve
expanded its balance sheet with short-term, interest-bearing
liabilities on one side, and long-term, interest-bearing assets
on the other, and this was at a time of historically-low
interest rates. When, predictably, expansionary fiscal monetary
policy sent inflation to the highest level in 40 years, the Fed
was forced to raise interest rates rapidly.
Now, going back to one of my colleague's questions about
the bank losses and the result of that being poor management
and failing to hedge against the interest rate environment, is
it a fair summation that management and failure to hedge is
what caused some of the bank losses?
Mr. Powell. Certainly, many banks managed the interest rate
risk that came along through that technique.
Mr. Ogles. But some did not. Is that correct?
Mr. Powell. Some did not.
Mr. Ogles. In October, the Fed suspended its remittances to
the Treasury due to losses. The Mercatus Center estimates that
the lost revenue for the Treasury will result in $760 billion
over the next 10 years. So, it does concern me that Treasury is
blaming banks for mismanagement when you, yourself, had to stop
remittances and will suffer losses.
When the Fed prepared its Semi-Annual Monetary Policy
Reports through the time of QE4, none of those reports
mentioned that interest rate risk would impact the government's
finances. Should that have been disclosed, or did the Fed not
understand its own risk and the correlation to the interest
rate environment?
Mr. Powell. What we do is, we remit all of our profits, and
in the era of QE, those profits were enormous. We remitted
something like $1.2 trillion in profits to the Treasury
Department because we are funding purchases of long-term assets
with issuance, as you pointed out, of overnight, lower-rate
instruments.
In a way, that is what was happening during the QE era. As
we now enter an era of raising rates, that will turn around a
little bit, but ultimately, we don't manage at all for fiscal
reasons. What we are managing to is maximum employment and
price stability, and we are using our tools to achieve that.
So, we don't think of ourselves as trying to attain some kind
of fiscal goal one way or the other.
Mr. Ogles. I guess I will ask this question: When you look
at the roughly $700 billion and below to the Treasury, how is
that going to impact the President's and Congress' economic
plans and policies going forward? Is it going to impact them
negatively?
Mr. Powell. It doesn't affect spending. Congress
appropriates money, and the Executive Branch spends it. So, it
will mean that more borrowing has to take place, and that could
raise rates very marginally at the margin. That is how it would
affect the budget, but it wouldn't have a major effect on the
budget.
Mr. Ogles. I didn't ask about the budget more over than our
overall economic goals. And what I think a lot of us are
getting at is when you look at Main Street America, and when
you look at mortgage rates and how they are impacting a
family's ability to get a mortgage, you will see that someone
who was eligible for $300,000 to buy a home now is no longer
eligible for that home. You have people who are now upside down
due to this expansionary interest rate environment. And I have
concerns about future raises and the impact that is going to
have on small businesses, the availability of credit, and,
again, your average homeowner. The people who pay that or bear
the burden of that are your lower-income and your middle-class
families.
Now, when you look at Silicon Valley Bank, which is
supervised by the Fed, again, I get back to when you look at
the interest rate increases, why there was not more warning or
hedging from you as to the impact it may have on the fiscal
system, the financial system and the banking system, because,
as we well acknowledged on both sides of the aisle, there was
some poor management, but the regulators and the communication
from the government was lacking.
Mr. Chairman, I am out of time. Mr. Powell, thank you for
being here, and I will yield back.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Ogles. With that, the Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the ranking
member. Welcome, Chairman Powell. It's good to see you again.
Chairman Powell, I heard some of your comments over the
last couple of days about the Fed seeking a softening in the
labor market. And as a former union president for the iron
workers, I always took a dim view of softening of the labor
market because it reduced targeting power and that sort of
thing. But I do admit that right now, unemployment rates are
historically low all across the country.
I think in Massachusetts, the Fed number is at 2.8 percent
unemployment, Arkansas even less, and Alabama even less, so I
understand the need for your position. But when you look at the
Black and Latino unemployment rates in some of these major
cities, they are double that. And I can't help but see this as
an opportunity to perhaps redouble our efforts to pull workers
who don't traditionally have strong connections to the job
market and make things happen.
At the Federal level, we fund about 25,000 job training
programs, and according to the Government Accountability Office
(GAO), we don't do a very good job. I think the average program
produces about three workers per year, but I am aware of the
work that the Boston Fed is doing with the Gateway Cities
Program. Susan Collins is running that in the Boston area. And
the Fed actually helps us with data and coordination in cities
like Brockton, Massachusetts, in my district, but also
Fitchburg and other more rural areas. The Fed comes in and
actually provides a great amount of expertise and has done
wonderful, wonderful work.
I am just wondering, are there other tools in our toolbox
that the Fed could use to help? You could soften the labor
market by adding workers as well, and I would rather see that
on the supply side than simply restrict credit and squeeze
companies into a position where they have to lay people off.
And I am just wondering if there are other tools that you think
might be available to us to accomplish that?
Mr. Powell. I will say two things. First, the softening
that we have seen so far in the labor market has been around
job openings declining. It has not been around unemployment
increasing. We have seen some wages moderating back toward more
sustainable levels. You will remember well the labor market
before the pandemic where we had 2-percent inflation and a
really, really tight labor market with no inflation, and a lot
of the gains were going to people at the lower end. That is
where we all want to get back to because what we have now is a
very tight labor market, but inflation is so high that it is
eating up the wage gains that these people make, so we need to
get away from that.
In terms of other tools, I visited East Hartford, which was
another one of those cities. And I agree with you, we are not
spending taxpayer money on this. We don't have the authority to
do it. We convene people who have private-sector funds and we
focus on a city, and I was really impressed. I don't know if
you have--it sounded like you have visited one or more of these
cities. It is amazing what you can do, but as a convener
really, rather than as an agency that has the authority to
spend money on people. We do think about these things. We think
that the most important thing we need to do for working people
is to get inflation back under control because it is the people
at the lower end of the income spectrum who suffer the most
from high inflation.
Mr. Lynch. Yes. I just think there are deeper structural
problems in the limitations within our workforce. I met
yesterday with the International Brotherhood of Electrical
Workers (IBEW) Local 103 in Boston, and I talked to new
electrician apprentices, mostly women of color, who are working
days and their husbands are working nights, and it reflects in
that very, very low unemployment number. You are getting around
2 percent. It is really people who are in between jobs, so
there is no real reservoir of unemployed workers there that you
can rely on.
And I do appreciate the way the Fed came in and the Boston
Fed came in and big-footed the situation in Fitchburg, where
they brought a bunch of people together, and they accomplished
a lot without spending Federal taxpayer money. And I am going
to continue to try to find ways that we could use the resources
that you have available.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Lynch. The Chair recognizes the
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Powell, it's
good to see you again. Thank you for being here.
I want to continue a dialogue that you and I had about
FedNow, and I also want to continue voicing my concern that
this product is a solution to a problem that the private sector
is already addressing. The Real-Time Payments (RTP) network is
already capable of instant settlement with a much greater
degree of connectivity than FedNow will have at launch next
month or in years to come. And my concern is also that the Fed
has an undeniable advantage over the private sector in the
payment space as it can clear transactions through Fed master
accounts. Furthermore, the Fed already has options to improve
transaction speeds through existing services. For example, the
Fed has discussed extending the operation hours for the
National Settlement Service since 2015.
My first question is, why not respond to industry demand by
improving existing services instead of launching a new one that
can compete with private industry?
Mr. Powell. As you may remember, we surveyed all of the
banks, not just the large banks, who set up RTP, which was a
very positive development that we supported, and,
overwhelmingly, the smaller banks wanted us to set up FedNow.
This was a very overwhelming few among smaller banks. They
wanted a Fed alternative to RTP, so we set it up. And I would
agree with you that that is not a reason not to work on the
efficiency of our other payment services, and I hope we are
doing that--I know we are doing that.
Mr. Loudermilk. We had also discussed in the past about
setting up some guardrails to protect customers from accidental
or fraudulent transactions, and we know that is a big issue
across the entire financial services sector. And in response to
that, you know that the banks already have procedures for
customers to report unintentional transactions, and FedNow will
come up with a suite of features as well to help institutions
investigate and remedy any unintentional or fraudulent
transactions. However, with real-time settlements, this becomes
a whole lot more difficult than just debiting the account that
receives funds by mistake. Can you elaborate on how you are
going to handle this protection?
Mr. Powell. Yes, and of course, RTP faces the exact same
issues. It is a problem with real-time payments. You just have
to have very high, extra high levels of security around the
payments, whom the payee is, and that sort of thing. And we do
think we can master that and build that in, again, as any
faster payment.
Mr. Loudermilk. Do you have any ideas of the direction that
you are looking to go? How are you going to be able to resolve
it, or is this just something you are beginning to look into?
Mr. Powell. No, I think we have built in very strong
safeguards. I can't give you the technology answer, but we will
be happy to supply that.
Mr. Loudermilk. Yes, if you could supply that, I would
appreciate it.
I just have a couple of other questions. Will the Federal
Reserve itself use FedNow for real-time payments between banks
in the System?
Mr. Powell. I'm sorry, will it----
Mr. Loudermilk. Are you going to use FedNow for real-time
payments between banks within the System?
Mr. Powell. Yes, that is what it is for, it is an interbank
payment system that allows banks to offer real-time payments to
their customers.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. With that, I am going to diverge just
a little bit. I have dealt, in the past at the State level,
with government competing with private industry. We run into
this problem where the government has an undeniable advantage.
In this case, it had to do with internet services, where city
governments had gotten involved in internet servicing and
started competing against private providers. And the issue came
that the city governments were undercutting the private
providers because of the poll access fee. So, we passed
legislation in the State of Georgia which required that any
municipal government that provides a service that competes with
private industry has to assess themselves the same fees.
With that in mind, will transactions between Federal
Reserve Banks be subject to the same rules and fees as other
banks? Are you going to charge yourself the same fees as
private industry and abide by the same rules as private
industry?
Mr. Powell. I don't know the answer to that. In the payment
space, there are many, many instances of a government-operated
payment system operating side by side with a private-sector
one. It is not something I would advocate broadly for in the
economy. Think about the Automated Clearing House (ACH). Think
about Fedwire. There are private-sector and public-sector
payment utilities operating next to each other in the United
States and around the world.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Thank you. My time has expired, so I
yield back.
Mrs. Wagner. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from California, Mr. Vargas, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman. I
appreciate the opportunity. I want to thank the ranking member,
too. Thank you.
Chairman Powell, I have always had great confidence in you,
and I have told you that personally. Now that you are a
Deadhead, though, I am not quite sure. This is after 50 years.
Anyway, again, thank you very much for being here. I appreciate
the service you have done for our nation.
One of my colleagues was talking about the difference in
inflation rates in the United States and Europe, on both sides,
actually. One of my colleagues on our side talked about that.
And I was wondering if you saw the headline today in the New
York Times about the U.K. inflation rate, and you saw that they
are running, I think, at 8-something percent.
Mr. Powell. Yes, I did see that.
Mr. Vargas. And you were asked a question by the gentleman
on the other side of the aisle about how when the Biden
Administration took over, what you could buy for $1 now costs
$1.16, and that was hurting consumers. And you said, ``I
strongly agree.'' But the question obviously inferred that that
inflation was the fault of the Biden Administration. That is
the whole point of the question.
Mr. Powell. That wasn't the question I answered, by the
way.
Mr. Vargas. That is right. And I was going to say that, and
I will give you an opportunity to answer that because you later
said that the pandemic was the issue all around the world. Is
the Biden Administration the cause of all this inflation?
Mr. Powell. Just to be clear, the question I answered was,
is inflation hurting people? It was nothing to do with the
cause of the inflation.
Mr. Vargas. But to infer, Mr. Chairman, when you say that
this has happened during the time of the Biden Administration,
I think the question clearly infers that.
Mr. Powell. I think you understand the question I was
really answering. I guess I would say, again, people are going
to be unpacking the causes of this inflation. Many academic
careers will be built on new ways to look at this. Former Fed
Chairman Bernanke delivered a paper with a colleague just a
couple of weeks ago at the Brookings Institution on this, and I
just think you see inflation everywhere in the world. There is
a common factor here, which has to do with the pandemic.
There is also room for fiscal policy, and there is room for
monetary policy in the explanation, and I just think it is very
hard to unpack that. We don't render judgment on fiscal policy.
We don't support it. We don't criticize it. We take it as
something that arrives at our front door. No matter who is
President, no matter what fiscal policy is, it is not something
we play a role in commenting on or criticizing or praising.
Mr. Vargas. I appreciate the answer. I wanted to give you
an opportunity just to make sure if there was any confusion
about that. The confusion was cleared up, and I think you have
cleared it up.
Now, I want you to answer a question that you didn't
answer, that you passed on. The question was if Congress should
be in charge of setting the Federal funds rate. I can't think
of a worse idea. The only worse idea, I think, might be another
idea that was set forward earlier, that maybe we should be
involved in supervising the banks. In Congress, we can't even
figure out appliances here. We closed down the government over
appliances. We can't even figure that out. I don't know how in
the world we would be setting rates and how in the world we
would be supervising banks.
Again, I think you guys can do a tighter job of supervising
banks. I do think that there were, and you guys have admitted
to that with the Silicon Valley Bank, and I hope you do, and I
know you are looking at these regulations. It was brought up
that since 2008, 2009, the capital requirements have gone up,
and the banks generally have done well in the stress test. What
was the law that caused the rates, the capital requirements to
go up?
Mr. Powell. It was a combination of the Dodd-Frank Act and
also the Basel Committee.
Mr. Vargas. Of course. And those are the two things that I
have heard from colleagues on the other side, that they just
keep beating up on. They don't do it as much now. It is the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) now. But that was
the choir, again, once again, just saying it is a terrible Act,
but the reality is it probably saved banking in the United
States, and I appreciate it.
Lastly, I would just comment, and you don't have to
comment. I am just going to make this comment. Obviously, your
focus is narrow and should be, but the notion of climate change
is important. I do think that it is affecting the economy. I do
think that it is affecting our world. And I do think that we
have had our head in the sand for way too long on this issue,
and we have to do something about it. Obviously, that is not
your mandate, but obviously, it is important, and I hope we do
something about it. We don't have the courage to do that in
Congress. That is why I think others are doing it for us, but
we have to do something. We see the bigger hurricanes. We see
these things happening and it is because of our participation
in making it happen. Thank you very much.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Lucas, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and Chairman
Powell, it is good to see you, as always.
Mr. Powell. You, as well.
Mr. Lucas. Many of my colleagues today, of course, have
expressed their concerns about the upcoming Basel III
revisions, and I hope you will continue this dialogue with the
committee once the joint rule is proposed and is open for
public comment.
I would like to follow up with a topic we discussed back in
March. I am sure you are keenly aware of how important it is
for banks and companies to manage interest rate risk,
particularly over the last several years. The Silicon Valley
Bank made that very clear. Could you speak generally to how
hedging interest rate risk is an important risk management tool
for U.S. banks and companies?
Mr. Powell. I think you see the reality of it here. When
rates go up, banks are encouraged by their supervisors and
their own internal personnel and risk committees that they need
to manage that risk, and most U.S. banks did a good or adequate
job of that. I would say it is a fundamental risk of banking,
one of the most basic risks, along with credit risk.
Mr. Lucas. Exactly. And on that point, I have heard
concerns that the Fed's Basel III revisions could increase
costs for derivatives end users. Whether hedging interest rate
risk or commodity price risk, I am optimistic that these
concerns will be addressed. Having said that, these revisions
to capital requirements do not exist in a vacuum. The SEC is
proposing major changes of their own. Last week, I asked
Secretary Yellen if Treasury is coordinating with the Fed and
the SEC on economic analysis as necessary to understand the
potential consequences of U.S. banks implementing both
significant market structure changes and increased capital
requirements associated with market activities. The Secretary
responded that the Fed is, in fact, coordinating with Treasury
on this analysis. Are you aware of this coordination, and have
you personally been a part of these conversations?
Mr. Powell. I have not been a part of those conversations,
but I do understand that that is correct.
Mr. Lucas. Okay. Chairman Powell, I would like to follow up
with you on your conversation with Congressman Gonzalez from
earlier today. You have assured this committee that the Fed is
not a climate policymaker, and I appreciate your commitment to
this. However, I am concerned that the Fed's regulatory toolkit
would be utilized in a way that would, in effect, require the
Federal Reserve to make policy decisions on climate change. We
have seen other U.S. financial regulators embark on significant
climate rulemakings, such as the SEC.
Chairman Powell, are there principles you keep in mind when
ensuring that the Fed doesn't give in to, shall we say,
political pressure around things like climate change?
Mr. Powell. There are. And for a starter, one would be that
we don't see it as at all appropriate for us to tell banks what
legal businesses they can lend to; that is not our role. We
don't allocate credit, so what we do is we supervise banks to
make sure that they understand and can manage the risks that
they are running. And we are thinking of that as our point of
contact with climate change in the sense that it is another
risk that over time, banks need to be able to analyze and
assess.
Fundamentally, though, as I mentioned earlier, climate
change is going to be a very important issue for a long time,
and it needs to be addressed principally by elected people
because it has enormous distributive consequences, and we don't
have a mandate to deal directly with climate change as a
policymaker. It does arise in connection with bank supervision,
but that is not the heart of bank supervision. That is just a
small part.
Mr. Lucas. I very much appreciate those comments. On
another topic, I would like to discuss the Fed's balance sheet,
which currently stands at around $8.5 trillion. As you know,
the size of the balance sheet more than doubled as the Fed
worked diligently to stabilize markets during the height of the
pandemic. Now, as the Fed begins to reduce the balance sheet,
could you explain this process and describe the levels of
securities that the Fed would look to maintain in the long
term?
Mr. Powell. The way the process works is that securities
mature and they roll off our balance sheet, and that is the way
it works, and there is a cap for mortgage-backed securities and
also for Treasuries so it doesn't get too large. And if you hit
that cap month upon month, it works out to roughly a little
less than a trillion dollars a year in shrinkage, which is a
whole lot faster than what we did in the last cycle. But then
again, the balance sheet is that much bigger. In terms of the
level, we are thinking about a level that will allow us to
operate our abundant reserves regime with enough of a buffer on
top of it so that reserves won't accidentally become scarce. I
can follow up more with you on this.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you. My time has expired, Madam
Chairwoman.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The gentlewoman
from Ohio, Mrs. Beatty, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And thank you,
Chair Powell, for being here today. I have two questions I am
going to try to quickly get through. The first question on the
U.S. dollar dominance is kind of a follow-up to Congressman
Torres' question.
Chair Powell, in our National Security Subcommittee, of
which I am the ranking member, we have been discussing the
importance of preserving the U.S. dollar's status as the global
reserve currency. Can you share with us the current status of
dollar dominance as it stands today and whether there are risks
to the strength of the U.S. dollar in the international
financial system? And if so, what are some of the risks?
Mr. Powell. The U.S. dollar is still the dominant reserve
currency in the world, and that is principally thought to be as
a result of our liquid capital markets, the rule of law, strong
democratic institutions, price stability over the years, and,
critically, its openness; money can come in and out of the
United States without all sorts of legal restrictions and
things like that. All of those things are necessary to provide
the world's reserve currency. We have them. There is not
another economy that has all of those features. So as long as
we are a country of rule of law, and relative price stability,
and strong democratic institutions, and open capital accounts,
we can continue to be the world's reserve currency. History
shows that this is not a permanent status, but it is a lasting
one. And I think in the case of the United States, as long as
we maintain those characteristics of our government and our
country, then we can continue to be the world's reserve
currency.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Thank you. Let me go to another question
that will not be foreign to you. As the former Chair of our
Subcommittee on Diversity and Inclusion, I asked you and others
of your colleagues, and let me just say for the record, Madam
Chairwoman, that Chair Powell was always on point, and went out
of his way, in my opinion, to make sure that there was fairness
and equity for all people. In light of that, I would like to
follow up with Ranking Member Waters' comments, and maybe
Congresswoman Velazquez--maybe what she was talking about.
Several of our colleagues here and in the Senate felt that
the person who preceded you--it had been stated by many of us
that we thought, through banking deregulation, he was enabling
risky banking practices and failing to combat lending
discrimination, which might have perpetuated racial inequities.
A few weeks ago, Chairman Powell, on June the 7th, you said
that, ``We understand at the Fed that our actions affect
communities, families, and businesses across the country, and
everything we do at the Fed is in the service to our public
mission.'' Could you maybe elaborate, since the time ran out
with Ranking Member Waters--is there anything you would like to
share with us that you do at the Fed that would dispel that
there are things that you are not looking at that cause one or
more Members of Congress to think that it is perpetuating
racial inequities?
Mr. Powell. As you know, we do call out disparate economic
characteristics of different demographic groups, including by
race, and we want those facts to remain present in the room as
we are making our decisions. We try to think of maximum
employment, we do think of it as a broad and inclusive goal,
meaning we are not just looking at the aggregate level. I think
it is important to keep those facts in your head as you think
about monetary policy. I will say, though, that we have one
Federal funds rate, and we don't really have tools that address
distribution and historical inequities and things like that.
Really, the Fed is not an agency that has those things. The
best thing we can do for everybody, including, in particular,
low- and moderate-income communities, is to maintain price
stability over a long period of time, and on top of that, to
maintain a very, very strong labor market. Strong labor market
conditions are the single biggest contribution we can make in
this area.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you. And let me end by saying I
appreciate your comments when you said that you realize that
high inflation imposes hardships as it erodes purchasing powers
for food and housing from the least of us. Thank you so much
for being sensitive to everyone.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentlelady's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and, Chairman
Powell, it's good to see you again.
I wanted to follow up on an exchange that we had back in
March, this past March, where we were discussing the parameters
highlighted in the Federal Reserve Board's legal opinions that
outlined how asset managers can operate without being deemed,
``in control of a regular bank or a bank holding company.''
Letters from the Fed's legal division also include certain
commitments made by these asset managers to ensure the same
result. However, it is no secret that this percentage of
ownership held by asset managers will constantly fluctuate as
shares are purchased and sold on a daily basis.
With the ever-changing ownership structure, someone must
ensure asset managers are complying with not only these opinion
letters--your opinion letters prepared by your own staff--but
also with the statutory and regulatory framework that the
letters outline.
So, Chair Powell, I would like to ask you again, is the Fed
taking any steps to assess or monitor whether Vanguard,
BlackRock, and others are complying with these commitments made
in November of 2019 and December of 2020, respectively? Is that
ongoing?
Mr. Powell. Can you give me one second?
Mr. Huizenga. Okay.
Mr. Powell. Sorry. That is a very specific question, and I
didn't know the answer. I would say this: We are broadly
monitoring the situation. I don't know that we have a
particular focus on the asset managers.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Those were opinion letters put out by
your folks outlining very specific things that could or could
not happen. And back in March when I brought this up, and now
again today, I am looking to find out who is actually minding
the store on that, and it is a little concerning that we don't
have an answer on that. I guess we will continue this
conversation, and maybe you can answer this: What Division at
the Fed is responsible for reviewing and monitoring an asset
managers' compliance with these opinion letters issued by the
Board's legal division?
Mr. Powell. It would be the General Counsel's office. We
don't have any reason to think that they are not in compliance,
by the way.
Mr. Huizenga. But nobody is checking?
Mr. Powell. We will check.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay.
Mr. Powell. I think we know what we are going to find.
Mr. Huizenga. I would like to know what you are going to
find, not what you think you are going to find on that, so
thank you. I will be following up with a letter to include some
more detailed questions on the topic, and I assume you will
commit to getting us a timely answer to that.
Mr. Powell. I think we offered your staff a briefing on
this, by the way.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes, and there was a briefing, and let me be
clear, I appreciate the cooperation that has happened. We have
also had some other briefings. There have been a number of
briefings that we have requested, and, frankly your division of
government has been more helpful than others, shall we say.
I am going to quickly pivot to the committee's
investigation of the Silicon Valley Bank failure. Your staff
has been working to get us some answers on our outstanding
questions. You did your own report. Now, it is our turn, and
can you appreciate that our committee, is conducting its own
independent review of what happened in March?
Mr. Powell. Yes, very much so.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Thank you. Will you commit to producing
the interview notes and allow us access to the staff who
participated in the interviews conducted for the Fed's own
internal review of the bank supervision report?
Mr. Powell. I am not in the middle of that discussion. I
don't know where that stands, so I don't want to make
commitments that I can't back up. But I will be happy to find
out where that discussion stands and try to work with you.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. We are going to be following up for
sure on that. When Vice Chair Barr concluded that a, ``culture
shift''--his words--``happened,'' do you know if the Fed
officials spoke with examiners of other banks, or was this
conclusion made solely after the review of SVB? In other words,
did they find some systemic problem throughout the Fed?
Mr. Powell. The thing is, I didn't play any role, by
design, in the preparation of the report, and I am reluctant--I
think I know the answer, but I don't want to guess. We can
provide you with a 100-percent clear answer on that, and I
would rather not speculate.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Along with the FDIC and the Department
of the Treasury, you invoked the systemic risk exemption (SRE)
for both Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank, guaranteeing
all depositors would be made whole. For example, regulators
could have used the Orderly Liquidation Authority (OLA), the
very tool Dodd-Frank intended to resolve the too-big-to-fail
institutions, while protecting taxpayers. Why was the decision
to use SRE made, and do you think that we have now lowered the
bar to use SRE in future bank failures?
Mr. Powell. I hope we don't have to face that question
again as long as I live.
Mr. Huizenga. We all do. But has a new bar been set? No pun
intended.
Mr. Powell. I would say this. This happened with no warning
in the middle of the night, Thursday night, and less than 12
hours later, we were on the phone with the FDIC, and they were
deciding to close the institution and to haircut uninsured
depositors. So, it was an emergency situation over that
weekend. We could see that there was an electronic run building
up, and we did what we had to do to address that and, I think,
successfully.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Foster, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you, Mr.
Powell for being here today.
Wars have historically been associated with elevated levels
of inflation worldwide, although the relationship is
complicated and wars can have impacts on both supply and
demand. Higher inflation may just be one of the many prices
that humanity pays for the decision to go to war.
Now, we don't have boots on the ground, but there is no
doubt that in terms of supply disruption and military spending,
both Europe and the U.S. are effectively at war in support of
the freedom of the people of Ukraine. My question is, is the 2-
percent inflation target a realistic and appropriate goal
during a time when much of the world is effectively at war, or
should the 2-percent goal be thought of as a goal for normal
times, with policies being put in place that will return to 2
percent when the war is over, or at least when we have
decoupled adequately from the Russian economy?
Mr. Powell. Two percent is our goal, and it will remain our
goal. It is a medium-term goal, so we are using our tools to
get the inflation level back down to 2 percent. We are not
considering changing it because of the war in Ukraine, and I
don't know that that is playing a particularly important role
in inflation today, although when energy prices and commodity
prices went up at the beginning of the war, it certainly was.
Mr. Foster. And certainly, it is an important factor for
Europe still----
Mr. Powell. Yes, the disruption particularly.
Mr. Foster. Just more generally, you have been trying to
deal with this question of how you balance your dual mandate,
and whenever you are trying to optimize simultaneously two
different things, the first step is to put them into common
units. Just to be specific here, let's say that you are missing
your unemployment goal by 1 percent, and you are missing your
inflation goal by 1 percent in the opposite direction. At some
point, do those two cancel each other out? Is 1 percent in one
goal equivalent to 1 percent in the other, or do you need a 2
percent missing of the unemployment target? There must be that
coefficient there in the Taylor Rule and things like this that
try to predict your behavior, but internally, how do you view
the difference between a 1 percent unemployment missing of the
target versus a 1 percent of inflation?
Mr. Powell. The Taylor Rule is a pretty good place to start
there, with the same coefficient on both variables.
Mr. Foster. Is that really true? I don't know. I would have
to go look at it.
Mr. Powell. In the original Taylor Rule.
Mr. Foster. Okay, because it is a coincidence if the
coefficient is 1, because you could choose a quarterly
inflation target or an annual or a decade-old inflation target
numerically and get very different numbers.
Mr. Powell. There is significant amount of research about
the relative social costs of inflation and unemployment, and
you wouldn't want to ignore that research either, so I think
there will be a lot of judgment in this. At the current moment,
it is not a question, because the labor market is
extraordinarily strong, and we are very far from our inflation
targets.
Mr. Foster. But you are getting complaints from business
that the labor market may be too tight. At least, it is viewed,
from the Taylor Rule point of view, that there is a penalty
that you pay when the unemployment gets too small. There is a
target you are trying to hit.
Mr. Powell. But both sides are calling for tight policy.
Mr. Foster. Yes, that is correct at present, but you can
certainly foresee times when they will be in tension and they
historically have been. So, you are saying that pretty much it
is a 1 percent on both?
Mr. Powell. I think that is a starting place. I think it
doesn't lend itself to that level of precision.
Mr. Foster. It is either that or you have to face questions
like you have been facing for the last decade, and just how do
you balance this? In terms of the internet or electronic runs
on banks, it seems like that is a new thing that is going to
have to inform bank capital and liquidity providers. The first
question is, if you get a significant electronic run on a
significant size bank, is there anyone but the Federal Reserve
that can provide that emergency assistance, or do you pretty
much have to be the only line of defense against big internet
runs?
Mr. Powell. I think regulation and supervision can play a
role in that as well.
Mr. Foster. That has been stopping the run from starting,
right?
Mr. Powell. Yes.
Mr. Foster. But part of that stopping the run from starting
is knowing that if it starts, there is someone or some entity
that can stop it.
Mr. Powell. Or the lender of last resort, and that is
something that only the central bank can be or do. But I would
say changes to regulation to ensure that you don't have this
mismatch between runnable liabilities and available cash to
fund their running is something we can address and will address
through regulation and supervision.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes herself for 5 minutes for questioning.
Welcome, Chairman Powell. I want to start by asking about
the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC's) latest forecast.
It predicted the core inflation will fall below 3 percent
within a year. This forecast has been the exact same for each
Fed meeting over the past 2 years and has been wrong each and
every time. Why do FOMC participants continue to make the same
forecast, sir, and what data are they reviewing to make this
forecast?
Mr. Powell. In the world of economic forecasting, we don't
really have any advantage over private-sector forecasters who
have been at this. There are a number of private-sector
forecasters that are well-resourced, and the data are all
public. We don't have private data. That is not how this works.
And I think, essentially, all forecasters have made the same
mistake, which is at the beginning, thinking that the supply
chain problems would be resolved quickly, and workers would
come back to work quickly, and things like that. Inflation has
consistently surprised us, and essentially all other
forecasters, by being more persistent than expected, and I
think we have come to expect that and expect it to be more
persistent.
Mrs. Wagner. It seems that we have moved way past the whole
transitory thing. And for the 2 full years down, they have been
saying it is going to be under 3 percent, and clearly, they
have missed that, so it was just a little concerning to me if
there was something that we are missing.
Let me move on. In your press conference last week, sir,
you stated that, ``The conditions we need to see in place to
get inflation down are coming into place.'' What conditions are
you seeing that show that we are moving in the right direction,
because I can tell you, my constituents are still feeling great
pain from this inflation that continues to persist?
Mr. Powell. There are underlying conditions that I will
mention, but the point is, you get them in place, and then the
process of inflation moving down will take a significant amount
of time, and we have been consistent in saying that. And the
conditions I mentioned would be: first, we need economic growth
to be slower than to be modest, and it has been at a modest
level, so that is happening; second, we need the supply chain
bottlenecks to go away and get better and improved; and third,
we need the sort of mismatch between demand and supply in the
labor market to diminish, and that has been happening.
So, all of those things are happening much later and much
more slowly than we would hope. And my Committee and I do
believe that the process of bringing inflation down is going to
be a relatively lengthy one, longer than we expected.
Mrs. Wagner. It is clear that the spending on consumer
services, for example, a car oil change, a haircut, or a
concert ticket, remain almost unresponsive to rate hikes. Do
you have a projection for when we might see this spending go
down?
Mr. Powell. Non-housing services, the broad service sector
is famously less responsive to and less focused on rate hikes
and the cost of capital. So, what we think that is about half
of the core inflation, a little bit more than. We think, and I
think broadly that this is what forecasters think, that it will
take some softening in labor market conditions because in that
service sector, it is very labor-intensive. By far, the largest
cost from most service companies is labor, so what you want to
see is rebalancing. So, the demand for labor and supply, a lot
of that can happen through fewer job openings and things like
that, and we do see it happening.
Mrs. Wagner. The Consumer Price Index (CPI), which measures
the price of everything from groceries to cars and to rent,
has, in fact, declined from its peak. But the Personal
Consumption Expenditures (PCE) Index, which measures, as we
were talking about, consumer spending, remains historically
high. How else can you account for this difference when it
comes to a rate hike pause?
Mr. Powell. We never used the word, ``pause,'' and I
wouldn't use it here today. What we did was we agreed to
maintain the rate at that meeting. Almost every single one, 16
of the 18 participants on the FOMC, wrote down that they do
believe it will be appropriate to raise rates, and a big
majority----
Mrs. Wagner. Yes.
Mr. Powell. ----raise rates twice this year. And I think
that is a pretty good guess of what will happen if the economy
performs about as expected.
Mrs. Wagner. Yes, I think it is right. More rate hikes
likely are needed to bring inflation back down to the 2
percent, and we are concerned about a hard landing, about a
recession.
Anyway, my time has expired, and I now recognize the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Casten, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And thank you,
Chair Powell for being here.
In June of 2021, at the Green Swan conference, you said,
``Climate change poses profound challenges for the global
economy and the financial system.'' In October of 2021, FSOC's
report on Climate-related Financial Risk, for the first time
identified climate change as an emerging threat to U.S.
financial stability. And in December of last year, the Fed
released climate supervisory principles for large banks that
said, ``The financial impacts that result from the economic
impacts of climate change and the transition to a lower carbon
economy pose an emerging risk to the safety and soundness of
financial institutions and the financial stability of the
United States.''
You have made many comments today that I think are broadly
consistent with that in your role, and I appreciate the
comments you have made in that capacity. Can I safely conclude
that in June of 2023, 6 months after that release, the Fed's
position is still that climate change presents a risk to the
global economy and the financial system?
Mr. Powell. Yes. I hasten to add, though, that our role in
this is an important but quite small one around bank
regulation.
Mr. Casten. Understood, and I am not asking for the role. I
just want to clarify that the reason I asked that question is
because on May 11th, your colleague, Christopher Waller, at a
speech in Spain said, ``Climate change does not pose a serious
risk to the safety and soundness of large banks or the
financial stability of the United States,'' and went on to say
that the risks posed by climate change are not sufficiently
unique or material to merit special treatment relative to
others. Should we understand as we sit here that Mr. Waller was
speaking in his personal capacity and not as a designee of the
Fed, if indeed, Fed policy hasn't changed since December 2022?
Mr. Powell. I don't comment on any of the things that my
colleagues say.
Mr. Casten. I understand, but you understand the concern
that if markets and regulators are to understand that the Fed
has a consistent policy, and one of the members of the Fed is
saying something that appears to be directly opposed to Fed
policy from 6 months earlier, that is a concern.
Mr. Powell. Again, Governors have always had the ability,
and Reserve Bank Presidents as well, the ability to have their
own views on things. And that is going to happen, and that is
probably a good thing that we have a diversity of perspectives.
I think there may be less than that difference than you
suggest. Again, what I am saying is, to the extent we have a
role, it is to ensure that banks understand and can manage the
risks that they do face from climate change.
Mr. Casten. Okay. I don't want to create internal tension,
but I think we are all aware that you, above anyone, is aware
that your words are closely scrutinized, and we were concerned
with the words of your colleagues there.
Madam Chairwoman, I would like to introduce for the record
a working paper from the European Central Bank entitled, ``The
Impact of Global Warming on Inflation.''
I don't know if you saw this report that just came out
recently, but it says, among other things, that climate change
poses risks to price stability by having an upward effect on
inflation, both food prices and headline inflation. And what I
wonder is, without opining on their math, if, in fact, we are
looking at a world where climate change for the European
Central Bank is going to increase inflation, and were we to
find ourselves in that world going forward, would the Fed or
other central regulators say we have the tools to address this,
or we are going to say, well, that is non-core inflation? What
are we going to do in hindsight, because it feels to me like we
have a major bank regulator saying climate change is running
the risk of inflation? But I don't even know what tool you
would use to address that.
Mr. Powell. What I can just say is that for now, this
doesn't enter my thinking in any way that we would, in the near
term, change our inflation goal because of climate change or
the need to deal with it. There is a lot of thinking and
research that over a long period of time, really, the process
of investing very large amounts of money in a green transition
could drive inflation up, but that is not something we are
thinking about today. During our FOMC meetings, we are not
thinking about climate change as something that is relevant to
current inflation or to current monetary policy.
Mr. Casten. Sure.
Mr. Powell. And our focus today is inflation.
Mr. Casten. I guess what I am struggling with is that if we
agree that this is a systemic risk, if we agree that this leads
to inflation, and we don't really know what role you would have
with tools, there is a concern there.
The last thing I want to end with is, in April of 2023, in
the report on SVB, one of the lessons that was noted in the Fed
review said that this is an opportunity for regulators and bank
managers to be more willing to adopt a precautionary
perspective and that the Fed must strengthen its supervision
based on what we have learned. I am trying to figure out with
climate change, if we agree that this is a forward risk, how do
we get the Fed the tools to apply a precautionary perspective?
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Chairman Powell can submit an answer in writing for the record.
And I now recognize myself for 5 minutes. Chairman Powell,
in March, you confirmed to me that the Federal Reserve is a
consensus organization built on garnering broad support before
agreeing to any proposal. And given the breadth and scope of
the potential changes to the capital framework that is under
review right now, that consensus-driven approach seems to be
all the more important. I am concerned that the Vice Chair for
Supervision has seemingly been given far too much latitude to
act unilaterally, especially in light of Section 1107(a)(1) of
the Dodd-Frank Act, which provides the Vice Chair for
Supervision authority only to develop recommendations for the
Board and oversee supervision and regulation.
Can you speak to the process that is underway? Is the Vice
Chair acting unilaterally, or is that a wrong characterization?
And if so, if it is just a recommendation, can you walk us
through the steps that the Board will take from recommendation
to a vote?
Mr. Powell. Sure. I think what you see is very much the way
the statute works, which is the Vice Chair for Supervision has
the responsibility, the obligation to develop regulatory
proposals for the Board that will be considered by the full
Board. As I mentioned before in another context, he is not the
Comptroller of the Currency. He brings proposals to the Board,
and the Board votes by majority vote to support them or not,
which is how that works. In terms of provision----
Mr. Barr. Is he including other members of the Board
currently?
Mr. Powell. I think all of us have been getting briefings
on what is developed, but ultimately, the job is to present
something to the Board for consideration by the Board.
Mr. Barr. Once he presents his recommendations, how long
will there be debate/deliberation, and is that transparent to
the public?
Mr. Powell. There will be a meeting--it could be a virtual
meeting--this summer to vote on these things. In the meantime,
there is a lot of conversation going back and forth now, and we
are sort of in that process now, but things are still moving
around.
Mr. Barr. Our concern, Mr. Chairman, is that it seems like
right now, the Vice Chair is writing personalized assessments
of bank failures and results of new Fed climate scenario
experiments without a whole lot of collaboration with other
Governors. And given that this new scheme could raise capital
requirements by as much as 20 percent, in an already well-
capitalized banking system, and that the cost of such changes
could be $100 billion or more in lost GDP, I am concerned with
your testimony that this would only be a virtual vote.
Shouldn't this be a more transparent public Board meeting and a
deliberative process that includes all members of the Board?
Mr. Powell. It is really just a question of calendars and
where will people be in the summer. We haven't decided what
form the meeting would take, whether it would be virtual.
Mr. Barr. Given that it is a pretty big decision, and that
the law requires the full Board to make this decision and not
one Board Member to act unilaterally, we would hope that the
Fed would hold public meetings on the new proposal. Will you
and the Federal Reserve Board commit also, when the proposal is
voted on, to also include your economic analysis that would
justify whatever capital changes are made in a quantitative
form?
Mr. Powell. I don't know that. I am not sure we will have
exactly what you are looking for. But we will create a public
record that supports the proposal, whatever it turns out to be,
and the votes will be what they are, and it will be subject to
public comment and analysis, no doubt.
Mr. Barr. Well, in order for the notice-and-comment period
to be meaningful, I think market participants will need to
understand, on a quantitative basis, what the justification is
for additional capital requirements if, in fact, that is what
the proposal is, given the fact that we already have a very
well-capitalized system. I don't have much time left, but will
you also commit to proposing appropriately-tailored regulatory
requirements based on the complexity and size of the financial
institution?
Mr. Powell. I will commit to supporting that. I can't
commit to what the final product will be, what the vote will
be. But as I mentioned at the outset, I do think we benefit
hugely from a very diverse banking system, and I wouldn't want
to do anything to jeopardize that.
Mr. Barr. Finally, earlier this week, the Wall Street
Journal published an article that stated that, unlike your
predecessors, you have not focused on fiscal responsibility.
Would you like to correct the record regarding that?
Mr. Powell. I would. Thank you very much. It was just an
op-ed, but it was factually incorrect. There are countless
times that--and you have heard me do this--I have said the same
thing that my predecessors have said, which is that the United
States' Federal budget is on an unsustainable path, which means
that the debt is growing faster than the economy. And that we
are going to need to fix this, and sooner is better than later.
Mr. Barr. The time has expired. Thank you. And the
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Gottheimer, is now recognized.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
being here today, Chairman Powell. I am particularly concerned
that the current regulatory environment disadvantages small and
regional banks. Specifically, with First Republic receivership,
I am concerned that the largest banks were given preference in
the bidding process, thereby enabling the larger banks to grow
even bigger. My understanding is that certain regional banks
were unable to bid on First Republic because of an extensive
and time-consuming vetting process put in place by regulators
that put them at a disadvantage in the bidding process.
Mr. Chairman, are you aware of a regulatory-mandated, pre-
approval process that banks must complete to bid on firms going
into receivership? And is there a notification process for
informing banks that they can go through this process, because
I am concerned that some who wanted to bid were unable to do
so.
Mr. Powell. This is entirely something within the
jurisdiction of the FDIC. We play an important role here, but
when it comes down to selling a closed institution, that is
just something the FDIC does, according to our own procedures.
To my knowledge, there were a bunch of regional banks involved
in bidding for First Republic.
Mr. Gottheimer. Do you know of any where they said they
could not participate, or was your understanding that anybody
could participate?
Mr. Powell. I am not aware of any. That is the heart of
what they do. They have the law. They have the people who have
the experience and everything.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you. Small and medium banks are a
large portion, as you know, of our country's commercial real
estate loans. The Federal Reserve's May financial stability
report said that the higher interest rates may be increasing
the risk that commercial borrowers are not able to refinance
their loans, and that a correction in property values could
lead to losses by banks that hold commercial real estate debt.
I am particularly concerned that such a correction threatens
the stability of lenders and thousands of jobs in my district
in Northern New Jersey. How is the Fed looking at this and
helping small, medium, and regional banks manage their
portfolios or think about the risks of commercial real estate
loans, and what guidance is being provided to banks, given that
nearly $1.4 trillion in commercial mortgages are set to mature
in the next 2 years?
Mr. Powell. We are following it very, very closely, and I
think you have put your finger on it, this is a problem more
for smaller banks, and not for all smaller banks, but it is the
banks that have high concentrations. There will be losses,
particularly in the office and some of the mall sectors. And
what we can do is, there is a supervisory playbook, so the
supervisors are in there, and they are working with the company
to help it preserve capital and do the right things to get
through what may be a difficult time for some banks that have a
high concentration.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you so much. As we have discussed
today, there are concerns obviously that the banks may be
tightening their lending processes and tightening what is
available. Are you concerned that higher rates and the recent
instability in the banking system will lead to a credit crunch
that can make it harder for small businesses to finance their
operations, and potentially lead to rolling blackouts of loan
defaults across industries?
Mr. Powell. We are watching that very carefully. Bank
credit conditions have been tightening for a year, and that is
partly as a result of our rate increases. We are very alert to
the possibility that the sort of shocks that happened in March
might exacerbate that. We don't see a lot of evidence yet on
that, but we wouldn't have expected to. So, it is something we
are going to continue to monitor carefully.
Mr. Gottheimer. Are you concerned at all about the nonbanks
and the crunch that could happen on that side?
Mr. Powell. Yes, the banks are obviously highly regulated
and have capital and that kind of thing, and some of the non-
bank lenders are in a very different place. But we don't
regulate and supervise them, and so it is something we are
watching.
Mr. Gottheimer. How do you think we as a Congress should be
looking at the nonbanks? Are there any recommendations?
Mr. Powell. Where there is same activity, there really
ought to be same regulation. You shouldn't be able to conduct
the same activity. We regulate these things for a reason, and
if we are not regulating them appropriately, then that should
be changed. But if you can just go across the street and start
a business that does the same thing without the regulation,
then that is not going to be effective or fair.
Mr. Gottheimer. With Basel III conversations up and
running, and obviously driving towards some conclusions or
recommendations, is that something that you have been watching?
Obviously, you have Fed representation there. What are your
biggest concerns in terms of requirements, and how you are
thinking through that right now?
Mr. Powell. I think these are going to be very important. A
number of very important proposals are coming, and I would just
put out a couple of principles. And that is, our banks are
strong, and they are well-capitalized. I think that is pretty
broadly agreed upon, and I think we are going to want to
understand how even higher capital is justified. There will
need to be a case made for that.
Almost as important as that or maybe more important is that
we need to respect the diversity of institutions that we have
in this country. And we benefit from having banks of all
different shapes and sizes, and we don't want to push
regulation or capital, for that matter, to a place where only
the biggest banks have a viable banking model. We are a long
way from it. I just think we need to keep that in mind.
Mr. Gottheimer. Or be disadvantaged compared to our foreign
banks?
Mr. Powell. Yes. Thanks.
Mr. Gottheimer. Okay. Thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Powell. Thank you.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thanks.
Chairman McHenry. Chairman Powell, we have two more Members
here, but unfortunately, you have a hard stop at 1:00. Can we
go over just by 5 minutes? Is that okay? Okay. No good deed
goes unpunished. So, we will go to Mr. Davidson from Ohio for 5
minutes, and Ms. Garcia from Texas for 5 minutes, and then we
will wrap up. Thanks.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Powell,
thank you. Thanks for the extra time so we get all these
questions in. And just picking up where my colleague, Mr.
Gottheimer, left off talking about nonbanks and banks and kind
of the regulatory framework, you recently published online the
list of master accounts that the Fed has. Are any of those
master account holders, non-FDIC-insured entities?
Mr. Powell. Are any of them? I don't know.
Mr. Davidson. Could you get that answer back to us, please?
Mr. Powell. Sure.
Mr. Davidson. Okay. Thanks.
When I think about some of the dynamics that are going on
in the market related to banks, nonbanks, securities, not
securities, one agency in particular has been very active in
this space over at the SEC, and it is kind of tangentially
related to the Fed. But crypto and digital assets in the U.S.
has a market cap of around $1.1 trillion right now. It has been
there for a bit. Do you acknowledge that this asset class has
staying power in the U.S. economy?
Mr. Powell. It appears to have some staying power. Of
course, that $1.1 trillion was--what was that, a year ago--a
lot higher.
Mr. Davidson. Yes, it has had some volatility, in large
measure due to the lack of legal clarity. So hopefully, this
committee will help that quite a lot here this summer, with at
least two bills, one on stablecoins and one on market
structure. And it will be clear, not just for Congress, but for
regulators, including Chairman Gensler and obviously, market
participants, whether they are forming the ideas or investing
in the ideas or participating in the activities in the space.
But when I think about participating in activities, one of
the core functions that has taken place for a while now is the
reverse repo market. It has hovered just over $2 trillion for
the first half of this year, and it follows kind of exponential
growth that we have seen over the past few years. What is your
assessment on the implications that the reverse repo market has
on our economy?
Mr. Powell. Not much. It is just a place that holds money
on the Fed's balance sheet. It is like a mutual fund. In fact,
it is, as the Treasury has been issuing bills to refill the
Treasury General Account, we have actually seen the Overnight
Reverse Repo Facility declining.
Mr. Davidson. Isn't there some sort of conflict with higher
reserve requirements, liquidity and lending in the market, or
is there any tension there?
Mr. Powell. I don't believe so. It is just a place for
where, largely, money market funds have been putting their
money. And as rates normalize in the economy, we are likely to
see the Reverse Repo Facility shrink dramatically, and I think
without particularly important macroeconomic effects.
Mr. Davidson. When you think about the implications, the
Fed had to intervene in September of 2019 to provide stability
and liquidity to that market. The fact that the Fed needed to
use an emergency facility to intervene in the market would
normally indicate some cause for alarm. Do you feel like that
was an aberration, and there is no more cause for alarm, that
everything has been settled?
Mr. Powell. That was about suddenly finding ourselves in
reserve scarcity. We had been monitoring the level of reserves
really carefully, and thinking that we knew where scarcity
would start to appear, and the problem is that demand can be
very volatile. So, demand spiked and there weren't enough
reserves, so you had a situation where we had to supply
reserves in big quantities. The Reverse Repo Facility was at
zero for a very long time, and I think it is shrinking. Now, we
don't know how much it will shrink.
Mr. Davidson. I think the growth of it kind of highlights
some of the related concerns for inflation and tension between
liquidity, and, frankly, when you look at the requirements for
capital, in the alternative, returns in the market, there is
concern that all that capital can't be deployed in the same
place. When you have to pick places for it to be deployed, then
it certainly has implications. I would love to follow up with
you on that, and maybe align my own views with the thinking at
the Fed and with some market participants.
When I think about the Federal Reserve, of course, I think
about monetary policy. And we want Fed autonomy on monetary
policy to some extent, a lot of non-market intervention that,
to me, continues to be a cause for concern, continued purchases
of mortgage-backed securities, for example, prevent real price
discovery. Is Fed purchasing propping up prices, or is it
holding them artificially low? It is a non-market influence,
and I think it has some distortions. As Chair of our Housing
and Insurance Subcommittee, I continue to be concerned about
that, but the other thing is really the big concerns of the
regulatory side.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Davidson. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. We will now recognize Ms. Garcia for the
ultimate questions of the day.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Chairman Powell, for being here today. It is always a breath of
fresh air to have you here to give us the latest report from
the Fed.
I first want to thank you personally for working on a topic
that has always been near and dear to my heart, and near and
dear to the heart of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus. I know
several Members have already touched a little bit on issues
related to diversity and inclusion, and you, yourself, said
something, and I really was struck by the words you used, that
when you look at setting the interest rate, you want to reflect
all Americans in the room when you do it. And in my view, the
best way to do that is to make sure that the people at the
table making those interest rates decisions reflect what
America looks like.
Last month, joining you was Adriana Kugler, who was
nominated as the first Hispanic to ever serve on the Federal
Reserve Board of Governors in its 109-year history. It took a
while, but we are there now. And hopefully, that will help
ensure that when decisions are being made, all Americans are
indeed in the room with you. So, I want to thank you and the
President both for making sure that that happens. I know that
in my district that is 77-percent Latino, we are really proud
of that fact.
But, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to see if you could provide me
an update on the Federal workforce, particularly within the Fed
System, because I think in that area, and you may recall we
have discussed it before in prior times that you have been
here, the workforce doesn't quite look like America. Could you
give me an update on where you are at with diversity and
inclusion issues related to Latinos in the Federal workforce
for the Fed?
Mr. Powell. Sure. I guess the place I would start is a good
part of the story, which is with the Directors of the 12
Reserve Banks around the country; that is an area where we have
focused heavily on diversity and inclusion, and I think met
with a great deal of success, with relatively high numbers. We
would be happy to get you the numbers. Relatively high numbers
of both Hispanics and African Americans and other minorities,
and women, so that has been an area where we have a free hand
to act and we can do that. I think in terms of the workforce,
we actually had a particular focus at the Federal Reserve Board
on Hispanics and working hard, particularly devoting ourselves
to a tight focus on generating more Hispanic contact and more
Hispanic employees, and I think we had some success with that.
And it is very important. It is not a coincidence that the most
successful organizations in American society have seemed, to
me, to be the ones that have pretty advanced diversity and
inclusion programs, so that they do have all different parts of
America represented around the table.
Ms. Garcia. Great. Another area of concern for me has
always been affordable housing. I know that this is a challenge
for us in Houston, and also the challenge of combating the
homelessness crisis across America. I know that this morning,
Ranking Member Waters filed some bills related to seeking
increased monies, dollars for affordable housing and dollars
for tackling the homelessness problem. Do these issues impact
the inflation rate and the work that you are doing to lower the
cost of housing for all Americans?
Mr. Powell. I think it may have a marginal effect on
inflation. I would point to things like workforce
participation; people need housing so that they can get to the
places where the jobs are. And in many metropolitan areas, the
rents are very high, so people are having to drive very long
routes to get to work. And labor force participation has an
important effect on labor supply, which has an effect
indirectly on inflation as well.
Ms. Garcia. How long have we had the 2-percent goal for
inflation rate?
Mr. Powell. Unofficially, for a quarter of a century, and
officially, since 2012, and other central banks----
Ms. Garcia. What factors would have to occur for you to
reconsider the 2 percent, since it is been there for so long?
Mr. Powell. What would have to happen for us to reconsider
it?
Ms. Garcia. Yes.
Mr. Powell. I can't really think of anything. Nothing
during my tenure will happen to cause me to want to reconsider
it. If you come back in 100 years, it will probably be
different, but it is some unforeseen circumstance, I would say.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Chairman McHenry. I would like to thank Chair Powell for
his testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place his responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
Chair Powell, I ask you and your team to please respond no
later than July 30, 2023.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
Mr. Powell. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:08 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

A P P E N D I X

June 21, 2023
