- OVERSIGHT OF THE FINANCIAL CRIMES ENFORCEMENT NETWORK (FINCEN) AND THE OFFICE OF TERRORISM AND FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE (TFI)

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE FINANCIAL CRIMES
ENFORCEMENT NETWORK (FINCEN) AND
THE OFFICE OF TERRORISM AND
FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE (TFI)

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 14, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-74

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-279 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
February 14, 2024............................................     1
Appendix:
February 14, 2024............................................    65

WITNESSES
Wednesday, February 14, 2024

Gacki, Andrea M., Director, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
(FinCEN).......................................................     6
Nelson, Hon. Brian E., Under Secretary for Terrorism and
Financial Intelligence (TFI), U.S. Department of the Treasury..     5

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Gacki, Andrea M..............................................    66
Nelson, Hon. Brian E.........................................    78

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Beatty, Hon. Joyce:
Written statement of Democrats Abroad........................    88
Huizenga, Hon. Bill:
Written statement of the Mercatus Center at George Mason
University.................................................    91
Luetkemeyer, Hon. Blaine:
Written statement of AICPA...................................    99
Written statement of the American Bankers Association (ABA)..   101
Written statement of America's Credit Unions.................   108
Written statement of the Bank Policy Institute (BPI).........   111
Written statement of the Independent Community Bankers of
America (ICBA).............................................   116
Nunn, Hon. Zach:
Bloomberg, ``The Oil Was From Iran. The Insurance Was From
New York,'' dated February 8, 2024.........................   118
Written statement of the NFIB................................   128
Pressley, Hon. Ayanna:
FACT Coalition: ``Dirty Money and the Destruction of the
Amazon,'' 2023.............................................   131
Waters, Hon. Maxine:
Written statement of the Bank Policy Institute (BPI).........   204
Written statement of the Free Speech Coalition...............   209
The Global Anticorruption Blog, ``A Welcome Mat for
Corruption,'' dated December 2023..........................   213
Written statement of the Small Business Majority.............   216
Transparency International U.S., ``Guest Post: Corporate
Transparency Is Easy,'' dated November 14, 2023............   218
Gacki, Andrea M.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative De La Cruz..................................   252
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Fitzgerald..................................   240
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Garbarino...................................   244
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................   246
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Kim.........................................   234
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Luetkemeyer.................................   230
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nickel......................................   256
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Rose........................................   233
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Velazquez...................................   250
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   265
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nikema Williams.............................   260
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Roger Williams..............................   236
Nelson, Hon. Brian E.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative De La Cruz..................................   281
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Fitzgerald..................................   279
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nickel......................................   283
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Ogles.......................................   299
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   287

OVERSIGHT OF THE FINANCIAL CRIMES
ENFORCEMENT NETWORK (FINCEN) AND
THE OFFICE OF TERRORISM AND
FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE (TFI)

----------

Wednesday, February 14, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick McHenry
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives McHenry, Lucas, Sessions,
Posey, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Wagner, Barr, Williams of Texas,
Hill, Emmer, Loudermilk, Mooney, Davidson, Rose, Steil,
Timmons, Norman, Meuser, Fitzgerald, Garbarino, Kim, Flood,
Lawler, Nunn, De La Cruz, Houchin, Ogles; Waters, Sherman,
Meeks, Lynch, Himes, Foster, Beatty, Vargas, Gottheimer,
Gonzalez, Casten, Pressley, Tlaib, Torres, Garcia, Williams of
Georgia, Nickel, and Pettersen.
Chairman McHenry. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Oversight of the Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) and the Office of Terrorism
and Financial Intelligence (TFI).
I now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Welcome, Under Secretary Nelson, and Director Gacki. More
than 4 years ago, Republicans worked in good faith with our
colleagues on the other side of the aisle to pass the Corporate
Transparency Act, or CTA. With the CTA, Congress intended to
enhance our national security by preventing bad actors like
China, Russia, and Iran from using the financial system for
illicit purposes. We did so by creating a new beneficial
ownership (BO) reporting regime. This reporting regime was
supposed to rid the financial system of bad actors by going
after the shell companies often used by foreign adversaries to
hide their proceeds of trafficking and terror financing.
Throughout this process, Republicans were clear: Our
national security tools must be balanced with the protection of
small business owners' privacy rights. Republicans fought for
and secured key provisions to ensure that the burdens imposed
on small businesses are limited, and the beneficial ownership
information is protected just like tax returns; it is very
important that these things are protected just like tax
returns.
However, the Biden Administration has failed to implement
Congress' intent. It has added unnecessary complexity and
confusion to the reporting regime, potentially risking our
national security and further burdening small businesses. The
Administration has transformed what was a simple and direct
program into a Frankenstein's monster of complexity. For
example, the CTA required four pieces of information from
people who are reporting as beneficial owners. The filing form
now consists of 51 data points.
Additionally, Republicans secured the strongest privacy and
disclosure protections ever for America's small businesses. We
fought for guardrails on the collection, maintenance, and
disclosure of beneficial ownership information. Instead of
adhering to the bipartisan agreement and treating this
sensitive data just like our tax information, the Biden
Administration opted to completely reinvent the wheel. We now
have a new, overly-complex, and less-secure access regime.
Finally, it is unclear what Treasury and FinCEN are doing
to communicate key compliance and process information to its
small businesses. This is the opposite of transparency. Every
single small business in America will be forced to comply with
this regime, yet 90 percent do not know they have a new
reporting responsibility, and that is according to the National
Federation of Independent Business' (NFIB's) new survey.
Republicans have been sounding the alarm for years about
the Biden Administration's failed implementation of the CTA.
This committee has advanced several bills to deliver much-
needed transparency and accountability to FinCEN while bringing
these rulemakings closer to congressional intent. We all agree
that to protect national security, we must prevent foreign
adversaries from using our financial system for illicit
purposes. FinCEN has a critical role in achieving this goal,
and Congress has already granted the agency tremendous power to
that end.
We were told that the beneficial ownership reporting regime
would be the silver bullet that FinCEN needed to catch and
deter bad actors, yet, even after enactment, we have been
inundated with never-ending requests for new authorities and
more money.
Now, we see reports indicating that the agency may be
abusing its existing authority. According to these reports,
law-abiding citizens, American citizens, have been targeted by
FinCEN because they have differing political views than the
White House. That is unacceptable. No matter the
Administration, no matter the ideology, no matter the politics,
that is unacceptable. Until FinCEN can show Congress it can do
its current job and appropriately use its existing authorities,
I am skeptical of providing greater authorities and resources.
FinCEN is one of the least-known but most-powerful agencies in
the entire Federal bureaucracy, but when Congress gives you an
inch, you don't get to take a mile. I yield back.
I will now recognize the ranking member of the committee,
Ms. Waters, for 4 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I would
like to welcome Under Secretary Nelson and Director Gacki.
Good morning. Right now, our national security is being
increasingly challenged all across the globe. We see in it
Russia's aggression towards Ukraine and NATO, and in the
trafficking of deadly fentanyl from China, and we see it with
the rise of White nationalist extremists who threaten elected
officials and government workers. These nation-state
adversaries and homegrown terrorists and their destabilizing
bad acts are directly making threats to the American-led peace
and prosperity that has existed since the end of World War II.
So, it is so important that we discuss how Treasury plays a
role in countering these national security threats and why it
is so important that they have the resources necessary to
confront these challenges.
In fact, Committee Democrats have worked to address these
threats for a long time. That is why in 2020, under my
leadership, Committee Democrats led the bipartisan effort to
pass landmark financial crimes legislation, including the Anti-
Money Laundering Act of 2020, and the Corporate Transparency
Act of 2020. While there is still more to do, through these
laws, we have empowered Treasury and its partners to make
significant progress in bringing bad actors to justice.
Unfortunately, Marjorie Taylor Greene and extreme MAGA
Republicans are working just as hard to undo this progress. Not
only are they politicizing critical national security decisions
at the direction of the twice-impeached, four-times-criminally-
indicted former President, but the GOP is also trying to
undercut those in our government who protect the United States.
Republicans don't want you to know that it was Treasury
that brought the criminal crypto exchange, Binance, and its
executives to justice with a $4.3-billion settlement to
taxpayers. Republicans don't want you to know how valuable the
Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) data is and how it has led to the
arrests of human traffickers, fentanyl dealers, and fraudsters
on a regular basis. And they don't want the public to know that
it is Treasury that has been sanctioning Iran and Russia and
busting shell companies so Russian oligarchs can't hide their
stolen funds in the United States.
Ultimately, Mr. Chairman, extreme MAGA Republicans are the
biggest threat to our national and economic security as they
continue to undermine aid to our allies, threaten the funding
of vital programs for countless Americans, and dismantle the
ability of the House of Representatives to function as it
should under the Constitution.
While Democrats continue to put people, peace, and
prosperity over politics, MAGA Republicans prioritize only one
person: Donald Trump. If my Republican colleagues are serious
about combating oligarchs, frauds, fentanyl, kingpins, and
Hamas terrorists, then they must support increased, not
drastically reduced, funding and authorities for Treasury and
other national security agencies. Thank you very much, and I
yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman McHenry. The ranking member yields back the
balance of her time. We will now recognize the gentleman from
Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is also the Chair of our
Subcommittee on National Security, Illicit Finance, and
International Financial Institutions, for 1 minute.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Chairman McHenry, for yielding,
and welcome, Director Gacki and Under Secretary Nelson. Thank
you both for being here today to discuss the operation of
FinCEN and Treasury's Office of Terrorism and Financial
Intelligence more broadly. The work you and your teams do is
vitally important to our national security because you are the
tip of the spear for financial intelligence, sanctions, and
countering the financing of terror and other criminal activity.
However, it has been disturbingly clear from the work of
both this committee as well as the Weaponization Subcommittee
that FinCEN has trained its broad, powerful, and often opaque
authorities not just on foreign assets, but also on law-abiding
Americans, merely on the suspicion that they may disagree with
the Administration now in power. The American public deserves
to know if the Federal Government is collecting their bank
records simply because they wore a red hat to a bank or went
shopping at a sporting goods store. FinCEN and TFI must be
focused on America's enemies, not innocent American citizens.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. We will now go
to the ranking member of our Subcommittee on National Security,
Illicit Finance, and International Financial Institutions, Mrs.
Beatty of Ohio, for 1 minute.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters, for hosting this hearing today, and to Under Secretary
Nelson, we are very glad to have you back and look forward to
your testimony. Director Gacki, congratulations on your recent
appointment as FinCEN Director. I want to thank you both for
the essential work that you do to protect our financial system
from terrorists, facilitators, money launderers, drug
traffickers, and other national security threats.
TFI and FinCEN have made significant strides to increase
transparency, pursue bad actors, and implement historic
bipartisan legislation, like the Anti-Money Laundering Act and
the Corporate Transparency Act. I am very eager to hear about
your offices' developments over the last several months to
combat illicit finance and preserve the integrity of our
financial system, and I associate myself with all of the words
of Ranking Member Waters. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back.
We will now welcome the testimony of: the Honorable Brian
Nelson, Under Secretary for the Office of Terrorism and
Financial Intelligence (TFI) at the U.S. Department of the
Treasury; and Ms. Andrea Gacki, Director of the Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), also at the U.S.
Department of the Treasury.
Under Secretary Nelson, Director Gacki, thank you for being
here. You will each be recognized for 5 minutes to give an oral
presentation of your testimony, and without objection, your
written statements will be made a part of the record.
Under Secretary Nelson, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE BRIAN E. NELSON, UNDER SECRETARY FOR
TERRORISM AND FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE (TFI), U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
THE TREASURY

Mr. Nelson. Thank you so much, and good morning, Chairman
McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and distinguished members of
the committee. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
once again. Since I was last here, the Treasury Department's of
Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (TFI) has made
important strides on anti-money laundering and countering the
financing of terrorism, as well as safeguarding the United
States and international financial systems. Today, I would like
to discuss the threats to the U.S. financial system as well as
the approaches that we are taking when encountering those
threats abroad and closer to home.
One of our key missions is to protect the financial system
by making it harder for illicit actors to exploit domestic and
international financial systems. We do this here by focusing on
our own anti-money laundering/combating the financing of
terrorism (AML/CFT) regime, and internationally by deploying
economic measures, enforcing those measures, and engaging with
key stakeholders. This gives us the ability to remain flexible
to the changing national security landscape while mitigating
unintended consequences of our authorities.
Our response to Russia's illegal invasion of Ukraine
exemplifies this flexible approach. Our Russian sanctions have
two core objectives that we continue to pursue in coordination
with the G7 and other allies: first, limiting Russia's ability
to fund this war by taking steps to restrict its revenues from
energy and its access to the global financial system; and
second, restricting Russia's access to items that it needs to
prosecute the war on the battlefield.
We also designed a novel price cap policy to pursue what
appear to be contradictory goals: to maintain a reliable supply
of crude oil and petroleum products to the global market, while
also reducing the revenues that the Russian Federation earns
from the sale of those commodities.
We have pursued multiple successive rounds of sanctions
against actors who have violated the price cap, including
shipping companies, vessel owners, and opaque traders, without
causing significant oil market volatility. We have also
launched a push to crack down on sanctions evasion and the
provision of goods and services for Putin's war machine. On
December 22nd, President Biden issued a new Executive Order
which further targets Russian sanctions evasion, making it
clear to foreign financial institutions that facilitating
significant transactions relating to Russia's military
industrial base may expose them to U.S. sanctions.
While the events of October 7th have caused us to redouble
our efforts on countering terrorist financing in the Middle
East, disrupting Hamas' financing operations is not new to TFI.
We have been doing this work for many, many years. Treasury is
implementing a sustained global campaign against Hamas
financing that includes our full suite of tools, including
sanctions designations, public alerts and advisories, the
convening of public-private partnerships, and the use of our
regulatory authorities.
We are also closely following the situation in Yemen and
are increasingly concerned with the growing number of Houthi
attacks against vessels in the Bab al-Mandeb Strait. In both of
these contexts, while we do not risk further regional
escalation, we work to make sure that we are mitigating the
unintended consequences of using our authorities, including our
sanctions authorities. The Administration strongly supports the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people,
and we also seek to make it clear that U.S. sanctions do not
stand in the way of these lifesaving efforts.
Just a word on China. As Treasury Secretary Yellen has
stated, our approach to the People's Republic of China in the
national security context is very clear: We will safeguard our
priority interests, along with those of our allies and
partners, and we will protect human rights. Our aim has been to
take specific, targeted actions where our concerns have been
clearly communicated and it becomes necessary to defend our
vital national interests, not to seek a competitive advantage.
We continue to lead the world in mitigating illicit finance
risk, as you will hear from Director Gacki, and we are very
focused on all of the regulatory support and rulemaking
communication around the work that we are doing to implement
the bipartisan Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2020.
With that, I will stop, and I just wanted to say we are
excited to have this conversation and appreciate the
opportunity to engage with you all. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Under Secretary Nelson can be
found on page 78 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. We will now recognize Director Gacki for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANDREA M. GACKI, DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL CRIMES
ENFORCEMENT NETWORK (FINCEN)

Ms. Gacki. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify this morning on behalf of the Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network, or FinCEN.
Since joining FinCEN 5 months ago, I have been struck by
the range of functions that the organization performs, and by
what a staff of about 300 Federal employees can accomplish. The
past year has seen an extraordinary amount of activity by
FinCEN. I would like to briefly touch on some of these
accomplishments, organized around three themes: transparency;
our swift responses to priority threats; and accountability.
First, on transparency, FinCEN is bringing greater
transparency to various structures or sectors that are vehicles
of or destinations for illicit finance. Since the bipartisan
Anti-Money Laundering Act (AMLA), including the Corporate
Transparency Act (CTA), was enacted, FinCEN's highest priority
has been achieving the successful implementation of the
beneficial ownership information reporting requirements.
The beneficial ownership registry successfully launched on
January 1st of this year. In the first week alone, more than
100,000 companies successfully filed their beneficial ownership
information, and I am pleased to report that today, so far,
FinCEN has received more than half-a-million reports
successfully filed. The now-ongoing collection of beneficial
ownership information, paired with the forthcoming phased
provision of access to the database by law enforcement and
other authorized users, will close what has long been
identified as a gap in the United States' anti-money laundering
and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) regime.
FinCEN has also taken two recent and significant regulatory
actions to bring transparency to two distinct areas marked by
illicit finance risk. Last week, FinCEN advanced its efforts to
prevent bad actors from misusing anonymous all-cash purchases
of residential real estate to launder or hide the proceeds of
crime by proposing a rule to bring greater transparency to
transactions in the residential real estate sector.
FinCEN is also working to address the known risks
associated with investment advisors, which are not subject to
consistent or comprehensive AML/CFT obligations in the United
States. This week, FinCEN proposed applying AML/CFT obligations
to certain investment advisors.
Shifting gears, I am proud of the successes that the FinCEN
team has achieved in supporting law enforcement and national
security agencies as the United States Government responds to
significant and multiple threats, both international and
domestic. Much of our work is necessarily behind the scenes due
to the sensitive information that we safeguard and analyze, but
I am grateful for the opportunity to call out just a few
specific examples of FinCEN's good work.
Perhaps no issue has been more front and center since I
joined FinCEN than addressing the ongoing crisis in the Middle
East, and through our focus on the financing of terror,
identifying steps we can take to aid our allies in Israel. We
are supporting our colleagues at the Office of Foreign Assets
Control (OFAC) who have been implementing financial sanctions
to degrade and disrupt Hamas' and other terrorist
organizations' financial networks, and we are directly engaging
with stakeholders, including financial institutions, to ensure
they are taking steps to prevent illicit financial flows to
these organizations, without stopping legitimate humanitarian
support.
FinCEN has also been working tirelessly with our law
enforcement and foreign partners to combat our nation's opioid
crisis. As one example, FinCEN has convened multiple public-
private exchanges focused on fentanyl. Just last week, FinCEN
convened a fentanyl exchange in Los Angeles to share
information about fentanyl trafficking and related money
laundering typologies.
Also, last week FinCEN participated in the second U.S.-
Mexico Public-Private Roundtable with Mexican authorities and
financial institutions to advance the fight against this
scourge. FinCEN has also continued its wide-ranging efforts to
counter Russian illicit finance, including by issuing Russia-
related alerts and driving reporting by U.S. financial
institutions regarding sanctions and export control evasion. We
have poured through over 16,000 Russia-related filings to
identify actionable reports of particular interest to partner
agencies since the start of the invasion.
Finally, on accountability, FinCEN's responsibilities as a
regulator include ensuring that regulated entities are held
accountable, and we take enforcement action where necessary,
and this has been a banner year for FinCEN and enforcement.
To highlight one important case, FinCEN took the
enforcement action late last year and assessed a civil monetary
penalty of $3.4 billion, the largest in FinCEN's and the
Treasury Department's history, on Binance Holdings and several
affiliates. This was a significant achievement made through the
partnership of our Treasury partners at OFAC and at IRS-CI, but
also with our partners at the Department of Justice and the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC). It was truly a
collaborative interagency effort.
To conclude, it has been an extremely productive year at
FinCEN, and it quickly became clear when I arrived in September
that the FinCEN workforce is steadfast in its commitment to
keeping our financial systems safe, and I am proud to represent
them before you today. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Director Gacki can be found on
page 66 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you both for your testimony, and I
will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Under Secretary Nelson, I am trying to understand
Treasury's thought process with respect to beneficial
ownership. We have three separate rules. The first is the
reporting rule on the collection of data, the second is the
access rule that goes into effect on Monday--if that is right,
Director Gacki, Monday--and the third is a rule that has not
yet been proposed, which rescinds the 2018 customer due
diligence (CDD) requirement. So, how many companies have filed
beneficial ownership information?
Mr. Nelson. About half-a-million.
Chairman McHenry. About half-a-million. And how many do we
expect to file?
Mr. Nelson. Thirty-two million.
Chairman McHenry. Thirty-two million. So, we have about
500,000 out of 32 million. Okay. And at the same time, all 32
million are required to adhere to the CDD requirement, so they
are already providing this information. The NFIB survey found
that 90 percent of small businesses don't even know that this
rule exists, so we have a massive problem, but we also have a
massive problem about who can access this database.
Under Secretary, you said a small pilot program of users
will access the registry first. What agencies are part of that
pilot?
Mr. Nelson. Just a clarification, the small businesses
wouldn't be subject to the customer due diligence rule.
Chairman McHenry. They are subject to it through their
banks. The banks are subject to it.
Mr. Nelson. Right, yes. The financial----
Chairman McHenry. So, just because I put the obligation on
a colleague, to put an obligation on you, doesn't mean that you
are not obligated.
Mr. Nelson. Right. If they have an account at a financial
institution, that is correct.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. So how many parts of the pilot
program are there to access the information?
Mr. Nelson. We are thinking about phased access in about
five tranches. The first phase would be those Federal partners
that FinCEN works most closely with: FBI, HSI, DEA, and the
like.
Chairman McHenry. Okay.
Mr. Nelson. IRS-CI of course.
Chairman McHenry. And they will have full access to the
registry?
Mr. Nelson. I will defer to Director Gacki on that.
Ms. Gacki. Mr. Chairman, yes, access to the extent with
guardrails. Any user will have to engage in training and meet
the requirements of the Corporate Transparency Act to be able
to access that information, but through the pilot program, we
will first focus on those high-volume users we have seen with
Bank Secrecy Act reporting, kind of the big law enforcement
agencies.
Chairman McHenry. And when do you think we will have a
proposed rule to rescind the CDD requirement?
Ms. Gacki. That is something we are presently and actively
working on, so at the latest----
Chairman McHenry. Is there a goal?
Ms. Gacki. The statute envisions the rule by, I believe,
January 2025.
Chairman McHenry. Right, but this current requirement, the
reporting requirement, is obligated for that deadline as well.
So, we are going to have people find out this year that they
have this massive new requirement to a domestic intelligence-
gathering organization, and they will find out for the first
time that FinCEN exists. The average small business will find
out for the first time that FinCEN exists. Then, they will
start asking questions about, what do you do, and then, they
will find out that you collect all of their bank records as
well. This is an enormously cumbersome and complicated thing.
Director Gacki, as I have told you in private, you have a
heavy obligation here, trying to fix a mess created by your
predecessor and trying to dig out of that mess and preserve and
protect American civil liberties. In doing so, we have not yet
seen you adhere to these exchanges of letters that we have had,
and I expect better from your agency. We need you to be better
for American civil liberties and to make sure the people are
protected.
But let me get into this question. We currently have
suspicious activity reports (SARs) under the Bank Secrecy Act
(BSA). You process these. You had over 300,000 suspicious
activity reports in January, a 240-percent increase from the
number of reports we received just a decade ago, in January of
2014. In 2017, there was a report by the Bank Policy Institute
that suggests that about 4 percent of SARs are acted on by law
enforcement.
Director Gacki, do you agree with that percentage?
Ms. Gacki. Mr. Chairman, I respectfully question that
statistic.
Chairman McHenry. What is the statistic then?
Ms. Gacki. I would like to get back to you on that, but I
think that we are doing our best to improve the feedback loop
so we can actually draw and explain the value of suspicious
activity reports.
Chairman McHenry. Okay, but let me ask you this question:
Do you collect statistics on the percentages of SARs that are
used by law enforcement?
Ms. Gacki. That is something that we are beginning to do.
It is actually----
Chairman McHenry. You have been collecting SARs for how
many decades as an agency?
Ms. Gacki. Several decades.
Chairman McHenry. And yet, we don't know how law
enforcement uses them, and at the same time, this
Administration has just proposed a new collection for
investment bankers of new Bank Secrecy Act requirements, yet we
don't know what we are doing with the existing information, the
effectiveness of it. We are saying 4 percent of SARs are used
for law enforcement, and you are saying that is not correct,
but you don't have data to back that up. You should have data
to back it up. The agency should be better. And it is not just
a question of public policy. This is about Americans'
protection. It is about American civil liberties. It is a high
obligation.
With that, I yield back, and I recognize the ranking member
for an equivalent period of time.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Under
Secretary Nelson, first, I would like to congratulate
Treasury's Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence
(TFI), the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), and
the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) on a very
impressive year. Since we saw you for your last annual hearing
in April, hundreds of individuals and entities have been
sanctioned, including many from Russia, Iran, and China.
Rulemakings on residential real estate, investor advisors, and
beneficial ownership have been posted or finalized.
Treasury has also been bold in developing new solutions to
old problems, whether it is collaborating with allies to cap
the price of Russian oil, or it is taking on new crypto
criminals committing old-school crimes, including the record-
breaking Binance settlement that will garner $4.3 billion in
penalties for the American taxpayer.
Our Republican colleagues have misguidedly rejected the
$229 million requested by the Biden Administration for FinCEN
for Fiscal Year 2024, reducing that to an astonishingly low
$166 million in their appropriations bill. TFI, which includes
our sanctions agency, OFAC, suffers similar cuts in the
Republican budget as compared to the President's request. How
would reducing the resources available for your mission affect
the ability of TFI and its staff to respond to national
security threats, and what would it mean for Bank Secrecy Act/
Anti-Money Laundering (BSA/AML) compliance?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you, Ranking Member Waters, for the, I
think, accurate description of the key priorities that TFI and
FinCEN have sought to support our overall national security
mission over the last year, identifying how important it is to
close those critical gaps in our AML/CFT infrastructure to
protect our financial system. And with the three rulemakings
you noted, we believe we have successfully started down the
path to do that.
In terms of resources, as you noted, I think, from our
perspective, to the extent our budget doesn't match the
challenges as you described, we will be less effective in the
use of our tools. That is the range of tools from our sanctions
authorities to the regulatory authorities that Director Gacki
oversees in managing FinCEN. We would not be able to enforce
the economic measures that we are engaged in, in support of our
national security in the ways that I think you and policymakers
would find meaningful, and I think we would also not have the
capacity to address new national security challenges as they
come up.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. Last year, the Treasury
Department released a long-awaited U.S. Government-wide de-
risking strategy as mandated by the Anti-Money Laundering Act
of 2020. Having worked for years with those most heavily
impacted by de-risking, including many Caribbean nations and
territories that are effectively cut off from the international
banking community, I was pleased to see the release of this
strategy. Its importance was underscored in a 2022 hearing I
chaired where Prime Minister Mia Amor Mottley of Barbados gave
historic testimony about the negative effects of de-risking on
the people and businesses in the region. Your strategy
recommended several follow-up actions, et cetera, et cetera, et
cetera, so I am very pleased about the response and would like
to continue to work with Treasury to see what we can do to
strengthen the Caribbean with involvement with the United
States banking community.
Mr. Nelson. We would welcome it. We welcome your
leadership, and we have some ideas, so hopefully we can work
with your office on that.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back. I will now go
to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sessions, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Under
Secretary Nelson, thank you for taking the time to be here. And
Director Gacki, we are glad that you are here as well. You have
heard some conversation this morning from Members about White
nationalists or some circumstances maybe related to them
attempting to undermine the financial needs of this country.
Then, you heard from the young chairman about his ideas about
getting into personal matters, perhaps, maybe dealing with the
purchase of weapons and other things. Can you please talk more
directly about the threat that you think is out there?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for the question. In our recently-
released National Risk Assessment on Countering the Terrorist
Threat, we talk about both international and domestic
terrorism. Obviously, we are working across our government with
law enforcement partners on indicators that would express
domestic terrorism but that are very cognizant of
constitutionally-protected speech. Those indicators are largely
associated with indicators of violence.
Mr. Sessions. So, you get involved in a law enforcement
exercise----
Mr. Nelson. Yes.
Mr. Sessions. ----as opposed to a financial integrity
issue?
Mr. Nelson. Let me step back and just describe a little bit
about how we support law enforcement through our financial
intelligence.
Mr. Sessions. I really want to go high, how big is this,
because I have heard both of you give testimony today and
nobody asked for help. We got a happy face from you about how
effective and efficient you are, and about how your employees
are all happy and doing their jobs, and yet, now we are
hearing, well, maybe this is an issue. Is it an issue or not?
Mr. Nelson. I don't think it is an issue in the----
Mr. Sessions. Okay. Thank you very much. Director, we are
very concerned about the numbers that we see here: according to
data from the FTC, in 2023, $2.5 million of fraud reports
totaling $10 billion, and in 2019, it just went up to $2.4
billion more. What is causing this increase over this period of
time from 2019 to 2023?
Ms. Gacki. Representative Sessions, thank you for that
question. We are digging into the data to determine the core
causes of fraud but have, like you, seen fraud be a leading
indicator. I think that this was reflected in the recent
national risk assessments put out by the Treasury Department to
show the climb in fraud. It is something we are still digging
into. We have a Research and Analysis Division----
Mr. Sessions. Has anything jumped out at you in your day-
to-day operations of seeing trends, seeing things to where you
were able to pinpoint something, or did this simply come back
as an aggregate and you said, wow, look at that large amount?
Ms. Gacki. I think I owe you a better answer. I don't have
one single indicator at this point to jump out at this, but it
is----
Mr. Sessions. I am interested in that because, once again,
I have heard both of you, thankfully, coming and reporting the
good work that you are doing, and the commitment that not only
employees have, but coming back to report successes to us. And
yet, I would like to see where you are able to drill down to
see these huge losses that occurred, where they are, and what
you are doing about that. When do you think that would be
available to you for your review, and then, perhaps, to
approach the committee on a bipartisan basis to make sure we
saw the same things you did? When do you think that would be?
Ms. Gacki. Sir, if it is okay, we will get back to you, but
it is something I will definitely get my team working on right
away.
Mr. Sessions. Okay. When do you think you are going to call
your 15th favorite Congressman or write me and say, by the way,
we were in this committee hearing on Valentine's Day, and here
is the answer? When do you think you are going to get back to
me, because, ``10 months,'' is not a good answer. Yes, thank
you, and maybe the gentlewoman agrees with me about when.
Ms. Gacki. We are going to endeavor to get back to you in a
month.
Mr. Sessions. One month. Okay. Thank you very much.
I want to thank both of you. This committee, on a
bipartisan basis, is concerned about real threats, not bogus
ideas and things we throw around. I appreciate you both very
much. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I yield 31 seconds to the gentleman from
Massachusetts.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. Ms. Gacki and Mr. Nelson, thank you
so much. I really do appreciate FinCEN and all the work you do.
I have one request and then one question. I need to have a
briefing on fentanyl in the Boston area, similar to the one
that you provided for the West Coast folks, and we can either
do that on Zoom or we could work that out, but a briefing on
fentanyl. And also, we are seeing a lot of crystal meth in our
area, which hasn't been an issue before. My question goes to
the chairman's remarks around the cash transaction reports
(CTRs), and the collection of suspicious transaction reports,
which the banks complain about all the time. Could the use of
artificial intelligence help us to re-engineer that process so
that we don't have to be as burdensome as we have been in the
past?
Mr. Sherman. I will interrupt the gentleman from
Massachusetts----
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Go ahead.
Mr. Sherman. ----and ask that that question be responded to
for the record.
Mr. Lynch. Excellent. Thank you. I appreciate your
courtesy.
Mr. Sherman. Having spent 28 years on the House Foreign
Affairs Committee, and 28 years on this committee, I want to
commend our witnesses and the agencies they represent, since
our ability to impose sanctions and economic penalties is such
a critical, I think the most critical, element of American
national power. It is certainly more usable than our military
power. And that is why I have opposed cryptocurrencies, whose
promoters have made it plain that they regard the United States
as an illegitimate player on the world stage, they regard our
sanctions policies and efforts to affect world policy as
illegitimate, and that they are promoting crypto, in part to
defang the United States Government.
I would join with the chairman on a concern for civil
liberties because we may be seeing Trump 2.0 in the White
House. It is not impossible. Revenge Trump will certainly go
after his enemies, and it is important that we build, whether
it be for 2024 or for the future of this century, civil
liberties laws that would stand up to someone who is trying to
bend them and break them, and the most important of these may
be our civil service laws that protect government employees
from being pushed to bend and break our statutes.
As the chief Democrat on our Capital Markets Subcommittee,
I have to comment on what a government shutdown would mean. It
would shut down the most significant part of our capital market
system because you couldn't have IPOs or other public offerings
that bring money from the capital markets into the operating
economy, and, of course, our $100-trillion capital market
system would be basically without a cop on the beat.
Let me quickly ask our witnesses here. It is my
understanding that if there was a government shutdown, the
majority of your staff would be furloughed. Is that correct?
Can you just answer yes or no?
Mr. Nelson. Close to the majority, yes.
Mr. Sherman. Close to the majority?
Ms. Gacki. Yes, sir.
Mr. Sherman. Gee, what could go wrong? That is a rhetorical
question. An awful lot of attention is paid to banks because
long before your agencies existed, we had the prudential
regulators. They are huge agencies. They are there to enforce
our Anti-Money Laundering/Bank Secrecy Act, so we would expect
criminals to go where they are less likely to be detected, so
you have the nonbank sector. What is being done as to the
registered money services businesses? They are subject to the
same laws, but laws don't mean anything if there is no
enforcement. What is being done to ensure that there is
sufficient supervision of nonbanks in this area?
Ms. Gacki. Representative Sherman, thank you for that
question. A significant amount of our small compliance team at
FinCEN actually works with our delegated examiners to ensure
that examinations are focused and that we participate in those
examinations where we can. We absolutely agree with the
critical need to make sure that money services businesses are
regulated and examined where we see risk.
Mr. Sherman. The prudential regulators are not there. You
are the only one there. You need to be there. And I will
finally point out that there are only thousands of transactions
every day in Bitcoin, tens of thousands. There are billions of
transactions in dollars. If Bitcoin ever becomes a currency----
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Sherman. ----you are going to have a tough time. I
yield back.
Chairman McHenry. We will now recognize the gentleman from
Oklahoma, Mr. Lucas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. During the past year,
Iranian oil production reached a 5-year high. In fact, the
International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that Iran produced
roughly 445,000 barrels of oil a day, more in 2023 than it did
in 2022. It should be concerning that Iran has been able to
boost output in the face of U.S. sanctions, generating billions
of dollars that can be directed towards militia groups across
the Middle East.
Under Secretary Nelson, could you elaborate on how Treasury
tracks where Iranian money is being held around the world?
Mr. Nelson. I'm happy to do that, and thank you for that
question, Congressman.
Mr. Lucas. And along with that, which countries hold the
bulk of it?
Mr. Nelson. Yes. Just one really brief step back, which is
that, as I think you know, the State Department has the primary
designation authority as it relates to services of the sale of
Iranian petroleum and petrochemicals, but what we have seen at
Treasury using our own authorities, and I think to the point of
your question, is a lot of those funds are associated with
terrorist activities or are going to terrorist operators in the
region.
The thing that we have focused on is identifying those
pieces of the international financial system that Iran relies
on in order to facilitate the transfer of those funds. We have
seen, I think, as you have noted in the uptick of Iranian oil
sales, that many of the customers are in China, so we have
focused and, as recently as this past week, identified and
designated a Chinese petroleum buyer in the context of funds
that we perceived would then move onward to one of the malign
militia groups operating in the region.
Mr. Lucas. Which countries do we believe hold the bulk of
the Iranian monies as these transactions flow through the
international financial service system?
Mr. Nelson. I would say the bulk of it, obviously, is in
Iran, but where we see it going is countries like Lebanon,
which is the location of Lebanese Hezbollah. Obviously, there
are a number of militia groups, including Kata'ib Hezbollah
operating in Iraq, and, of course, Hamas operating out of Gaza.
Mr. Lucas. I would like to focus on the Iranian money that
is in Oman bank accounts. As you know, in July of last year,
the U.S. allowed $10 billion in transfers from Iranian accounts
in Iraq to Oman. From my understanding, any transaction using
these funds must be approved by the United States Treasury.
Under Secretary, could you explain the need to transfer
Iranian funds from restricted accounts in Iraq to restricted
accounts in Oman? Do we have certain agreements in place with
Oman to give us enhanced oversight of such transactions?
Mr. Nelson. No agreements with Iran. None of the money is
going to Iran, and just to correct the record, it is about $500
million that was transferred from the restricted account in
Iraq, at the Trade Bank of Iraq, to Omani financial
institutions. I would defer, of course, to the State Department
on the policy justifications for the transfer, but as an
overall matter, it was designed in the reflection that Iran has
used the buildup of these funds within Iraq to apply political
pressure on Iraq, and respecting that, underlined the desire to
move the money into Oman, the $500 million. And there have
been, as of this date, only two transactions out of that
account, both of which we have reviewed.
Mr. Lucas. Turning our attention to China, China is able to
extract significant discounts from countries with heavy Western
sanctions. Accordingly, China purchases the vast majority of
both Russian and Iranian oil exports.
Under Secretary, do you know how many Chinese financial
institutions the United States has sanctioned for facilitating
this trade with Iran and Russia?
Mr. Nelson. I don't know the number off the top of my head.
We sanctioned a number of Chinese-based institutions in March
of last year in the context of a large shadow banking network
that was facilitating the flow of billions of dollars of
Iranian oil sales, and as I said, just last week, we sanctioned
a front company in China that was facilitating these sales as
well.
Mr. Lucas. If you could provide follow-up information on
that for the record, I would be very appreciative.
And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. We will now
recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Meeks, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Under Secretary Nelson,
the Biden Administration announced the historic Outbound
Investment Protection Security Program in 2023. For the first
time, we will have mechanisms in place to ensure American
capital and know-how do not fund the up-and-coming military
companies of our adversaries. Can you explain why the
Administration settled on the approach laid out in its August
2023 Executive Order rather than an OFAC-only sanctions
approach?
Mr. Nelson. I am happy to take that. I will just note that
Outbound Investment and the implementation of both the
Executive Order and the follow-on regulations are a separate
office, not in TFI. But the theory of the case, which I think
you would appreciate, is that sanctions would not necessarily
get at the core challenge that we see in terms of investment
into sensitive technologies that China seeks to develop and
would create, I think, from the State Department's view, the
potential to diminish the overall bilateral relationship we
have with China with very little additional uptake, versus the
Executive Order approach that the Administration has taken.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you for that, and, again, Under Secretary,
the Biden Administration's approach to sanctions on Russia, I
believe has been unprecedented, has been impactful, and has
meaningfully limited Russia's ability to conduct its illegal
and unjustifiable war of aggression against Ukraine. Sanctions
on semiconductors have forced Russia to use dumb missiles
rather than precision-guided ones. Oil bans have limited
Putin's ability to fund his war, and the Russian ruble has
collapsed in value, hindering the Kremlin's ability to pay for
necessary imports, but I think more can be done. Can you speak
to the Administration's recent effort to sanction vessels
transporting Russian oil and how that has impacted Putin's war
funding efforts?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for that question. We do believe that
the price cap is succeeding in diminishing oil revenue
generated by Russia, while keeping energy markets stable, and
we saw at the deployment of the policy a little over a year
ago, the success in driving a discount for Russia. And we have
seen through the enforcement actions that we have taken over
the last number of months that that is continuing to drive a
discount that Russia is able to receive from its oil sales. We
have seen over 2023, a 30-percent decrease when compared to
2022, so we do think that the price cap policy continues to be
very successful. And as we are continuing to take enforcement
and compliance actions, we will also look to ensure, as we talk
to partners around the world, that they understand the reliance
on the ghost fleet and these other vessels which are oftentimes
environmentally unsound, aren't well insured, and the like.
The decision not to use G7 services comes with some serious
downside consequences. To the extent Russia is going to invest
in creating a separate fleet or a new fleet, they have to
provide significant investment, and that will decrease their
capacity, of course, to build tanks and do other things that
will be meaningful to their prosecution of the war on the
battlefield in Ukraine.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. Let me see if I can squeeze in a
question to Director Gacki. Yesterday, FinCEN released an
analysis of money laundering risk in the investment advisor
sector, which found more than 80 American investment advisors
manage funds in which Russian oligarchs have invested or
otherwise had significant ties. The report notes that the scale
of these investments is significant and may include billions of
dollars. How do we guarantee that Treasury has all of the tools
needed to ensure that investment advisors are not being seen as
an entry point to the U.S. market for illicit proceeds or
foreign cooperation?
Ms. Gacki. Congressman Meeks, thank you for that question.
We will work through the comments we have for that proposed
rule to ensure that we are appropriately crafting that, and I
just appreciate this committee's support, now, previously, and
ongoing, to ensure that FinCEN has the resources it needs to
ensure that we can keep up with this grave threat.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. [presiding]. Thank you. The gentleman's
time has expired. With that, the Chair recognizes himself for 5
minutes for questions. Thank you.
Director Gacki, as a former member myself of the House
Small Business Committee, the ranking member, in fact, I am
painfully aware of the numerous reporting requirements that
these small businesses face, and now, we have added another
requirement on top of all the other ones. The burden is getting
very heavy, and people wonder why our small businesses are
struggling sometimes and why they are going out of business and
why they are consolidating. It is just one straw after another
until finally one breaks the camel's back, and we are getting
close on a lot of stuff, and this is another one of these
rules.
And it begs the question--I think, Under Secretary Nelson,
you made a comment that there are 32 million small businesses
in the country, and apparently, you are going to have to have a
data report on every single one of them. Is that correct?
[Nonverbal response.]
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thirty-two million businesses in your
database. The chairman made a comment while ago about how you
are really only required to ask 4 questions, and yet, you have
51 different data points. Why? Why did you expand your ability
to ask more questions than what you are supposed to ask?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative Luetkemeyer. I want to
stress that the data points are merely fields that go after the
core requests in a beneficial ownership report. And just to
step back for a second, I have appreciated your comments here
and in conversations I have had with you about ensuring that
this obligation is workable for small business. And we are
taking pains to ensure that our filing system is simple,
secure, easy to use, and something that can be done without the
need for professional help, and we have been told that it is
taking most entities with simple structures no more than 20
minutes to fill out this form.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. There are 20 minutes here, 20 minutes
there. By the end of the day, your whole day is busy filling
out reports. You take 20 minutes. This agency takes 20 minutes.
That local entity takes 20 minutes. Enough is enough. You
already have this information. Are you getting any information
from this that you couldn't get from a warrant?
Ms. Gacki. Sir, I think at this point, we are populating
the database, so I do think that this provides a greater degree
and a greater way of getting transparency and compelling those
shell companies that are acting as fronts for the movement of
illicit money----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I certainly agree that we have a problem,
and we need to be going after them, but what you are doing is
enlisting all of the financial institutions. You are deputizing
them basically to become law enforcement officers, which is
wrong, and if they don't do what you say, what you ask them to
do, then they get fined. That is not what their intent is. They
are not law enforcement. They are financial folks. Now, you
said you got a big settlement a while ago from Binance, is that
right, $3 billion-plus?
Ms. Gacki. Yes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Did anybody go to jail over that?
Ms. Gacki. I will defer to the Department of Justice for
that, but I believe the founder of Binance--that process is
ongoing.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. So, somebody may go to jail yet.
Very good. One of my concerns, and the chairman had the same
concern a while ago, is with regards to the access to this
data, and a while ago, you gave a whole list of different
agencies. And I think the eight different Federal agencies have
already shown they are not very good guardians of people's data
to begin with, i.e., the IRS, and the FDIC, among others. This
is almost ridiculous. Whenever you do this, for instance, the
Small Business Administration, that is documented with the
Inspector General report of $200 billion worth of fraud. Are
you working with them to try and find ways to see if there is a
way that you can be helpful with them? Are you correlating data
with the Small Business Administration and all the fraud that
they found?
Ms. Gacki. We have worked very closely with the Small
Business Administration in building the rules, but there are
probably greater areas for our partnership when it comes to
areas of fraud.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Under Secretary Nelson, you talked a
while ago about how one of your duties is protecting human
rights. Is that correct?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. What are you doing with China?
Mr. Nelson. We have designated a number of individuals for
human rights violations in China, as you know, particularly
associated with the treatment of the Uyghurs----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Along that line, can I ask you a follow-up
question?
Mr. Nelson. Of course.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. We just had a Super Bowl.
Mr. Nelson. We did.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Temu had a big ad during the Super bowl.
They use slave labor to make their garments, to make their
products. They don't deny that. They say, no, we don't, but
they don't make any effort to hide the fact that they don't
really care one way or the other. Are they on your list, or are
they getting ready to be on your list of sanctioned entities?
Mr. Nelson. Under our Global Magnitsky human rights
authorities, we take referrals from civil society, and
obviously, there are colleagues here----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. There are a couple of articles that have
appeared in the last week or so about them, and now they have a
big ad in the Super Bowl. They are out there, so I don't know
why you can't do something about this.
Mr. Nelson. Again, I appreciate the concern, and certainly,
we will take on board that concern.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay.
Mr. Nelson. I can't give you a potential----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
With that, we go to the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Foster,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters, and thank you also to our witnesses.
Director Gacki, last month, FinCEN published a financial
trend analysis of Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) data which found that
approximately 1.6 million BSA reports, 42 percent of reports
received, were related to identity fraud. These reports alone
were equivalent to $212 billion in suspicious activity. The
analysis described ways that the fraud can occur at every step
in the identity process, from initial onboarding at a BSA-
compliant firm to the day-to-day operation of an account, and
while our monitoring of this type of fraud has evolved over the
years, so have the scammers. My first question is, this report
was a snapshot of the identity fraud landscape as of 2021, so
would you estimate that the problem of identity fraud has
gotten better or worse since then?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative Foster. We are
beginning now the next stage of our identity project, following
up on the financial trend analysis regarding identity, to look
at more recent reporting. We have no indication that things
have gotten better in terms of fraud when it comes to identity.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. New technologies, like artificial
intelligence and digital assets, give scammers many new tools,
and, frankly, I worry that our regulators will be quickly
outgunned by things like open source generative AI models.
Deepfakes replicating individuals' voices or images are
becoming more convincing. Many of us took notice but were not
entirely shocked by the recent report of a $25-million
fraudulent transfer that took place by an employee who had
attended a Zoom meeting entirely populated by deepfake
impersonations of his boss and co-workers.
In your report, FinCEN noted that public-private
partnerships and applications of emerging technology present
many opportunities to combat identity fraud. I have spoken to
you about this in the past, particularly about a Digital ID,
which is one potential solution that is listed in your report.
Given these developments, could you sort of quickly summarize
what the benefits might be of a robust Digital ID system that
would allow citizens who wish to use it with a tool to prove
they are who they say they are in online transactions, and a
tool that would be securely backed up with biometric
information like passports or REAL ID, and how valuable could
that be in the fight against financial fraud?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Mr. Foster, and I think, because we
have worked closely with your office, my team does, that we are
committed to working on a workable solution that can set up
systems and guardrails related to a Digital ID. We do think it
could pay dividends, especially as the financial system
modernizes and technology is embodied, and we are committed to
working with you on this.
Mr. Foster. Yes, and it is not just the SARs where this
will be an issue. My colleague mentioned SBA fraud, and I am
sure some significant fraction of that was effectively identity
fraud as well, so this will have huge benefits for the Federal
taxpayer.
Now, as you also know, many countries around the world are
moving rapidly toward privacy-enhancing Digital IDs, so has
FinCEN been engaging with other governments in Europe,
Australia, Korea, or Japan, the free democracies of the world,
for example, who have already rolled out or are in the process
of rolling out a secure Digital ID for their residents?
Ms. Gacki. Sir, I think in international fora, identity is
a core issue that we face when it comes to suspicious activity
and fraud. So, it is something that we are engaging in not only
domestically, but also internationally through our Egmont
partnership with financial intelligence units (FIUs) around the
world.
Mr. Foster. Yes. What are the biggest obstacles that you
have identified that are maybe slowing down our adoption of the
systems that are starting to prove very successful around the
world?
Ms. Gacki. Sir, that is a great question. I think I would
need to get back to you on that as to the biggest obstacle.
Mr. Foster. That is fine. If you would respond for the
record, that would be great.
Now, AI presents, as you know, many new risks, as I
mentioned, by assisting bad actors in fooling businesses and
consumers about perpetrating fraud, but it also has the
potential to improve financial crimes compliance, finding
patterns and trends in data that human analysis alone may not
be able to spot. It can also lower costs by assisting financial
institutions to have more reliable and efficient Know Your
Customer (KYC) verification. Can you describe what you are
planning to do with regards to using AI to detect fraud in
FinCEN?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, sir. Through our Bank Secrecy Act
advisory group and other provisions we are implementing under
the Anti-Money Laundering Act, we are actually engaged in an
active dialogue with our regulated entities to see how
artificial intelligence could be a benefit to some of the more-
simple reporting structures that need to be made pursuant to
the Bank Secrecy Act, and to see how we can leverage this in
technology to really get smarter when it comes to reporting----
Mr. Foster. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr. Hill
is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the
witnesses. We are proud to have both of you here to provide us
information. We're always pleased to have Treasury here.
Mr. Under Secretary, I want to start with the beneficial
ownership provisions that you are attempting to implement now,
that Congress passed in the last Congress. That was a bill
that, as you may recall, I voted against in committee, and I
voted against it on the House Floor because I thought it was
not the right way to go about collecting the information. I
urged Secretary Mnuchin to take a different course, and he
didn't, so we have what we have. How many small businesses, do
you estimate, are going to be required to comply with this
rule?
Mr. Nelson. I think our estimation is 32 million existing
businesses, and every year, there would be about 5 million new
businesses.
Mr. Hill. Right. By coincidence, at noon today, I have a
Zoom meeting with CPAs in Arkansas, who contacted me through
the Speaker of the House in the State of Arkansas, who were
stunned to learn about this new requirement, and these are our
tax preparers. These are our front-line accounting and tax
professionals. So, what are you doing to ensure that all small
business owners are educated about these requirements?
Mr. Nelson. We are doing a number of things. We are using
all of the available channels, social media, and we have
created a number of guides for small businesses. I have been
engaging with all of the key associations, including the CPA
associations, and I am happy to engage with that group in
Arkansas. I have been working, obviously, with chambers of
commerce, and we have a big team at FinCEN who are doing the
types of sort of educational materials, both in the format of
videos but also in the context of documents----
Mr. Hill. Let me----
Mr. Nelson. ----and websites and the like. But we recognize
that a number of these small businesses have never heard of
FinCEN, so there is a big educational campaign----
Mr. Hill. Yes. This is why I think we should have used the
LLC passthrough tax form to collect this information, since
this information is already on every K-1 issued by the Internal
Revenue Service, and it was turned down by the Treasury's own
management to use their own bureau, saying that it would be an
exception to share that information with FinCEN when Treasury
and the IRS already shares this information with 35 other
exceptions in the statute, so I want to say this was
absolutely, I think, how we should do it. Are you putting a
notice in 1060 filings, for example, ``Hey, taxpayer, do you
know you need to file this form with FinCEN,'' and are you
asking the Secretaries of State, at their expense, to send out
that notification and link to FinCEN?
Mr. Nelson. We are engaging Secretaries of State on exactly
that question, obviously voluntarily, but I have been in direct
contact with all of the largest Secretaries of State.
Mr. Hill. Good. Thank you for that. Let me change subjects
to another subject that's very, very important to this country,
and to the Administration, with great leadership from the
Treasury, and that is our efforts in Congress and the House
Foreign Affairs Committee and the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee to pass the REPO Act, which would authorize the
President, under IEPA, to seize and take title to Russian
Federation assets in our country, but the bigger issue is to
compel and encourage and nurture all of our partner and allied
countries to do the same. Does the Administration support the
REPO Act as marked up in the House Foreign Affairs Committee?
Mr. Nelson. We support it in principle. I think the thing
that we feel strongly about is the capacity to have
flexibility, as we approach our partners and from a policy
perspective, the need to move in concert with partners that are
housing these----
Mr. Hill. We understand that the bulk of liquid assets of
the Russian Central Bank are in Brussels, approximately $300
billion in round numbers, but here in the United States, I
think there has been a lack of clarity, and you see a lot of
different open source discussions about that. Is it $30
billion? Is it closer to $5 to $8 billion? Can you tell us how
much Russian Federation sovereign money is in the United
States, that you have eyes on?
Mr. Nelson. I can't provide you a precise figure at this
time, but I can, as you noted, refer to the public reporting.
That is a total amount at somewhere around $5 billion.
Mr. Hill. So, $5 billion? Thank you, and that is why it
demonstrates how it is important for our European partners and
our Asian partners to pass this legislation, and as you know, I
support majority-controlled Russian Federation state-owned
enterprise assets being on the list as well. It doesn't mean
that countries have to do it. Do you like the idea that Russian
Federation-owned shares in Gazprom in a foreign country should
also be on the list?
Mr. Nelson. I think that is a question that is currently
being discussed in the interagency, so I will have to get back
to you on that one.
Mr. Hill. Thank you. I look forward to continuing that
discussion.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentlelady from Ohio, Mrs. Beatty, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ranking Member Waters. Director Gacki, I would like to applaud
you and your agency for making the significant and necessary
changes to the final Corporate Transparency Act access rule
that your agency issued, I think it was in December. As I
expressed to FinCEN during the rulemaking process, I was very
concerned that financial institutions' proposed use of the
beneficial ownership information was so narrow, narrower than
we had drafted or intended in the law, and that it would
undercut the utility of the access. I was also concerned that
FinCEN's draft rule seemed to hinder efficient State, local,
and tribal law enforcement's access to the database in ways
that were contrary to the statute.
With all that said, the final rule, which is important,
fixes both of these issues. So, I want to thank you and your
staff, not only for your hard work on completing the rules, but
for your responsiveness. So often, people come here and we say
to them, we wrote, we asked you this. So this is a perfect
scenario for me, when no matter what side of the aisle you sit
on, I can say to you, I don't like this, this is harmful to my
constituents, to America, to corporate America, or whomever.
You listened, you took it into consideration, and I think that
is noteworthy for the record. I know those concerns came from
Congress. I know you heard it from the industry. I know you
have heard it from law enforcement and transparency advocates
alike.
I would now like to shift to some privacy concerns we have
heard in regard to the Beneficial Ownership Secure System
(BOSS) database. Can you explain for us what security protocols
are in place to ensure that personally-identifiable information
stored in the database will not get into the wrong hands, or
what will be in a secure system?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Congresswoman, and thank you for the
recognition on the access rule. On the security of the
database, I want to assure you that the database storing
beneficial ownership information, which is incredibly important
for us to keep secure, has been established with the highest
level of security for a non-classified system set to Federal
standards, the Federal Information Security Modernization Act
(FISMA) standards.
And not only is the database held to a high standard, but
we will have protections in place for anyone who is authorized
to access that information. We will do it through agreements
that we will enter into with different agencies or financial
institutions or their regulators to ensure that they are also
keeping this secure, accessing this information only for
purposes authorized by the Corporate Transparency Act, not for
other purposes, and that we have the ability to audit that
access.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you. Now, let me go to this whole issue
of de-risking. I would like to turn to the ongoing debanking of
many, whether it is small businesses, their employees,
freelance workers, et cetera. Banks and credit unions routinely
point to FinCEN guidance and suspicious activity report filings
as justification for closing accounts, cutting off access to
reliable banking services, despite Federal laws providing no
authority for account cancellations under these conditions. So,
I was glad to see last year that Treasury issued a report
outlining its de-risking strategies.
Under Secretary Nelson, can you describe the steps that
Treasury has taken to implement the strategy to minimize the
unintentional de-risking of customers engaging in lawful
activities?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for the question. One of my
priorities over the next year is to lead the implementation of
that strategy because I think it is so important for the
reasons you identified. I will be brief. I think we found that
the main thing that we heard and was validated is that
profitability drives a lot of these decisions, but there are
things that we can do on the government side, like regulatory
clarity and working with the Federal banking agencies, which we
are doing, and working with the examiners, examiners' training,
the examiner manual, to ensure that there is regulatory clarity
across our entire system so that the expectations of financial
institutions are clear to avoid exactly the really negative de-
risking effects that we----
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, and my time is up.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady's time has expired. With
that, we will go to the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
witnesses being here. I am going to jump right in. I have a
number of issues here.
Last December, our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee, which I Chair, held a hearing in order to better
understand how the Iranian regime accesses money around the
world due to relaxed sanctions enforcement and waivers, both
here in the U.S. and abroad.
Under Secretary Nelson, Iran is the leading state sponsor
of terrorism around the globe. That is acknowledged virtually
around the globe.
Mr. Nelson. Yes.
Mr. Huizenga. They continue to back groups that target
Americans and our allies. We know they support Hamas, who last
October committed a brutal attack on the State of Israel. In a
few weeks, on March 12th, the Biden Administration will be
faced with a decision to waive sanctions on Iran and allow
billions of dollars' worth of Iranian assets held in Iraq to be
transferred to other jurisdictions. They have done this
previously. It is what is currently happening. I know that this
decision is left up to the State Department, but given your
experience and, frankly, your title, do you believe that the
Biden Administration should continue to allow Iran access to
these funds, whether it is directly or indirectly?
Mr. Nelson. Just to be very clear, Iran is not getting
access to the funds. These are in restricted accounts.
Mr. Huizenga. They are in restricted accounts. We know
that. However, they are there and they are moved for a reason,
and it is a handshake agreement with the Qataris. It is a
handshake agreement with the Omanis. And we know, based on
testimony that we had in this committee previously, that there
were at least two instances where there were, ``problems with
transfers out of Oman.'' So, details of that have to be
discussed in a SCIF. I am not sure why, ``yes or no'', was a
classified answer from the State Department previously. But
based on your title, and let me make sure I get it right, Under
Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence----
Mr. Nelson. That is it.
Mr. Huizenga. ----for the Department of the Treasury.
Congratulations. Awesome. Well-deserved. Has the State
Department consulted with Treasury previously or now to extend
those waivers? Have they consulted with you?
Mr. Nelson. They do consult with the Treasury Department,
and those waivers have existed across many Administrations.
Mr. Huizenga. On including this specific waiver, this
upcoming potential waiver?
Mr. Nelson. I don't believe the upcoming waiver has been
teed up for consultation yet.
Mr. Huizenga. So, they have not done that for March. That
window is closing. Okay.
Switching topics here, Director Gacki, I want to follow up
on sort of Chairman Luetkemeyer's line of questioning. I was
here at the beginning of my congressional career during
Operation Choke Point, and, frankly, it was wrong then, and it
is wrong now, whatever it is called. It doesn't matter what the
name is. It is the action of that. I am very concerned about
FinCEN providing financial institutions with, ``suggested
search terms and merchant category codes,'' that would be used
to identify transactions. This was something that Mrs. Wagner
did in our last hearing. I shop at Cabela's. I buy ammo. Am I
on a list somehow? That is what a lot of people, including me,
were asking when we heard this. Your agency was created to
protect Americans and our national security, not to spy on
them.
And as you know, our committee, along with Judiciary
Committee Chairman, Jim Jordan, sent you a letter in January
which you responded to last week. We have asked for an in-
person staff briefing. We are not asking you to move the world
here. This is an in-person staff briefing. Can you provide an
update to me on when we can expect that briefing to be
scheduled?
Ms. Gacki. Representative Huizenga, we will definitely get
with your staff, and we will put that briefing on the books for
you.
Mr. Huizenga. Time frame?
Ms. Gacki. In the coming weeks.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. And, Mr. Chairman, I would like to
submit for the record a letter from the Mercatus Center:
``Financial Privacy Limits: Developments and Ideas for
Reform.''
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you. Director Gacki, I want to briefly
discuss the Customer Identification Program (CIP) and your
interpretation of it. I believe this issue came up during
former Director Das' last testimony before the committee. Do
you believe it is a good idea to collect consumers' full nine-
digit Social Security number in order to comply with CIP's
rules?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, sir. That is something we are
studying. We understand that new financial technology firms
usually collect a subset of that information, and we are taking
this in and evaluating the best approach as we look at the
Customer Identification Program.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. So, it sounds like you are leaning
towards that. We know that there are State-chartered banks that
are working with fintech companies and not banks at the Federal
level, right?
Ms. Gacki. Right. There is a divergence of approaches that
we want to understand and get right.
Mr. Huizenga. Do you believe it should be done through a
formal rulemaking process, not regulation by enforcement, or do
we just need to move ahead with this?
Ms. Gacki. I think it is appropriate for formal regulation.
Mr. Huizenga. I would think so, too, and do you not believe
that this opens consumer institutions----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Huizenga. ----collecting data to identity theft? That
is a concern, and I will have you answer that in writing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gonzalez, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. And I thank the witnesses for
being here.
Director Gacki, in 2023, Mexico received a record $63
billion in remittances, a 7.6-percent increase from 2022, of
which more than 95 percent came from the United States. With a
recent surge in remittances, I am concerned that this has
inadvertently made it easier for Mexican drug cartels to
launder drug money. Cartels use civilians as conduits for
remittances and then hand the money back to cartel workers or
the cartels themselves, a practice, as you know, commonly known
as, ``smurfing.'' What is being done to limit or monitor these
remittances as an avenue to finance illicit activities, and
what can we do to better identify and monitor these laundering
schemes through our committee?
And one more thing. Are you working with your counterparts
in Mexico, and how cooperative are they being on this issue? I
clearly believe there is a lot more to this than what we know
at this point in time, but that surge in remittances has really
kept the peso strong and stable, even competing against some of
the global currencies. It is a real concern for me as a Member
whose district sits on the border. We find huge bulk cash, and
we know a lot of it is being moved electronically, and it is
quite a concern of funding being used for campaigns in Mexico
and to make these cartels even stronger.
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Mr. Gonzalez. The FinCEN team is very
focused on this issue. Immediately after we had an exchange
with a public-private partnership in Los Angeles on fentanyl
last week, that team joined other colleagues from Treasury in
Mexico City for a public-private partnership with the Mexican
Government. We have good relationships with the Mexican
Financial Intelligence Unit, the UIF. But we are working on
making sure that Mexican banks and U.S. banks are working
together to ensure that we have robust, and with guardrails up,
ability to share typologies, and ensure that both sides are
looking at the flow of funds between our countries, and
ensuring it is not abused for narcotics trafficking.
It is a high priority for us, and I know Under Secretary
Nelson has taken a trip to the border and has focused on this
issue previously. I need to get there, and so I will look
forward to working with you and your staff in order to
highlight this critical area of work for us.
Mr. Gonzalez. Certainly. I actually will be traveling to
Mexico this next week and meeting with officials. Is there
anything that you think I should be urging officials in Mexico?
Ms. Gacki. I would just ask that you express support for
the work with the Treasury Department as a whole. We think that
working with our Mexican counterparts is so important on these
issues.
Mr. Gonzalez. Okay. Thank you, and I will follow up with
you and your staff.
Under Secretary Nelson, I was pleased to see the recent
announcement of sanctions, obviously, on entities who violated
the Russian price cap set in place by the Group of Seven and
the European Union and Australia. This cap bolstered American
energy production and created a stronger economy that is
resilient to geopolitical shocks and economic fluctuations.
While the price cap has caused a squeeze on Russia, it
still has its shortcomings, as we know, for example, the
enforcement of this price cap is not absolute, and countries
like India are using refining loopholes to buy Russian crude
oil, refine it, and even sell it back to the United States and
the European Union markets at a higher cost, thereby
circumventing the price cap and keeping money in Russia's
pocket. So I ask, what is being done to prevent these loopholes
and third-party sales, and how are we targeting shadow fleets
to bolster our enforcement capabilities?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for that question, and we are doing a
number of things. One obviously is focused on enforcement, so
identifying those entities and vessels that are involved in
schemes to violate the price cap, either by using G7 services
and then sending energy payments back to Russia in excess of
the cap, but we are also requiring more attestation per voyage
so we have more visibility into the underlying documentation
and support by those that move this energy. And we are also
working, of course, with coverage service providers and
engaging on an education campaign to ensure that we are
achieving the level of compliance----
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, and I hope we keep urging our
partners around the world to do the same, because it is a
global effort. Thank you. Thank you so much for being here.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentlelady from Missouri, Mrs. Wagner, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Director Gacki, last
week, Treasury Secretary Yellen was woefully unable to reply to
my questions about the Biden Administration's surveilling
private citizens' bank transactions. My question to you today
is, what legal authority do you have to justify a search and
request for individual bank customer records?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Congresswoman Wagner. I would point
to the Bank Secrecy Act as a primary authority for the ability
to collect suspicious activities about financial transactions.
I do not equate that with surveillance of all financial
activity at all, and I do not think that----
Mrs. Wagner. Are you are talking about 314(a) or what are
you talking about here?
Ms. Gacki. I was actually talking about the statute as a
whole that allows us to collect. I will say 314(a), I agree, is
a statutory structure that allows us to request information
about----
Mrs. Wagner. But that, ma'am, is for terrorism and money
laundering, not for legal purchases made by United States
citizens. Absent a warrant, Ms. Gacki, my constituents in
Missouri and Missouri's 2nd District should not have their
legal purchases at Dick's Sporting Goods or the purchase of a
Bible become the knowledge of Federal regulators like FinCEN.
Were any warrants issued by a judge, any subpoenas issued by a
court, or any legal opinion provided by your General Counsel
about legal requirements under which banks would be required to
provide this type of information, ma'am?
Ms. Gacki. I want to step back and talk a little bit about
what I understand was going on, and to be fair, I was not at
FinCEN at the time, and I understand the FinCEN Exchange
Program that brought together law enforcement and financial
institutions began immediately after January 6th in the last
Administration, and continued for a few weeks into the present.
But what I understand is that the overwhelming focus of this
information was on violence.
Mrs. Wagner. Was on what?
Ms. Gacki. It was on sharing key terms around acts of
violence, words----
Mrs. Wagner. Bibles? Gun violence or gun purchases? I am
trying to understand here. These are legal purchases. These
have nothing to do with terrorism or money laundering or
anything that would come under data privacy and such. Were
there warrants issued by a judge and a court that required them
to provide this information?
Ms. Gacki. Respectfully, I would have to defer to my
Department of Justice colleagues on that question.
Mrs. Wagner. Okay. Let me ask this then. Director Gacki,
are there any limits to what the Federal Government can ask for
from banks or that a bank can provide in response to a request?
Ms. Gacki. I do believe there are limits. FinCEN has not
taken----
Mrs. Wagner. Well, I sure hope there are limits, especially
about legal purchases by U.S. citizens of Bibles. Are there
certain questions or criteria, such as targeting speech or
religious activities, that trigger constitutional concerns?
Ms. Gacki. FinCEN does not give advice that it is okay to
file suspicious activity solely on constitutionally-protected
activity.
Mrs. Wagner. How reasonable must the government's belief in
the relevance of the data be before requesting this
information? For example, could the government ask a bank for
the records on all customers who use a bank product in a city
on the day of a crime?
Ms. Gacki. Respectfully, ma'am, FinCEN was not in the role
of asking for any of this information.
Mrs. Wagner. Who was?
Ms. Gacki. These were public-private partnerships where
financial institutions and law enforcement were sharing
typologies and best practices to look for violent actors. That
is what the inquiry was: violent actors.
Mrs. Wagner. I need a full debriefing on this, and I want
FinCEN and Treasury to come before this committee, before our
members, before the people of the United States of America, and
explain how it is that the Federal Government and Treasury and
arms of Treasury are asking for information from banks about
legal purchases that may be politically triggered, that may be
triggered by the fact that they are purchasing a firearm or
religiously triggered by the purchase of a Bible. I am not
happy with any of the answers that I have received, both from
the Treasury Secretary, and quite frankly, from you, Ms. Gacki.
My time has expired, but I want a full briefing, and the United
States public deserves one, too. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim. [presiding]. Thank you. The gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Casten, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you both so much for being here. I want
to talk about crypto and illicit finance, and I just want to
thank you for your exchange on the last question. Not related,
but the idea that most acts of terrorism in the United States
are not committed by domestic White nationalists would be news
to anybody who has read a book on American history, so thank
you for prosecuting anybody who commits terrorism.
Director Gacki, I want to come through with just a couple
of quick questions for you just to sort of level set here. My
understanding is that about 2 to 5 percent of global GDP has
been estimated to be tied to illicit finance. I realize that is
a hard number, but is that roughly--you are nodding your head--
consistent?
Ms. Gacki. Yes.
Mr. Casten. Okay. Chainanalysis estimated that perhaps 0.3
percent of crypto transactions, and that is down from 0.4
percent--is entirely tied to on-chain transactions, so that is
a floor, not a ceiling. Is that correct?
Ms. Gacki. That would be my understanding. Yes, sir.
Mr. Casten. Okay. The National Bureau of Economic Research
recently said that in exchange sales of Bitcoin, so not on the
chain, but trading in the exchange, is 10 times the volume of
the on-chain transactions. Is it theoretically possible that,
in fact, the Chainanalysis view, by leaving out the in-exchange
transactions, is undercounting the total volume by a factor of
10?
Ms. Gacki. Yes, sir. I think we would agree with that.
Mr. Casten. Okay. Moving away from exchanges, which we
should be tracking and monitoring if we care about illicit
finance, and onto mixers, the Treasury's 2024 National Risk
Assessment memo highlighted that criminals are using mixers to
obfuscate the source, destination, or amount involved in a
transaction.
Under Secretary Nelson, could you just briefly explain why
the bad guys like mixers?
Mr. Nelson.. Yes. Mixers allow for the capacity to
obfuscate the attribution to who owns whatever that virtual
asset is, and they do that in a number of ways, by pulling a
bunch of different types of coins together, and then when it
comes out of the pool, basically disaggregating the attribution
that went into the mixer.
Mr. Casten. Okay. I appreciate it because FinCEN, the rule,
I think, last year would require financial institutions to
collect report details on transactions that they suspect may
involve mixing activities.
Director Gacki, is there anything you want to add about why
FinCEN thought it was useful to include mixers in some of that
reporting requirement?
Ms. Gacki. Just to echo Under Secretary Nelson, we have
seen the mixers are used to create anonymity in a way that
shields illicit finance, so we thought this was an appropriate
use of our tool, and I will just leave it there.
Mr. Casten. Okay. I am with you. There have been some folks
who have argued, including to some degree in this hearing, that
the proposals from FinCEN are too burdensome, and would require
financial institutions to report a bunch of data on mixers and
IP addresses, but help me out. Under existing AML rules, aren't
banks and institutions already required to collect that
information?
Ms. Gacki. Indeed. We would agree. However, we have
received a lot of comments on this proposed rule, and we are
looking through them all.
Mr. Casten. Okay. I appreciate your brevity because I want
to get to sort of the big meaty question at the end. But I
think you all have been extremely effective at shutting down
some of these networks from Garantex. You know all of the high-
profile work that you are doing, but it feels like there is
this whack-a-mole process going on because now we see this data
that the bad guys are moving to chain hopping, which is this
whole separate thing, and we probably don't have time in a
minute to explain what that is, although if you would like to,
feel free, but I would welcome thoughts from either of you.
Do we have reason to believe: first, that crypto is less
likely to be used for illicit finance than the 2 to 5 percent
of global GDP in fiat currencies; and second, is that question
even answerable with the structure of crypto networks right
now? Can we actually get at the data to answer that question?
Do either of you have any thoughts on that?
Mr. Nelson. I think the technology is obviously going to
evolve, and we have been focused, to your point, I think, on
working through the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), working
bilaterally with jurisdictions across the globe to ensure that
our AML/CFT approach is consistent to avoid sort of the
opportunity of jurisdictional arbitrage. I think recognizing
that there continues to be a need for additional clarity,
although FinCEN has been great for the last 10 years at being
clear that AML/CFT obligations apply to virtual assets, we will
look forward to working with Congress on ways to ensure that
our regulatory authority is clear in this area to address
exactly that concern.
Mr. Casten. I am out of time, but I welcome the chance to
work with you, because we talk a lot about this 0.3-percent
number, which is clearly wrong and----
Mrs. Kim. The gentleman's time is up.
Mr. Casten. ----we would like to understand how big a
problem this is. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim. The gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you, Under
Secretary Nelson. It's good to see you again. I appreciate you
coming to my district in August to hear from my constituents,
especially small businesses and financial institutions, and
State and local law enforcement, about how the beneficial
ownership reporting requirement updates will impact their
operations. I was pleased to see, following this meeting in
Lexington, Kentucky, that FinCEN released its Small Entity
Compliance Guide, as we heard from many stakeholders that the
compliance standards for this rulemaking will be especially
onerous on small institutions.
Director Gacki, since the release of this compliance guide,
what actions has FinCEN taken to properly educate small
businesses on these requirements?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative Barr, for that
question. We have taken a number of steps beyond the Small
Entity Compliance Guide, which we have translated into 11
different languages. We have also expanded into social media in
order to get the word out about it. We have partnered with
organizations, Federal and national. We have partnered with
professional organizations. We are working, for new companies
being created, to meet them at the point of creation. We have
worked with the IRS to ensure that they have information. We
have opened up new areas, new for FinCEN, areas to reach out to
FinCEN and ask questions, including the first-ever use of a
chatbot.
Mr. Barr. Reclaiming my time, you all are taking steps, and
I appreciate that, and the fact that the Under Secretary came
to my district shows a responsiveness to all of these concerns.
But I do share Chairman McHenry's concerns that this is a lot
for these small businesses.
Under Secretary Nelson, will Treasury allow small
businesses who cannot report their beneficial ownership
information electronically to FinCEN, and for very good
reasons--for example, my Amish constituents, who do not have
access to technology--to file paper registrations with
Treasury?
Mr. Nelson.We really appreciated that feedback, and I know
that Andrea and her colleagues at FinCEN are working through a
solution to meet that need, and we totally appreciate that we
are going to have to develop something to address that concern.
Mr. Barr. Thank you for that as well, and again, I
appreciate you coming to my district to talk about this. Let me
switch gears to Russia and our sanctions strategy, and I
appreciate your testimony, Under Secretary Nelson, but look,
here is the thing. The Administration and the Senate have now
passed this huge supplemental over to the House, $60 billion in
security assistance to Russia. There are a lot of Republicans
on this side of the aisle who want to support the assistance
package, but here is the problem. The problem that many of us
have is not that we don't want to support the Ukrainian
resistance and provide the assistance. The problem is that it
is perplexing to all of us why this Administration's strategy
with respect to defending Ukraine and their sovereignty is
working at completely cross-purposes with the Administration's
obsession with climate.
The Administration banned liquid natural gas exports just a
couple of weeks ago, and Treasury is inexplicably pursuing an
oil price cap strategy that, despite your testimony, sir, is
not working. It is not working because it is unenforceable, and
it is not working because Russian crude is trading above the
cap, and the Center for Strategic International Studies has
produced a study on this. A think tank called the Centre for
Research on Energy and Clean Air shared a report at the end of
2023 that said widespread circumvention and gaping loopholes in
the ongoing fuel business means that Moscow is still earning
billions from its flagship exports that it can use to prolong
the war, and the fact that Treasury has issued eight general
licenses on the sanctions on Russian banks that allow Russia to
process these energy-related transactions.
The bottom line is that the Administration's climate
strategy is compromising our national security because we can't
export energy to our NATO partners and allies. We are giving
huge sanctions relief to Russia's war machine, allowing Russia
to export its energy instead of sanctioning Russian energy. The
price cap is not working. My point is this: Why is the Biden
Administration greenlighting billions of dollars that fund
Moscow's war in Ukraine, even as you ask Congress to provide
supplemental budget funding for Ukraine?
Mr. Nelson. I would respectfully disagree. In terms of the
working of the price cap, at the beginning of the
implementation of the price cap, Russia's revenue from oil
sales was significantly reduced by 30 percent. To your point,
they, of course, sought to circumvent our price cap, so in
response, we have started to do a number of enforcement actions
working with our Price Cap Coalition----
Mr. Barr. My time has expired, and I know about what you
are doing. The problem is that oil and gas revenues to Russia
have more than doubled, and Russia oil and gas revenues exceed
$17 billion a month. We are not cutting off the funding for
Russia. When you ask us for money to support the----
Mrs. Kim. The gentleman's time is up.
Mr. Barr. ----Ukraine assistance, we need to shut down the
financing to Moscow. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you for the passionate exchange. I now
recognize the gentlewoman from Massachusetts, Ms. Pressley, for
5 minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you for joining us, Under Secretary
Nelson, and Director Gacki. In recent years, environmental
crimes have been on the rise. From wildlife trafficking to
illegal logging, mining, and fishing, global environmental
crime is estimated to generate hundreds of billions in illicit
proceeds every year, making it the third-most profitable crime
in the world. These crimes perpetuate and contribute to the
climate crisis.
I think about those devastating images of the Amazon
rainforest burning. In 2022, the Amazon lost more than 10
football fields every minute. That was not a naturally-
occurring phenomenon. Illegal mining and illegal forestry
contributed to the problem. The nonpartisan FACT Coalition
released a report last October entitled, ``Dirty Money and the
Destruction of the Amazon.'' It highlights how profits from
environmental crimes in the Amazon rainforest make their way
into the U.S. financial system. I would like to submit this
report for the record.
Mrs. Kim. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. Pressley. While environmental crimes are damaging in
their own right, they are also associated with other convergent
crimes, such as drug trafficking, corruption, and money
laundering, which endanger public safety and corrode democracy.
Financial transparency reforms are critical.
Director Gacki, can you speak to what FinCEN is doing to
tackle environmental crimes and their links to the U.S.
financial system?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Congresswoman Pressley. We agree that
this is an incredibly important concern for us, and I can
highlight a couple of things that we are working on. We are
bringing together public-private partnerships and exchanges
between law enforcement and financial institutions to highlight
the risk of environmental crime. A few weeks ago, we did a
FinCEN exchange specifically focused on illegal wildlife
trafficking, and then, a few weeks ago, I had the opportunity
to meet with financial intelligence units from around the world
as part of the Egmont Group, of which FinCEN is a leading
member, and had the opportunity to meet with the heads of the
financial intelligence units of South Africa and of Brazil.
In Brazil, we specifically focused on how we can partner to
ensure that our systems are highlighting reporting involving,
as you note, illegal mining, illegal forestry, et cetera. And
in South Africa, building on Secretary Yellen's trip there, I
think it was last year, we are trying to strengthen the
partnership with the Financial Intelligence Unit of South
Africa, both to highlight reporting that we can get from
destination points, transit points, and origin points when it
comes to illegal wildlife trafficking. In short, this is a high
priority for us----
Ms. Pressley. Thank you.
Ms. Gacki. ----and we are trying our best to contribute.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. Thank you, Director. The
Republican Majority is trying to defund our nation's financial
intelligence unit by cutting the budget of FinCEN.
Director Gacki, if the Republican Majority succeeds in
making these cuts to your funding, what are the possible
consequences for FinCEN's ability to fight financial crimes and
to finalize rules that will close money laundering loopholes?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Congresswoman. I want to express my
appreciation for all of the funding support we have had for
FinCEN over the years, but I do want to point out that in the
last 2 budget cycles, FinCEN has been funded under the
President's budget by $20 million and $30 million,
respectively. We will, of course, meet our congressional
obligations in terms of implementation, but what I worry about
is actually our ability to dedicate resources to important
things like the FinCEN Exchange. We have record requests to do
more and more exchanges focused around fentanyl, around illegal
wildlife trafficking, around environmental crimes. These
things, I think, will suffer for lack of funding.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. With environmental crimes
devastating indigenous communities and contributing to climate
change, I urge you, Under Secretary Nelson, to encourage
Treasury to lead the development of a whole-of-government
strategy to curb illicit finance associated with environmental
crimes in the coming months. In your opinion, Under Secretary,
is this something on which Congress and Treasury can partner?
Mr. Nelson. I think it is. We did a report maybe a year and
a half ago looking at illicit finance risk and how it sort of
fuels these nature crimes. And I had the opportunity in this
job to go to Brazil and South Africa and Kenya most recently to
talk about exactly these issues, and particularly in Kenya, you
hear things that were a little surprising, at least to me,
about how they have a big population of sandalwood trees that
are being deforested and may go extinct as a result of exactly
this issue. So it is, as Director Gacki noted, a very high
priority of the Department.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. The gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Williams, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I am a
small business owner, Main Street America, in the great State
of Texas, and the crisis at our Southern border has spiraled
out of control, and the Biden Administration has done nothing
to secure the border and keep American citizens safe, much less
keep small businesses safe.
These open border policies continue to provide bad actors
with opportunities to engage in more illegal activities and
exploit our system's weaknesses, and the increase in migrants
coming across the border will certainly have consequences that
trickle down to all aspects of American lives, from physical
safety to financial well-being. Our cities are not equipped to
deal with the influx of migrants who put a significant strain
on our public resources. Yet last week, when Secretary Yellen
testified before this committee, she could not give me or many
other Members a straight answer on whether illegal immigration
posed a threat to the security of our financial system.
Mr. Nelson, you have previously worked on efforts to combat
transnational crime organizations, human trafficking, and money
laundering, which means you understand firsthand the dangerous
effects these types of crimes have on communities, large and
small, and the larger financial system.
So, Mr. Nelson, do you believe that the crisis at the
Southern border and illegal immigration pose a threat to our
nation's financial security, and could you please elaborate on
the risk posed by the influx of illegal immigrants?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for the question, and I think, as you
know, my office, in particular, has been very focused on how we
can support all of the Administration's efforts to manage
migration to the United States. And one of the things that we
have particularly been focused on in the context of the work
that we do is exactly this question of the role of
transnational criminal organizations and the role of sort of
the dirty money that facilitates all of the unlawful human
smuggling and human trafficking that we see that are underlying
this migration.
Also, the work that my colleague, Director Gacki, is doing
to provide transparency in our financial system through
beneficial ownership, our new proposed real estate rule, and
through investment advisors, will help to close off that
opportunity for these bad actors.
Mr. Williams of Texas. So, illegal immigration does pose a
threat to the financial security of our country?
Mr. Nelson. I certainly think those who facilitate it do.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Yes. Okay. Part of this beneficial
ownership effort includes FinCEN collecting and storing massive
amounts of personal information in the BOI database, to which
tens of thousands of external users, mostly law enforcement,
will have access. Given Treasury's imperfect track record of
protecting sensitive personal information, it is imperative
that FinCEN puts protections in place to protect the data of
small businesses which are subject to reporting this private
information because of this new burdensome rule.
Director Gacki, quickly, what is the approval process for
gaining access to the database?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative Williams. I agree with
the premise of your question and just want to quickly note that
we will only give access to those constituencies approved in
the statute. And to do so, for the approval process, we will
set up a framework through a memorandum of understanding (MOU)
or other agreements to ensure that people who access the
information keep it at the highest security levels, and that
they can access it only for authorized purposes under the
statute, and do not disclose it beyond for any reason that is
not authorized.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. As we have discussed at length
today, FinCEN's beneficial ownership reporting requirements
have been open for filing since January 1st of this year,
despite numerous calls from members of this committee to
withdraw or delay implementation so FinCEN could provide more
clarity on compliance guidelines. When talking to small
businesses like the ones I represent--I Chair the Small
Business Committee back in my district--most of them are either
unaware of these new obligations or they are concerned about
the higher costs and possible penalties for their lack of
knowledge about this BOI rule. It is your duty to educate
business owners on how to comply and file returns properly,
while ensuring they are not held liable or penalized for
compliance on a rule that they have never heard of, and it is a
real issue. So quickly, how are you planning on reaching rural
business owners, like those that I represent, who may not have
reliable access to the internet to inform them of these new
requirements?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, sir. Quickly, we are employing all
strategies--I ticked through a number of them already, and I
don't want to repeat for time--but just to note that we are
open to trying to be as creative as possible, including
bringing on a small public relations contract to ensure that we
can get to constituencies that aren't natural for us, and so we
are working this way. We will take all ideas. I want to stress
that when it comes to enforcement, the statute is clear. We can
only take enforcement action for willful violations, and we are
not out to take, ``gotcha,'' enforcement actions. We want to
educate about the requirement, promote----
Mr. Williams of Texas. My time is up.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. I now recognize the gentlewoman from
Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you,
Under Secretary and Director, for being here. I know that both
of you have talked about this, but in general, the incredibly
important role that you all have, especially around the real
estate industry, has been a very attractive target for corrupt
foreign actors seeking to hide their money by paying with cash
or relying on shell companies. We already know, and my
colleagues should know that 20 percent to 30 percent of
residential real estate purchases in our country are not
financed and, therefore, do not face the same level of anti-
money laundering oversight as other more common transactions.
Again, it should ring alarms for many of my colleagues.
Huge influxes of illicit cash can destroy markets and
further incentivize developers to build luxury real estate and
commercial property instead of affordable housing. That is also
something I put aside as something that is important. Consider
rentals, for instance. Criminals often make bad landlords. In
some cases, buildings sit vacant for years. In others,
residents pay the price as rents go up and services decline.
In FinCEN's proposed residential real estate rulemaking--
thank you, by the way--you touched on some of the dynamics. The
notice stated, ``While money laundering may appear to be
concentrated in high-end real estate properties in luxury
markets, it is a spillover effect that, if left unchecked,
could, in some instances, disproportionately affect low-income
and otherwise high-risk communities.''
Director, can you unpack this statement a bit and help us
understand how money laundering works, since the housing crisis
impacts communities like mine?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative Tlaib. I just want to
stress that the flow of illicit money into the residential real
estate sector, I think, as that statement notes, raises the
costs of the real estate sector altogether. Allowing illicit
actors to store their money in this could have an effect that
disadvantages homeowners across the country, so we feel that
this is an important measure not only to stem the flow of
illicit finance, but also is an overall benefit to the
residential housing sector in the nation.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. Rulemaking is not enough. Implementation
matters, and it is going to take resources. FinCEN needs to
roll out the new reporting form, and conduct stakeholder
outreach and engage in compliance monitoring, among other
activities. This requires, again, resources. I know many of my
colleagues on this committee, the House Republicans, have
proposed $166 million for FinCEN for 2024. Director, would this
level be sufficient enough in implementing the rule
successfully?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative. I want to stress that
we are grateful for the support we have received, but this
funding amount does fall short of the President's budget. And I
think we need full funding to be able to adequately implement,
including not just issuing a proposed rule, but bringing it to
final, putting in place all the necessary forms, and all the
outreach necessary to make sure it is effective across this and
other regimes that we have to implement.
Ms. Tlaib. I commend this move, which will bring much-
needed transparency to our housing market. I also encourage you
to advance similar requirements in the commercial real estate
sector where the lack of transparency puts tenants at risk and
serves as a major, huge loophole for criminals to park money in
U.S. real estate in our country.
Director, can you commit today to finalize a crucial rule
by this September?
Ms. Gacki. Congresswoman Tlaib, this is something we are
definitely looking at next in commercial real estate. I can't
commit at this time, but we will be happy to work with you and
your staff to make sure you are updated on our efforts.
Ms. Tlaib. Okay. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mrs. Kim. The gentleman from Minnesota, Mr. Emmer, is now
recognized.
Mr. Emmer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I want to thank
Chairman McHenry for holding this important hearing today, and
I want to thank all of our witnesses for your testimony.
On October 10, 2023, The Wall Street Journal reported that
between August 2021 and June 2023, Hamas received $41 million
in digital assets, and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad received
$493 million in digital assets.
Under Secretary Nelson, is this Treasury's assessment, too,
because the world's leading blockchain analytics firms have
called this a misinterpretation of the data, and that the
amount that any terrorist might have received is significantly
smaller?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for that question, Congressman, and,
yes, I think that assessment largely tracks with our own. The
numbers noted in The Wall Street Journal piece talked about
wallets but did not necessarily disaggregate among the wallets.
Mr. Emmer. Right. It is assets that people had in their
wallets as opposed to what was specifically going to the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad and Hamas.
Mr. Nelson. That is what we think is most likely, and we
also assessed that terrorists still prefer, frankly, to use
traditional old products and services, but this is something
that we are obviously monitoring very closely.
Mr. Emmer. And I appreciate that. How much do you think
actually got into the hands of Hamas or the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad (PIJ)?
Mr. Nelson. I think we can have a classified conversation
about precise numbers or expectations. I think we have done, on
both Hamas and the PIJ, a good job of identifying the virtual
asset service providers that they have relied on and the
financial facilitators that they have historically relied on
that would tend to use virtual assets. So, we don't expect the
number is very high, particularly----
Mr. Emmer. I would love to take you up on that, because I
sent a letter with several other Members right after this
erroneous Wall Street Journal report asking for specific
information, so I will take you up on that offer.
Under Secretary Nelson, you said that digital assets are
not the preferred means of terrorist financing, but I want to
be clear: Digital assets were not even a popular tool for Hamas
or the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, correct?
Mr. Nelson. I think that is correct, and one of the reasons
that is, is because of our work with our counterparts in Israel
prior to October 7th----
Mr. Emmer. I will give you credit for that, but I am going
to reclaim my time because I really want to just make a record
here because, regardless, to be clear, Hamas is using crypto in
relatively small amounts compared to what has been widely
reported. That is correct, isn't it?
Mr. Nelson. That is our assessment, yes.
Mr. Emmer. Does Treasury have a responsibility to correct
the record here? And perhaps this is involving some of the
classified information you are talking about, because I
understand that, like today with FinCEN, Treasury has
acknowledged that digital assets are not the preferred
financial product for terrorists. But Treasury has the data to
paint the correct narrative of crypto and how it is used, and
instead, we have Senators who are legislating on these false
figures and major CEOs using these figures to inform their
perspectives on digital assets. Sure, we can go to
Chainanalysis and use their third-party reporting, but Treasury
already has the data, so doesn't Treasury have a responsibility
to correct the record here?
Mr. Nelson. We have put out a number of reports on illicit
finance risk in the context of virtual assets, and I think we
have clearly stated that while there is not a significant
uptake that we perceive currently, it is an area of opportunity
that we know terrorist groups could use. And we have seen some,
not Hamas, necessarily, but other terrorist organizations
particularly focus on the ability to use crypto to move their
funds.
Mr. Emmer. I appreciate that, but I am talking about the
misinformation that The Wall Street Journal has suggested and
that certain Senators are trying to base legislation on that
would literally destroy innovation in this country. I take it
that you don't have a position, then, as to whether Treasury
has an obligation to correct this record with the data that
they have? It seems to me that they would. I again want to
thank you and your colleague for being here today, and, in my
opinion, the Treasury must do a better job with all the data it
has to paint an accurate narrative of digital assets and not
perpetuate a false one. And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Rose. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from New York, Mr. Torres, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Torres. Thank you. On December 16, 2023, The New York
Times wrote an expose about, ``the money machine that generates
terrorism financing for Hamas.'' Here is a relevant excerpt
from the expose: ``The ledgers from the computer of a senior
Hamas official listed assets worth hundreds of millions of
dollars: Hamas-controlled mining, chicken farming, and road
building companies in Sudan, two skyscrapers in the United Arab
Emirates, a property developer in Algeria, and a real estate
firm listed on the Turkish stock exchange.'' It continues,
``The Israeli agents who obtained the records shared them
inside their own government, and in Washington, nothing
happened.''
So, did the financial intelligence unit of the United
States know that Hamas had a multinational network of companies
from which it could generate terrorism financing?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for the question, and just to step
back one step, we were obviously very aware of that press
reporting, and indeed, in March of or May of 2022, we
designated the entity on the Turkish stock market, because of
this concern. And in that context, we talked about this
significant investment portfolio and our long, historic efforts
to try to dismantle exactly that----
Mr. Torres. You designated it when?
Mr. Nelson. Trend GYO, it was, I think, May of 2023, so
this is prior to May of 2022.
Mr. Torres. How long before then did you know that company
was connected to Hamas?
Mr. Nelson. We go through a process where we have to
develop an evidentiary package that meets legal sufficiency and
work through our interagency, but we have been targeting Hamas
and Hamas' financial infrastructure for literally decades, so
this is something that----
Mr. Torres. But specifically, the Turkish company and the
companies that appeared in The New York Times expose, when did
you first receive financial intel about those companies?
Mr. Nelson. Again, we get intelligence from a lot of
sources, we work through the evidentiary package, and then once
we have legal sufficiency, we will either move to designation
or certainly have an interagency policy conversation.
Mr. Torres. I am not clear if your answer is responsive to
my question, but apart from the Turkish company----
Mr. Nelson. Yes.
Mr. Torres. ----did the U.S. sanction all of the known
companies generating terrorism financing for Hamas?
Mr. Nelson. We have been, and I have personally been
focused on going around the globe, working with Gulf partners
to identify and target all financial infrastructure that
touches the international financial system. As you know, Hamas
has historically generated----
Mr. Torres. I am just pressed for time. Did the United
States----
Mr. Nelson. The majority of money domestically----
Mr. Torres. Did the United States sanction any Hamas-
connected company beyond the Turkish firm that you referenced?
Mr. Nelson. Just in the last number of months, we have done
five rounds of designations and have sanctioned a number of
entities and people, including those associated with that
Turkish company.
Mr. Torres. I have a question about CVC mixing, and I share
the concern that the abuse of CVC mixing is a genuine security
concern. But if you are a financial institution and you see a
suspicious transaction involving CVC mixing, you are presently
required to file a suspicious activity report with FinCEN. So
what new information would you obtain under the proposed rule
that you could not obtain under existing regulations?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative Torres. The CVC mixing
notice of proposed rulemaking just closed, so I expect that
this is a comment that we will review. We will certainly look
to minimize burden and make sure that this is a new
requirement, but our experience in reviewing suspicious
activity reports didn't reveal that we were getting all the
reporting that we thought we would expect regarding mixing. So,
this is something we will look closely at and take your point
on this.
Mr. Torres. The United States has a strategic interest in
maintaining a unipolar financial system built on the U.S.
dollar, but I wonder if America has been too aggressive in the
use of sanctions? Do you worry at all about the unintended
consequences of incentivizing de-dollarization? If the world
were to shift from a unipolar financial system to a multipolar
financial system, it could render U.S. sanctions far less
enforceable and far less effective. So, how are you thinking
about that trade off?
Mr. Nelson. It is a great question. We don't think
sanctions are going to lead to de-dollarization or lead to the
dollar not being an international reserve currency, but we have
gone through a process of identifying ways we can make our
sanctions regime much more effective, and we have a new unit,
the Sanctions Economic Analysis Division (SEAD), to look at
these questions as well.
Mr. Rose. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank you
both for being here today, and, Director Gacki, it is good to
meet you for the first time, and congratulations on your new
position. I am a very strong believer in accountability, which
is part of our role, accountability of the Executive Branch,
and I hope that you will return to testify here on a recurring
basis to update us on FinCEN's activities.
Something else that is very important is understanding the
roles of the different branches that our founders intended: it
is the role of the Legislative Branch to make the laws; and the
role of the various agencies and departments and bureaus under
the Executive Branch to carry out those laws that Congress
makes.
Just to lay the groundwork, inflation has had an impact on
every aspect of the U.S. economy, and just about everybody,
including the cost of government. In 1990, Congress passed the
Federal Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act (FCPIA),
which, with its subsequent amendments, requires agencies to
adjust civil penalties for inflation annually. So, you look at
inflation, and you adjust it. Has FinCEN issued a rule to
update its maximum civil penalty amounts for inflation as
required by this Act?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative Loudermilk. Yes, we
have. A few weeks ago, we implemented the statute to adjust our
penalties to keep up with inflation.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, and that is refreshing, because
it is frustrating to us a lot of times when we pass laws and
they are pretty much ignored by some agencies.
There is another one I want to ask you about, and this is
30 years later, Congress passed the Anti-Money Laundering (AML)
Act of 2020, and Sections 6204 and 6205 of the AML. And for
everyone's benefit, these sections require FinCEN to conduct a
review of currency transactions and suspicious activity
reporting frameworks. Section 6205 requires FinCEN to review
existing filing thresholds for CTRs and SARs and report back to
Congress. These reports are very useful to us as we look at
updating and modernizing CTRs and SARs. However, both reports
were due to Congress no later than 1 year after the enactment
of this law on January 1, 2021, but FinCEN has not met the
statutory deadlines to submit these reports. When are we going
to see these?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative Loudermilk. I want to
assure you that we are hard at work on these reports, and to
give you a sense of what has been going on, these particular
adjustments, unlike our adjustment of our penalties, require
extensive coordination across the U.S. Government, but we are
actively working to examine the threshold limits and respond to
Congress and implement these reports. We issued a request for
information to the public in 2021 and received 140 comments
that will help us analyze these reporting obligations. We have
been working across the U.S. Government to determine the best
approach, and a couple of things that we are focused on are
looking at certain low-value----
Mr. Loudermilk. Summarize quickly. I have a couple more
questions.
Ms. Gacki. Oh, I'm sorry. Okay.
Mr. Loudermilk. Before I run out of time.
Ms. Gacki. Okay. I will stop there.
Mr. Loudermilk. Reclaiming my time then, it is important
that we get these, and, as you know, CTR filing thresholds have
not been adjusted since it was enacted in 1971, which was
$10,000. Do you have any idea what it would be had we adjusted
for inflation today?
Ms. Gacki. I apologize. I don't know that offhand. I will
say we are looking at that.
Mr. Loudermilk. It would be over $75,000, a significant
difference. Now, I hear what you are saying. There is work
involved with it. It has been 3 years-plus since this bill was
enacted, and it is troubling that FinCEN has prioritized
following statutory requirements that bring in more money to
FinCEN, but for a requirement that would actually benefit
consumers, the can keeps being kicked down the road. So, it is
important. We need to move very quickly on adjusting CTRs and
SARS, and we need that information.
Just as troubling is FinCEN's apparent lack of awareness
when it comes to the real cost of compliance. In 2020, you
estimated that it took banks less than 2 hours and $75 per SAR
filing. According to your 2024 estimate, this cost has not
changed.
Director Gacki, does FinCEN really expect us to believe the
cost of compliance hasn't increased in 4 years? Obviously, you
have said that your costs have increased in 4 years. Everything
else has improved. Are you saying that the costs to financial
institutions have not increased?
Ms. Gacki. Sir, I am not saying that. I would be happy to
get back to you on that.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rose. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Garcia, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to both
of the witnesses for coming to visit with us this morning.
I am from Texas, and I represent a beautiful, diverse
community that has many close personal and business ties to
Mexico and other parts of Central and Latin America. Texas, as
a State, sends the second-highest amount of U.S. remittances to
Mexico within the United States, making up 15.9 percent of
those sent in 2021. I think Mr. Gonzalez earlier outlined those
numbers. These funds represent the fruits of the hard work and
dedication of my constituents, who often are either unbanked or
underbanked, despite being assets to our local economy and
their families' businesses abroad. You may have seen the news
last week that the Congressional Budget Office estimated that
the immigration surge will help us bring $7 trillion more in
the economy, and $1 trillion in revenues, which is high,
meaning, again, that immigrants are an asset.
As you know, these remittances are largely sent through
money services businesses (MSBs), which transmit funds abroad
through relationships with larger multinational financial
institutions. That is why I read with great interest the
Treasury Department's April 2023 De-Risking Strategy, which
reports, ``Small MSBs continue to have significant issues
accessing banking services, especially small MSBs that service
certain immigrant communities.'' The Strategy goes on to
explain the range of reasons why this occurs, and then
discusses concrete solutions that the Department and partner
agencies could undertake to address this problem as required by
the Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2020.
Director Gacki, one of the solutions proposed in this
Strategy is the origin of the 2009 MSB Examination Manual. Has
FinCEN started this process, and if not, when does it intend to
do so? What other steps has Treasury taken or will take to
address the lack of financial access for my constituents?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative. This is an incredibly
important issue that I know the Treasury Department as a whole
wants to highlight. I will need to get back to you on the
progress with updating that manual, but I can tell you it is a
high priority and something that I will want to make sure we
make progress on.
Ms. Garcia. Do you have any estimated goal, or do you even
forecast when it might get done?
Ms. Gacki. We have put guidance out to ensure that
regulated financial institutions, the regulated populace,
understands there is no one type of person that demonstrates
risk and that should be unbanked, underbanked, et cetera. We
have tried to clarify how AML rules apply, and we will work
without undue delay to ensure that we make sure that this
message carries into the examination of MSBs, and I will get
back to you on the specific timing.
Ms. Garcia. Under Secretary, you are nodding your head. Do
you have anything to add, sir?
Mr. Nelson. No. I was just going to add I had the
opportunity to join Secretary Yellen when she traveled to
Mexico in December, and this question of remittances and ways
that we can better support the critically important remittances
going back to Mexico in terms of fee structure and cooperation
amongst our financial institutions was one of the highest
priorities in our conversations with the Mexican Government.
Ms. Garcia. Okay. The national security mission of the Bank
Secrecy Act, fraud provisions, and other financial crime laws
and regulations are essential for our safety, but the goal of
this De-Risking Strategy, mandated by our committee's
bipartisan law, was to find a better balance. This is for both
of you, and it is going to have to be in less than 45 seconds,
but how can we make sure that small businesses, especially
those owned by law-abiding immigrants or other marginalized
communities, aren't being negatively affected by unnecessarily-
strict financial crimes regimes?
Mr. Nelson. I would say one of the recommendations in the
Strategy is just more transparency around account closings,
which I had the opportunity to go to Seattle and talk to some
diaspora communities there, and that was one of the big asks of
those small businesses that were having trouble maintaining
accounts at financial institutions.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you.
Ms. Gacki. And just to add briefly to Under Secretary
Nelson, I think another tool we can use are public-private
partnerships to highlight this issue and create greater
understanding of this as an issue.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, and I see my time is up. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Rose. The gentlewoman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes himself for 5 minutes. Thank you to our witnesses
for being with us today.
The Cookeville Farmers Market, in my hometown, is a place
for commerce that many in my community love to visit. It is an
important marketplace for many small farmers and other small
businesses in the community where they are able to reach
customers. However, I am extremely concerned about how the
beneficial ownership rule would impact the micro businesses at
farmers markets like the one in my hometown. The penalties for
willful noncompliance would be extremely high for these micro
businesses, going up to even $10,000.
So, Director Gacki, does FinCEN plan to penalize micro
businesses, such as the family craft businesses and small
farmers that one would find at their local farmers market?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Congressman Rose. I want to stress
that we are trying to meet businesses where they are to help
educate who falls within the definition of a, ``reporting
company.'' One message we have recently put out is, for
example, sole proprietorships that aren't created by the filing
of a document with a Secretary of State or equivalent office do
not need to report, but for those businesses that do need to
report, we are looking to meet them and make sure the
obligation is easily understood.
The filing system we have set up is simple, easy to use,
and secure, and when it comes to enforcement, we are not
taking, ``gotcha,'' enforcement actions. We want to promote
education and compliance, especially the communities that have
never heard of FinCEN. And for most filers, this will be a one-
and-done requirement without the need to update annually, but
it is something that we are going to be redoubling our efforts
on to get to constituencies like micro businesses, farmers, and
the like.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I appreciate that, and I would just
like to take this opportunity to reinforce that it is my view
that for regulators at the Federal, State, and local level, the
number-one priority is to help the regulated comply, not to
punish them when they inadvertently slip up. So when you are
having to take enforcement actions, that doesn't just mean that
the regulated individual has failed. It means that the agency
has failed to help to bring about compliance.
Shifting gears a bit, in 2022, when Acting Director Das
testified before us, I explained my position that the Bank
Secrecy Act regulatory cost is far too expensive, in my view.
Like today, my colleagues and I urged acting Director Das to
pursue reforms that would allow banks to better understand the
quantifiable impact of the BSA and suspicious activity reports
(SARs).
Director Gacki, I understand that as part of the Fiscal
Year 2022 year in review, FinCEN released information regarding
the overall use of SARs. Are there any plans to provide, if you
will, individualized feedback to banks with reviews that
explain how useful the SARS that they are providing have been?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Congressman. One key objective of
ours is to implement that part of the Anti-Money Laundering Act
that calls on us to establish feedback loops so that financial
institutions see the value of their reporting and understand
it. And we get law enforcement to give us, law enforcement and
other national security professionals, information to show the
value of this reporting that we can feed back to the financial
institutions so that they can see the value of this reporting
and so that we can support putting this obligation on them.
That is something we are continuing to do is build those
feedback loops. We have for many years established it through
law enforcement awards that we put together where we highlight
certain suspicious activity reports by financial institutions
that have led to successful prosecutions. But there are a full
range of enforcement and other actions, like sanctions, that
could be taken based on critical tip and lead reporting that
comes from suspicious activity, and one of the key objectives
that we are pursuing is to ensure that we are feeding this
information back to financial institutions.
Mr. Rose. I just want to underscore how important I believe
that is, having served on the board of a small community
financial institution before coming to Congress, and I would
describe the process that board members at community banks go
through, and, for that matter, larger financial institutions--I
often describe it as throwing darts with a blindfold on, in the
dark, and never being told whether or not you hit anything. And
the problem that manifests is that, frankly, in the years that
I served on a board, I learned nothing. I grew not one iota in
terms of my ability to know what would actually be useful, and
so, no doubt, the system is flooded with information.
I see that my time has expired, so I yield back, and I now
recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Nickel, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much to our Chairs, and thanks so
much to our witnesses for being here today.
Once again, we are holding this hearing in the name of
national security while simultaneously jeopardizing our
national security by failing to provide needed aid to our
allies in Ukraine, Israel, and Taiwan. I believe that a
majority of my colleagues in the House as a whole, and on the
Republican Conference support standing with Ukraine, Israel and
Taiwan, yet we continue to fail to act. We should take up the
Senate supplemental appropriations bill as soon as possible.
Ukraine is literally running out of bullets, and if we abandon
them, Putin will win. Israel witnessed the brutal, barbaric,
and calculated attack against the Jewish people and the State
of Israel on October 7th. We must free the Israeli citizens
wrongfully held hostage, but we also must dismantle Hamas and
their financial system.
Iranian-backed groups have launched over 160 attacks on
U.S. forces in Iraq, Syria, and Jordan in recent months,
resulting in the deaths of three U.S. servicemen and the
wounding of dozens more. The Iranian-backed Houthis continue to
disrupt maritime commerce and target U.S. Naval Forces in the
Red Sea. Treasury must dramatically increase efforts to stop
the flow of resources to Iran and its terrorist proxies.
I would like to discuss FinCEN's recent finding that Iraq's
Al-Huda Bank is a foreign financial institution of primary
money laundering concern. I think this case highlights several
potential gaps in our sanctions enforcement efforts.
First, let me say I fully support FinCEN's action to stop
Al-Huda's use of the U.S. financial system to launder money for
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and other Iranian-
backed groups. According to FinCEN's notice of proposed
rulemaking, since its establishment in 2008, Al-Huda Bank has
been, ``controlled and operated by the IRGC and IRGC-QF.'' For
15 years, Al-Huda has operated for U.S.-designated terrorist
groups with no action by the Treasury Department.
Director Gacki, when did Treasury first become aware that
Al-Huda Bank was controlled by the IRGC?
Ms. Gacki. Congressman Nickel, thank you for that question.
I will stress that when we became aware of this information--
which I believe was in recent years, but I will get back to you
on a specific date--we immediately invested our resources into
investigating Al-Huda Bank as a potential target for action.
And when FinCEN takes action, whether it is under its Section
311 authorities or whether the Office of Foreign Assets Control
(OFAC) takes action under sanctions, it is an action that
doesn't take place in a vacuum. We must balance it with the
national security and foreign policy imperatives and ensure
that the timing is just right.
I think we are very proud of the action that was taken, and
the fact that we were able, over time, to build such a robust
public record of wrongdoing and of highlighting the money
laundering violations of Al-Huda Bank. And taking this action
under Section 311 and pointing out AML deficiencies is actually
a way to build an international consensus, because so many
countries have these standards as part of the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF). In short, we will get back to you on the
exact time, but we did work to create a very robust public
record of wrongdoing, and that itself took some time.
Mr. Nickel. I certainly support those actions, but I would
like to know when you became aware. Next question, same line of
questioning here, when did Treasury first become aware that Al-
Huda Bank was conducting transactions through the U.S.
financial system?
Ms. Gacki. When it comes to the U.S. financial system,
again, I want to get back to you, but I also want to stress
that the seriousness of this action and the need to support it
on an evidentiary basis is a substantial undertaking and one
that we can't take lightly, but I can assure you that we moved
with dispatch when we could.
Mr. Nickel. Under Secretary Nelson, has the Iraqi
Government cooperated with U.S. authorities in the
investigation of Al-Huda?
Mr. Nelson. I was in Iraq when we announced this action,
and we have been working with the central bank and, really, the
prime minister's office very closely on actions to move Iraqi's
financial system off of relying on the accounts that they hold
within the New York Fed for cash and wire transfers into a
commercially-viable and AML/CFT compliant mode, and we have had
great success in doing that so far. We made a lot of progress,
more progress in terms of transaction monitoring, given the
terrorist financing risk that exists in Iraq, but we are
working closely with Iraqi partners on that.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you. My time has expired. I will follow
up in writing. I yield back.
Mr. Rose. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Davidson of Ohio
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you. Thank you all for the work you do
to keep our nation safe and secure. FinCEN is one of the
agencies that is charged with the responsibility of financial
intelligence, and, frankly, it is a big burden in a lot of
ways. There is the safety requirement, but there is also the
need to balance civil liberties there. There are a lot of folks
who feel that America, in a way, is becoming a police state.
Pretty benign so far, but, frankly, all the information that a
police state would want resides in the databases that our
government already possesses, and there seems to be an
insatiable appetite to grow those databases.
With that, Director Gacki, I want to thank you for your
staff's responsiveness in scheduling a classified briefing on
Geographic Targeting Orders (GTOs) next month. I wish this was
accomplished before today's hearing, as Chairman Luetkemeyer
and I sent the memo back in November of 2023, but I look
forward to the additional opportunity to discuss geographic
targeting orders in a classified setting. FinCEN has asked
Congress to pass legislation to expand geographic targeting
orders nationwide, and this request would require data
reporting on every non-financed purchase of real estate above
$300,000. We want to understand why.
Instead of waiting for Congress to make a decision on GTO
expansion, FinCEN has incrementally expanded covered geographic
areas with little justification as to why places like Plymouth,
Massachusetts, Sarasota, Florida, or Travis County, Texas,
require this intrusive additional reporting requirement.
This is why I am working on legislation that any expansion
of GTOs by FinCEN is subject to the Congressional Review Act.
Let me be clear: This will not inhibit FinCEN's ability to
renew its current GTOs, but it will ensure that FinCEN makes
the case to Congress for why expanded coverage is necessary.
Americans are aware now more than ever that the Federal
Government is closely watching pretty much everything, but
especially their financial transactions. It is incumbent on
Congress to ensure that the Treasury Department and FinCEN are
properly using their authorities.
Regarding FinCEN's notice of rulemaking on efforts to
combat money laundering in the residential real estate market,
can you detail the engagement FinCEN has had with various
stakeholders in the real estate industry, specifically brokers
and title insurance companies, the folks who need to collect
this information, and, frankly, the additional obligations they
are confronting, what kind of feedback and dialogue have you
had with them?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Congressman Davidson. In preparation
to issue the notice of proposed rulemaking last week regarding
cash sales of residential real estate to trust or other
companies, FinCEN had earlier issued an advanced notice of
proposed rulemaking, I think in 2021--I may have that date
slightly off--where we actually sought engagement with title
agents and other settlement agents, and engagement and input
from industry on the proposed scoping of the rule. We got a
number of comments that we took on board in developing and
crafting the proposed rule.
In now putting out this proposed rule, which will have a
60-day comment period, we look forward to further comments to
assess the best impact and scoping of this proposed rule. And
we hope, to be honest, that this residential real estate rule
will dispense with the need for Geographic Targeting Orders in
this area, which have been expanded over time at the request of
law enforcement and evaluated for sufficiency by us to show a
compelling need.
Mr. Davidson. Yes, thanks, and I look forward to that
meeting. Thanks again for scheduling it, and I think we will
get a lot more in a better setting, the appropriate setting.
Let me turn briefly to digital assets, which is certainly a
space that, while the market is comparatively small compared to
the rest of our financial markets, the regulatory clarity isn't
there for a lot of things. In 2019, FinCEN issued guidance that
was, I think, important to the industry, which said that
digital asset miners, node operators, are not classified as,
``money services businesses.'' Is that still consistent with
FinCEN's view?
Ms. Gacki. I will say that I think that is our reading of
the existing law, yes.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you. Obviously, there are people who
want to change that law, and so let me just follow on that and
ask, how does FinCEN work with blockchain analytics companies
to trace things that are on chain already? It seems like there
are a lot of analytics. You have a permanent, immutable record.
Is this pretty productive?
Ms. Gacki. Yes, and FinCEN was at the forefront in
developing expertise on virtual assets. We have some really
great people who know this well and have sought and used tools
that allow us to use the blockchain to evaluate and find
illicit finance.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you so much. My time has expired, and I
yield back.
Mr. Meuser. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms. Pettersen, is now recognized for
5 minutes.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and it's great to
have both of our witnesses here today. Thank you for the work
you do every day.
We have already had the opportunity to talk about my
concerns around the fentanyl crisis, and I want to dive into
some of the work that you all are doing. You know that this is
the third wave of the opioid epidemic. We have more people now
who have died in the United States than all world wars
combined, and we have to come together with all the resources
necessary to stop the trafficking of fentanyl into this
country. So, I want to applaud the work that you are doing with
the announcement in December around the launch of the Counter-
Fentanyl Strike Force to bring that coordination and
information-sharing necessary to address this crisis.
Under Secretary Nelson, given your role as Chair of the new
Strike Force, can you give us an update on your work and
comment on any additional resources and authorities you may
need from Congress?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for the question. Secretary Yellen
announced the Strike Force back in December, and we are excited
working with IRS-CI to be able to leverage all of the tools
that we have internal to the Department of the Treasury to more
efficiently, I think, support law enforcement and other law
enforcement colleagues in identifying key networks and leaders
that are facilitating the flow, obviously, of fentanyl into the
United States.
I think we are focused on, with my colleague, Chief Lee,
who is the head of IRS-CI, bringing our teams together on a
regularized basis and identifying with other law enforcement
partners some key cases that we can support together, using
their particular expertise in virtual assets and the disturbing
trend, I think, that we are seeing of the use of virtual assets
to facilitate some of the fentanyl flows.
I would also just note we are also participating in the
overall U.S. Government engagements with China in the context
of the Counter-Narcotics Working Group, and looking for ways
that we can work on financial typologies in that context, and
then continuing to engage the Government of Mexico, and we have
committed to continuing to designate all parts of the supply
chain. So, just to assure you that all parts of the Office of
TFI are working on this issue.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you for those comments, and then, when
you talk about the move to utilizing digital assets, that is
concerning. We don't want to stop innovation here in the United
States, we don't want it to go elsewhere, and we also want to
have a standard in place to get out ahead of it. Can you talk
briefly about what additional things we could consider, bills
that are going through gaps that we currently face with the
legislative proposals? And also, I would love to know what we
are doing around engaging China in particular, because we know
that when they had pressure around the distribution of
fentanyl, they started distributing the supplies to make it in
Mexico and bring it over. So, what additional tools do we need
to stop that production?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, thank you for the question. I think we are
looking forward to working with Congress on a couple of things.
Are there ways that we can better get out and address the
challenge of compliance through additional regulatory clarity,
and I think we have some ideas that we can get you on that, and
then we're also focused on how do we get at the question of
jurisdictional arbitrage, and are there ways to extend sort of
AML/CFT compliance to entities that are operating abroad?
Certainly, just in the context of China, I think out of
President Biden's conversation with President Xi, we have
already seen that the Chinese have taken steps to provide
guidance to those precursor companies and restrict their
forward export to Mexico where, to your point, the fentanyl is
made, and I think we also understand that they are starting to
take some law enforcement actions as well. And as I noted, a
colleague just came back from China out of the Counter-
Narcotics Working Group, and out of that engagement, I think we
do want to look at ways we can work with them on an operational
level on financial typologies.
Ms. Pettersen. I would love to have a longer conversation.
Obviously, we are already out of time, and I didn't even get to
ask you my questions, so I will follow up in writing. I really
appreciate the work you do. Thank you for being with us.
Mr. Meuser. The gentlelady yields back. The gentleman from
South Carolina, Mr. Timmons, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I decided to run for
office because I was a frustrated small business owner. I was
spending all my time dealing with taxes and regulations--State,
local, Federal--and this beneficial ownership rule is really
just kind of shocking to me. I own seven LLCs with my business
partner, and I am part owner in probably another dozen LLCs,
but let's just do the seven LLCs that I own with my business
partner; we both are 50/50. He is the managing member because
of the congressional ethics rules. I am a passive investor. So,
he technically has to fill out 7 of these forms that take 20
minutes. He is not a lawyer. He has no idea what he is doing,
so he is going to then pay a lawyer. And that lawyer is
probably going to charge for half an hour for each one, so
let's just say 300, 400 bucks an hour. This is a $2,000 burden
to just my businesses. Do you think that is reasonable,
Director Gacki?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative Timmons.
Mr. Timmons. Oh, and by the way, he has no idea this
exists. So technically, we are in noncompliance.
Ms. Gacki. I just want to stress that we are working to
enhance and build outreach and education regarding this
requirement. We have built a----
Mr. Timmons. Are you going to pay for it?
Ms. Gacki. Pardon me?
Mr. Timmons. Are you going to pay for it?
Ms. Gacki. We do not require a fee to be paid.
Mr. Timmons. I understand that----
Ms. Gacki. Right.
Mr. Timmons. ----but most people who are intelligent are
going to hire an attorney, and that is going to cost hundreds
of dollars, but if you have multiple LLCs, it will cost
thousands of dollars. So, what is the plan to cover those
costs?
Ms. Gacki. Among the many things that we are looking at, we
stress that it does not require an attorney to file this
information----
Mr. Timmons. What if you get it wrong? It is pretty
complicated. I was just looking at it. Allegedly, it takes 20
minutes.
Ms. Gacki. Again, we are not in the business of taking,
``gotcha,'' enforcement, the statute. We would only take----
Mr. Timmons. Tens of millions of people have not filled
this out, and they are technically in noncompliance. What is
the----
Ms. Gacki. Existing businesses have a calendar year to
apply. They are not out of compliance.
Mr. Timmons. We can talk in February of next year. I can
promise you the answer will be that tens of millions of people
will not have complied.
Ms. Gacki. We will be working to ensure that there is broad
awareness and compliance throughout.
Mr. Timmons. As a small business owner, I get dozens of
pieces of mail from all these different bizarre things. You
can't tell if they are actually offering something. Businesses
literally intentionally create mail that they want you to open.
It is just a sales, whatever it is. So you are going to at some
point send mail, and people are going to throw that away. You
are going to do digital. I ignore everything that people do
digitally. What is the plan to create, because there are
technically penalties, both financial and also for willful
noncompliance. It is a felony. So, this just seems kind of
crazy to me.
Ms. Gacki. Among the many things we are doing, we are
partnering with not only with other Federal Government
agencies, to include our colleagues at the IRS, but also with
State Secretaries of State, and with professional
organizations. We are building information toolkits and
packages. There are a number of Secretaries----
Mr. Timmons. Have you thought about letting the IRS manage
this and say, in addition to filing your taxes, you have to
also fill this form out? That might make it at least easier so
that everybody who is filing taxes will know.
Ms. Gacki. We are certainly working with the IRS to
leverage their network. For example, a new business created in
this calendar year which goes to the IRS website for an
employee identification number now gets an exact link and
knowledge of the fact to report to FinCEN. So, it is something
we are definitely working on.
Mr. Timmons. Can CPAs fill out the beneficial ownership
form?
Ms. Gacki. We don't limit the types of third parties that
can help, so yes, ostensibly, a CPA could, and we have been
working----
Mr. Timmons. But a CPA would say that they are not a lawyer
and that a lawyer needs to fill this out because they don't
want to create additional liability. Could you give CPAs
specific authority to fill this out?
Ms. Gacki. Let me look into that. I don't know if that is
necessary, but it's certainly something that we are looking
into. Our overwhelming objective is to make this easier on
small businesses. They are not the target of this. The target
is the opaque, nontransparent flow, the way shell companies are
used to move illicit funds at ultimate cost to small business.
This should be, for most businesses, a one-and-done reporting
requirement, and when it comes to enforcement, we are going
to----
Mr. Timmons. Just for me alone, it is a one-and-done,
$3,000 to $5,000 fine, because you are trying to get to people
who are doing things that they shouldn't do. This is not
helping small businesses; it is hurting them. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes. Thank you very much to our witnesses.
So, 4 questions were laid out, and my understanding is that
turned into 51 questions, perhaps. Maybe there were just
subsets to those 4 questions, but 51 questions, and I know you
covered a number of things regarding the beneficial ownership
reporting plan. Let me just ask this first, Mr. Nelson. What do
we want to glean from those questions?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for that question, and the idea
behind this new reporting requirement as expressed through the
Corporate Transparency Act is to identify the shell companies,
the front companies that are really the doorways for
facilitating abuse of our financial system in order to make
possible a range of illicit activities that affect our national
security, that affect the ability of our colleagues----
Mr. Meuser. I don't mean to interrupt----
Mr. Nelson. ----small businesses.
Mr. Meuser. ----but my question is, is it going to work?
Have you gone over this? Have you done focus groups where
businesses have said, hmm, I can understand the practicality
and usefulness of this to national security? I was a small
business person for a long time as well, and here, I advocate
for small businesses, but I obviously advocate for the national
security of our country. I just feel that this is a very broad
net, heavy-handed approach to trying to gain information from
those who are in the business of defrauding or are involved in
criminal activity. What makes you think they are going to fill
these questions out in an honest manner or that only the lawful
are going to be the ones who actually fill it out in an honest
manner?
Mr. Nelson. The reporting entities are statutorily required
under the corporate transaction----
Mr. Meuser. We know that, and I am getting feedback from my
constituents of, what, I now have to fill this out? Is this
legitimate? I don't want to fill this out. I am just quoting
some of my constituents. There is too much information, a
government organization I have never heard of. I will close my
business first. Nobody knows about this. It is amazing. The
idea that the numbers show as many as 32 million small
businesses, and in a way, think about it again. Again, I was in
business for a while. It is like making a product and then
sending out an email telling all customers to buy it. That
doesn't work, right?
Ms. Gacki, you were mentioning the outreach program, which
is probably going to take a little while, but they have a year
to engage in it. I am just not sure, frankly, how effective
this is going to be for the purpose that you are seeking,
because it is a noble one, national security, you are FinCEN,
but to what degree are we actually going to have the outcomes
that we are seeking? I will ask you, Ms. Gacki?
Ms. Gacki. Just to echo Under Secretary Nelson, I think one
of the key objectives that we will do is as small businesses
apply to us, we will also be able to investigate the delta,
those companies that register but don't actually report to
FinCEN, and that will be a great area of inquiry. Is that for
lack of awareness, is that unintentional, or is there a willful
obfuscation? So, that is a good tool we can use to find those
bad actors who need to register to get a shell company to move
but somehow forget to file with FinCEN, if they even know about
it. So, that is something on which we will work closely and
look closely.
Mr. Meuser. I was Revenue Secretary in Pennsylvania for 4
years, and I removed most of the questions that were being
asked initially, and we just took, not an original idea, but
the dashboard approach. If something wasn't right there, then
we would ask for more. Have you gone through these questions
and determined what a red flag is going to be, because you
can't possibly have enough people, and the IT systems probably
won't do it either, to engage in targeting those that you think
might fall within this category?
Ms. Gacki. Sir, we are going to be leveraging technological
solutions where we can to ensure that we are fairly and
accurately looking through this data----
Mr. Meuser. Lastly, I am running out of time, but I would
like you to get back to us on what the penalties will be for
those who file after the time frame that you have laid out,
okay?
I yield back, and the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Steil,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you for being here today. I would like to
start with you if I can, Mr. Nelson. In preparation for today's
hearing, did you watch Secretary Yellen's testimony before us a
week ago?
Mr. Nelson. I did see a good chunk of it.
Mr. Steil. Great, and OFAC sits under your authority at
TFI, correct?
Mr. Nelson. Yes.
Mr. Steil. My question for you is, last week I had a
dialogue with Secretary Yellen about Chinese purchases of
Iranian oil. She said she wanted to get back to me. In that
regard, as we both, I think, know, oil revenues are a major
source of the funds for the Iranian regime, in particular as it
relates to Iran continuing to fund terrorism across the globe.
In 2020, sanctions helped reduce Iran's oil exports by or to
400,000 barrels a day. In 2023, with the eased-up enforcement,
Iran managed to export 2 million barrels a day, and much of it
went to China. So if we want to make it harder for Iran to fund
terrorism around the globe, we have to look at the entities
purchasing this Iranian oil.
My question is: one, is it a concern for you and your
Department; and two, what steps is TFI taking to address the
Chinese purchases of sanctioned Iranian oil?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for the question. Obviously, this is
a priority of ours. We are working with the State Department,
which can directly designate those entities that are associated
with the sale of Iranian oil and petrochemicals. We can get at
the problem in a couple of ways. One, I think to your point, we
know that the revenue is going to fund terrorist activities, so
one of the things that we have sought to do is identify those
pieces of the international financial system----
Mr. Steil. But Mr. Nelson, if I can, in our limited time,
you stated, which I agree with, that we know that these funds
are going to support terrorism.
Mr. Nelson. Yes.
Mr. Steil. We know that it is being purchased by Chinese
entities. You have said you have worked with your counterparts
at the State Department. How many Chinese financial
institutions have you sanctioned for facilitating the trade?
Mr. Nelson. Just last week, we designated an IRGC-QF front
company--it is called China Oil and Petroleum Company--which
had arranged contracts and sold hundreds of millions of
dollars' worth of Iranian commodities, and back in March, we
designated 39 entities that were part of a shadow banking
network that involved a number of Chinese touchpoints. We
obviously are also thinking about, as we are engaging in our
Economic Working Group and Financial Working Group and the
Counter-Narcotics Working Group with the Chinese engaging on
AML issues, and particularly the the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF)----
Mr. Steil. Let me jump in. I appreciate the work you are
doing in this area, and you rattled a bunch off, but I think
there is more work that needs to be done. I think we have
continued to see the sale of Iranian oil to China. We have seen
it increasing, so I think that there is a lot more work that
needs to be done, and I would like you to engage with us if you
need additional authority to be able to block this. Only
because----
Mr. Nelson. We absolutely appreciate that support.
Mr. Steil. Thank you. Only because of the limited time, I
want to jump over to you, Ms. Gacki. In your written testimony,
you highlighted the Administration's commitment to delivering
humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza, being supportive
of making sure that people have key aspects to continue their
lives, but I want to look back at what occurred, in particular
as to what played out of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency (UNRWA). You have a seat at the table of reviewing these
entities. It is U.S. policy to not provide support to Hamas,
yet we now know, rough math, that 10 percent of the individuals
who were engaged at UNRWA--10 percent were either Hamas or PIJ.
What went wrong? How did we miss it?
Ms. Gacki. Representative Steil, thank you for that
question. I don't know that I am best placed to answer it.
Sorry, Under Secretary Nelson.
Mr. Nelson. I think we have been focused on Hamas financing
for obviously a long time, and the intel community is looking
at these questions, and I think they are probably best
addressed in a closed session.
Mr. Steil. I will respect that, and maybe we can find the
time to do that in a secure setting.
In my very limited time left, I will come back to you, Ms.
Gacki. I think this does fall under your authority. In
particular, when we look at crypto, obviously, there is a piece
of it that probably is involved in illicit financing, but that
is actually a small piece. The primary vehicle is elsewhere,
but we do see issues in concentrated locations in places like
Russia. Can you just briefly describe how FinCEN works with our
foreign counterparts as it relates to that concentration?
Ms. Gacki. Yes. A few weeks ago, I had the opportunity to
meet with a number of other heads of financial intelligence
units around the world where a big topic of discussion was
sharing expertise when it came to virtual assets. I had notable
conversations with my Indian counterpart and with my Saudi
Arabian counterpart, to look at virtual currency, digital
currency as a vehicle for illicit finance.
Mr. Steil. I appreciate your work in the area. Only because
I am cognizant of the time, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
South Carolina, Mr. Norman, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norman. Thank you all for being here. There are over
32, I think, million or 32 reports that will be filed with
FinCEN, I guess, within a year, the beneficial ownership
database. What are you doing to make sure that all businesses
are aware of the regulations that are coming down the pipe?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative Norman. One thing we
have done is we have taken pieces of guidance, a Small Entity
Compliance Guide, which is translated into 11 different
languages, frequently asked questions, and other information
that we have created on a dedicated part of our website, and we
are doing our level best to make sure that different
communities which have never heard of FinCEN before get access
to this information. We have implemented key partnerships. We
are working with Secretaries of State of the individual States.
We are partnering with them to ensure that information which we
give to them is passed along, giving them a toolkit for
information using those networks. We are working with other
parts of the U.S. Government, the IRS, the Small Business
Administration, and others.
We have also put in place dedicated ways to contact FinCEN
about this obligation. We have stood up a dedicated contact
center with the first novel use for FinCEN of a chatbot to be
able to engage on individual filers' questions. We are ramping
up our efforts, including bringing in support from use of a
small public relations contract, in order to communicate these
requirements in plain language and as simply as possible
because we believe that the system that we have set up is
simple, secure, and safe to use.
Mr. Norman. Do you have a mechanism for knowing who is not
in compliance?
Ms. Gacki. When it comes to noncompliance, I want to stress
that we are not in the business of playing, ``gotcha,'' when it
comes to enforcement. The statute is very clear. We can only
take enforcement action against willful violations, and this is
not about punishing small business but looking for those actors
that are willfully evading the requirements.
Mr. Norman. What are the fines, what is the timeline, and
when is somebody subject to a penalty or a fine?
Ms. Gacki. I want to stress that for this first year,
existing companies have a full calendar year to file with
FinCEN. The timeline, we have set this out in our rule, and for
companies that are created in this calendar year, they have 90
days as opposed to 30 days, and we have tried hard to meet them
at the point of creation, for example, working with the IRS.
When a business needs an employee identification number, they
get access to FinCEN at that website.
When it comes to enforcement, the statute, this Corporate
Transparency Act, sets the level of enforcement, but again, I
want to just return to my earlier statement that this is not
about playing, ``gotcha,'' enforcement and going after or
punishing small business for innocence or just lack of
awareness. It is our job to make sure that the American public
understands this obligation. It is something we take very
seriously, and we don't anticipate using enforcement as a way
to educate them.
Mr. Norman. Well, a lot of companies have never heard of
FinCEN, and to be subject to a penalty is not fair. Will you
publicize the regulations ahead of time?
Ms. Gacki. Yes, we have done that, and we are working to
make sure that the plain language explanation of those
regulations gets out to more and more constituencies.
Mr. Norman. And your website?
Ms. Gacki. Yes. We have set up a dedicated part of our
website, which is modernized and made more user-friendly, to
reach different constituencies.
Mr. Norman. That is really important to the businesses. The
more they know, the better off they are, and particularly with
fines today, and with everything else going on, it is a real
problem for them. Okay. Thank you. I yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Fitzgerald, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The U.S. Secret
Service investigates a variety of cyber-related criminal
activities, including the illicit use of digital assets through
its global network of 44 cyber fraud task forces. Significant
aspects of this illicit activity involve unlicensed money
transmitting businesses, the illicit structuring of
transactions, and other criminal activity against organizations
that are not federally-insured financial institutions. Some of
those are financial institutions as defined by the Bank Secrecy
Act.
Two weeks ago, I was proud to introduce the Combating Money
Laundering in Cybercrime Act, along with a number of my
colleagues--Mr. Meeks, Mr. Nunn, Mrs. Dean--to harmonize
criminal and banking statutes and clarify the Secret Service's
investigative authority over crimes related to illicit digital
asset transactions. Could you both briefly touch on the
important role of the Secret Service in fighting illicit
transactions as well as the FinCEN exchanges?
Mr. Nelson. I would just note that the Secret Service
obviously is a critical partner, and particularly critical, I
think, in terms of the technical exchanges and the leadership,
which I believe your bill touches on, in the context of the
International Monetary Fund's (IMF's) work with the FATF in
creating anti-money laundering (AML) and combating the
financing of terrorism (CFT) standards that are consistent
internationally. So, we're very happy to work with you on the
bill.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good.
Ms. Gacki. And thank you, Representative Fitzgerald. I just
want to note, I think an important aspect of that bill, too, if
I am correct, is a renewal of the FinCEN Exchange Program----
Mr. Fitzgerald. Right.
Ms. Gacki. ----which is important. I just want to call that
out and thank you for that. And just to touch briefly on our
partnership with the Secret Service, I can tick off three
things. They are an incredible partner for us. First, we run a
Rapid Response Program where we work internationally to ensure
that proceeds of fraud are able to be recovered through
international means, and the Secret Service is critical to that
effort in our Rapid Response Program. We also frequently bring
them in on FinCEN exchanges. They are a valuable partner to
offer their law enforcement expertise with private actors, like
financial institutions, to ensure that we are highlighting
financial risks and giving financial institutions the
information they need to make sure that they are looking at
financial crime in a way that actually serves law enforcement.
And finally, we have been very lucky to have a strong
investigative partnership with the Secret Service,
specifically, as you note, their expertise in digital currency.
We have worked very closely with them. They have leveraged our
research and analysis to provide insights into some of their
investigative targets.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Okay. There is one other topic I want to
cover quickly. In a recent response to Senator Tim Scott, the
Treasury Department confirmed terms like, ``MAGA,'' and
``Trump,'' were included in the push by Federal investigators
for banks to surveil private financial transactions following
the January 6, 2021, protests at the Capitol. The letter states
that the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) requires that a bank or other
financial institution file a suspicious activity report
whenever it identifies a suspicious transaction relevant to a
possible violation of law or regulation. If that is an accurate
interpretation of the BSA, that would suggest that if a bank
suspected I was speeding, they could somehow flag a gas station
purchase.
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has estimated
that total BSA/AML costs are between $5 billion and $8 billion
per year, while the FBI's money laundering conviction numbers
suggest a per-conviction cost between $107 and $178. This is
not just a highly-inefficient system, but is also highly
intrusive to the privacy of citizens. Who decides what is
suspicious enough to warrant this suspicious activity report,
Ms. Gacki?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Representative Fitzgerald, and I
could offer some of what I have learned, not having been at
FinCEN at that time, but looking back at what may have
happened. FinCEN exchanges surrounding the events of the
violent attack on the Capitol on January 6th, and in
anticipation of potentially more violence at the inauguration,
were pulled together with financial institutions and law
enforcement to share expertise as to how to look for indicators
of violence, primarily violence using violent terms that may be
associated with political events. The ultimate responsibility
to determine whether or not an action is suspicious and to file
that report remains with financial institutions. The exchanges
that were organized at this time were information-sharing
mechanisms, and FinCEN does not suggest that reporting based on
constitutional rights is an indicator for suspicious activity.
Mr. Garbarino. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has
expired. The gentlewoman from California, Mrs. Kim, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
Under Secretary Nelson and Director Gacki for joining us today.
I want to address a very important issue today that is a
life-or-death issue for many: 6,959 Californians died of
opioid-related overdoses in 2023 alone, and that is an 115-
percent increase from just 2019. Many of these deaths were
preventable tragedies involving fentanyl, and while these are
just statistics, let's remember that there is a family involved
in every one of these cases.
So I want to ask you, Director Gacki, what private sector
tools does FinCEN utilize to help provide data for
investigations and enforcement on curbing the flow of fentanyl
into the United States, and, of course, we are concerned about
illicit drugs also coming into our country. So, do you have an
opinion on effective data and information products from the
private sector that can help combat the money laundering that
facilitates this drug trafficking?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Congresswoman Kim. This is an
incredibly important topic for the Treasury Department as a
whole, and just last week, a FinCEN team was in Los Angeles
with law enforcement and financial institutions, sharing
information with financial institutions to help them detect
evidence of fentanyl trafficking so that they can support law
enforcement efforts, knowing that the fentanyl supply chain
often begins with precursors and different types of die molds,
often in China, coming to Mexico, where it is then trafficked
into the United States.
Understanding this and sharing those typologies, this is
something that FinCEN has been working hard to do, and the
event in Los Angeles last week was one of several that we have
done over the past year, including at the border, and the
borders of Ohio and Kentucky and other places.
Mrs. Kim. Director Gacki, sorry to stop you, but last
month, I know the U.S. and the People's Republic of China (PRC)
launched a Bilateral Counter Narcotics Working Group to counter
this manufacturing and trafficking of illicit synthetic drugs,
but here is my concern. I am afraid that we may be giving away
some of our leverage by lifting some sanctions, and once again,
we are caving into the empty promises made by Chinese
officials.
So, I want to direct this question to you, Mr. Nelson. Can
you tell us about the role of Treasury in the working group?
Mr. Nelson. Yes. Thank you for the question, and we did
participate at a high level in the Counter-Narcotics Working
Group, and I think coming out of the meeting between President
Biden and President Xi, we have seen China start to take
meaningful action. They have sent guidance to the chemical
companies that make these precursors about export restrictions.
They did that in 2019, and we saw a meaningful drop in the
import into the United States of those fentanyl precursors. We
also understand that they have started to take law enforcement
action as well. So, we do think there is an opportunity, from
the Treasury perspective, to work on an operational level with
China to identify those typologies for the use of sort of money
launderers and other illicit financiers in support of the
transfer of these precursors.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. We know from experience that we cannot
solely rely on the commitments made by Xi Jinping or Chinese
officials. So, I just want to make sure that we do everything
we can to ensure that PRC officials are abiding by their
commitments in the Working Group.
Let me move on to the next issue. While I understand that
there is a need to engage the PRC on national security and
economic matters, I don't believe in rewarding the regime
without significant concessions on their part. We also know the
so-called, ``teapot,'' refineries in China can help Iran evade
Western sanctions. And Bloomberg reported that Chinese imports
on sanctioned Iranian oil are running at the highest level in
at least a decade. I know this issue was brought up, but has
Treasury discussed Iranian exports of crude oil to China in the
Bilateral Economic Working Group?
Mr. Nelson. I don't know that it is been discussed in
either the Economic Working Group or the Financial Working
Group to date. I know China, as a member of the Financial
Action Task Force--this is an AML/CFT issue. So I think in that
context, there will be opportunities to engage our Chinese
counterparts on this issue going forward.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you very much. My time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes of questions.
Director Gacki, I would like to follow up on a question
that my colleague, Representative Loudermilk, asked a moment
ago. He mentioned Treasury has far exceeded the deadline to
comply with Section 6204 of the Anti-Money Laundering Act of
2020, which pertains to a review of the reporting requirements
on suspicious activity reports and currency transaction
reports. While I understand that you mentioned that this review
is in progress, and there was a request for information issued,
I am wondering what the holdup is on Treasury's end, and can
you provide a timeline for when we will receive this report?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, sir. Just to reiterate, we issued our
request for information in 2021, and received 140 comments in
2022, and these particular reports require a tremendous amount
of coordination. We are working with nearly 2 dozen Federal and
State Government agencies to work through this. We are looking
at certain low-value SARs. Some of the things that we are
looking at would be to potentially automate certain low-value
SARs to ease impact on industry modifying or removing the
aggregation requirement of currency transaction reports. We are
looking at streamlining or automating the continuing activity
reviews and evaluating, of course, the applicable filing
thresholds.
I would like to get with my team and give you an informed
response as to when we will be able to file these important
reports with you, but I want to assure you that this is
something that we are taking very seriously and are working
toward completing in the near term.
Mr. Garbarino. Okay. So, 2022 was when you received the
comments, and we are now in 2024, so I just want to reiterate
that this is very outdated. The existing SARs are very outdated
and ineffective, in my opinion, and we need to be encouraging
some innovation, so the quicker you can get back to us on those
reports, the better. Thank you.
Under Secretary, for years we have had warnings from the
intelligence community about state-sponsored cyber actors, and
now we have them as a reality. Earlier this week, the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), the
National Security Agency (NSA), the FBI, and other governmental
agencies confirmed that the People's Republic of China has
successfully infiltrated the networks of U.S. critical
infrastructure. PRC-sponsored Volt Typhoon hackers are pre-
positioning themselves on IT networks to enable lateral
movement to IoT assets to disrupt functions within our water,
energy, and communication sectors, among others. This advisory
comes on the heels of OFAC's decision to sanction six members
of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps for their role in
exploiting industrial control devices used in water systems and
other critical infrastructure sectors, including the
Pennsylvania Water Authority.
While the recent sanctions are a positive step, the
Administration needs to do more to hold nations like Iran and
China accountable. My question to you is, what is OFAC doing to
counter these PRC cyber incursions now that the Administration
has acknowledged so publicly that they are currently in our
networks?
Mr. Nelson. I really appreciate the question, and I think
you identified our overall strategy at Treasury partially to
identify and then obviously designate/disrupt those malicious
cyber actors, and then, in the context of what we can do to
better protect critical infrastructure and, from the Treasury
Department's perspective, obviously our financial
infrastructure. Those are two significant lines of effort that
we are undergoing, but I think in terms of more specifics on
sort of our tactics and strategy, that conversation is best had
in a classified setting.
Mr. Garbarino. I understand that there are classified
portions of this, and I understand that we have to do better at
making sure not just our government networks, but also our
critical infrastructure, which, I think, 80 percent of it is
privately held, that those networks are protected. But
publicly, I think people want to know what we are doing to hold
the PRC and the bad actors accountable. I know there were some
sanctions, but what else is in the works? I don't need to know
the classified stuff, but can we know what is being done
publicly so people can see that this is being addressed?
Mr. Nelson. It is a great question, and I think it goes to
really the whole-of-government approach to this, because
sometimes Treasury tools are the most appropriate and going to
be the most impactful, either from a disruption perspective or
creating deterrence. Sometimes, it is obviously the Department
of Justice's tools. Sometimes, it is other tools. So, a lot of
our conversation is trying to identify what is going to be the
most effective disruptive action----
Mr. Garbarino. Are additional sanctions on the table?
Mr. Nelson. Not to preview additional sanctions, but we are
always working with our interagency partners about whether
sanctions are the best tool in this context when we identify
actors who are either in our systems or engaged in other,
frankly, malicious cyber activity.
Mr. Garbarino. My time has expired. I now recognize the
gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Flood, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One thing I think about
as it relates to FinCEN is the cybersecurity efforts associated
with the data that you collect. FinCEN is collecting
information pursuant to the Bank Secrecy Act, the Patriot Act,
and the Corporate Transparency Act. This information from all
of these different statutory sources can be sensitive in
nature. It is critically important to me and the people I
represent that FinCEN is able to properly safeguard that
information. For example, the beneficial ownership reporting
requirements put FinCEN in charge of a centralized database of
beneficial owner information for small businesses across the
country. Director Gacki, how does FinCEN plan to safeguard
beneficial ownership information, which it is beginning to
collect on a large scale, from cyberattacks?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Congressman Flood. I want to state at
the outset that we take this obligation very seriously and have
built the database to the highest security of FISMA standards
for unclassified systems. Having built in security to the
database, we now are putting up the appropriate guardrails to
govern access to this information. Access to this information
is set by statute. There are only certain categories of law
enforcement, Federal, State, local, tribal, and different
national security professionals that can get access to it, and
financial institutions and their regulators.
In order to get access to this information, we have built a
system and will set in place agreements to ensure that
information is only accessed according to the procedures we put
in place and kept secure and that it is auditable so that we
are able to ensure that this information is kept secure, and
that this information is not re-disclosed unless it is
authorized by the statute. And we are currently working through
a phased implementation plan to the data as it is being
populated, and we will be setting in place these appropriate
structures for access.
Mr. Flood. One of the benefits we have in Nebraska is that
as a motor vehicle operator in the State of Nebraska, I can
file a public records request with the DMV, and they will tell
me who has accessed my information from the Committee on
Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) or the law
enforcement registry so that I, as a citizen, can know who has
had access to my information. Will that be available to a
citizen of the United States not associated with law
enforcement?
Ms. Gacki. Sir, I believe that the records are exempt from
requests under the Privacy Act like that or from the Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA), so I don't believe that is the case,
but if I am wrong, we will certainly get back to you.
Mr. Flood. And my point here is I want a way to know that
the audits are happening and that they are being carried out,
and that a citizen can police the government if there are
abuses. We are dealing with this in other areas. And I am
confident that you are working to accomplish that, but knowing
that you have a system with an audit in place, and maybe the
Inspector General needs to participate here, but I would like
to know that there is a third party not associated with the
agency that is policing this.
One concern I have--and I am on the AI Task Force--relates
to the use of artificial intelligence and the potential that it
could be used by bad actors in a targeted way to penetrate
guarded systems. I guess as FinCEN, you presented the other
day, your agency did. Can you talk about artificial
intelligence in that scope.
Ms. Gacki. Oh, thank you so much, Congressman Flood. When
it comes to artificial intelligence, we see a couple of
different ways it intersects with FinCEN's work. First off, we
are very cognizant that it could lower the barriers for bad
actors to commit fraud, et cetera, and we need tools to be able
to both look at that and articulate it and provide different
red flag indicators to help financial institutions and law
enforcement look for that.
But we also see it as a potential technological innovation
to actually help and aid in the compliance with our Bank
Secrecy Act and other obligations. And we have been working
through our Bank Secrecy Act advisory group, with different
financial institutions and other players, to understand the
technology advances that can be brought to bear and can
actually help in meeting Bank Secrecy Act obligations.
But finally, we also want to be sensitive to any built-in
biases or any other types of issues with AI and other
technology. And that is why we recommend responsible innovation
but also testing and audit to make sure that the tools are
being used appropriately and as intended.
Mr. Flood. Thank you for your comments. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Iowa, Mr. Nunn, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
you both being here today. It's good work that you are trying
to do.
I want to highlight a couple of things. Your offices and
agencies are trusted, independent bodies, and we appreciate
that very much, with the mission of protecting Americans from
nefarious actors. I would like to note that since my short time
in office here of just less than 13 months, I have witnessed
continuous decisions that have hurt small businesses back in my
home State of Iowa, so I would like to have a conversation
about this.
One of the most concerning rules out of Treasury is the new
beneficial ownership reporting requirement. I hear from small
businesses across Iowa every day on this, whether it is a Main
Street business or a family farm, which is why I am proud to
have co-led the Protect Small Business and Prevent Illicit
Financial Activity Act by Congresswoman Beatty. And I fail to
understand why the Department did not adopt two other critical
parts of this bill that were passed by the House of
Representatives 420-1. Now, we all know in this city, that type
of bipartisan agreement is something that should be celebrated,
and I am hoping it is going to be considered by Treasury.
Director Gacki, let me begin with you. My State has over
270,000 small businesses. We are a small State of 3 million
people. I want to thank you for moving the filing deadline for
new businesses to 90 days, which my bill codified. However,
there are two crucial parts of that bill that you did not
adopt, so let's begin there. Why did FinCEN choose not to
extend the filing deadline for small businesses from 1 year to
2 years?
Ms. Gacki. Thank you, Congressman. In consultation, we
believe that it is important to get this database populated
because of the critical need it serves to unmask shell and
front companies that are being used for narcotics trafficking,
for----
Mr. Nunn. We are going to get into that, and I fully
appreciate it. But Congress has said overwhelmingly that we
want a 24-month runway for this, and you are continuing with a
12-month runway, which might be great for the big guys but it
is crushing my small guys. So I will re-emphasize to you, we
need time to execute on this and do it the right way.
Second, you did not close the loopholes that would prevent
bad actors from exploiting those loopholes and avoiding
disclosures of a potentially nefarious beneficial owner. I
think I understand why, but do you want to highlight again from
your perspective, quickly?
Ms. Gacki. Again, I just think that it is critical to get
this data in on an expedited timeline so it can serve and be
useful and critical for law enforcement and national security,
which is why we proceeded as we have.
Mr. Nunn. Understood. I think we are all there on the
national security front. Let's make sure we are doing it the
right way, and again, I would ask you to look at those
loopholes. I think that is something on which we all
collectively agree.
Mr. Nelson, I understand your position as Under Secretary
is a full-time job. At the same time, I want to switch gears to
what we are trying to do against Iran right now, a country that
has benefited from $80 billion in illicit oil trade, primarily
through a ghost armada. We have spoken to Treasury multiple
times on this issue, and multiple times, Treasury Department
has come back and told me there is nothing that they can do on
U.S. soil. However, the United Against Nuclear Iran Group is
highlighting ghost armadas being covered in part or in whole by
a New York-based company right here on U.S. soil, where
Treasury has the authority, called the American Club.
On January 12th, you did announce sanctions on one of those
ships only after our comments here, and mine particularly in
December, calling them out, at which point Treasury came back
and told me that there was no insurance company providing that
to a ghost fleet. Clearly, that was wrong. Now, Treasury has
moved forward and sanctioned, including the SINCERE 02--here it
is fueling up with illicit fuel--and specifically said that
this was linked to Houthi rebels who had fired multiple times
on U.S. carrier strike groups, most recently, sadly, resulting
in the loss of American lives. So, yes or no, did Treasury look
into the American Club yet?
Mr. Nelson. I think our staff has been in touch with your
staff. We are looking at it.
Mr. Nunn. You wrote me a tersely-worded letter that said
there is nothing to see at the American Club. Yes, I have that
here.
Mr. Nelson. We are looking at it. We will continue to look
at it. We are taking it seriously.
Mr. Nunn. Let me read in part what was reported in
Bloomberg. Your office says that it announced that SINCERE 02
was part of a network link to al-Jamal, an Iran-based financer
of Houthi rebels in Yemen, that Houthi then launched rocket
attacks based on those funds provided. What are we doing to
shut down the ghost fleet? I would like a tangible example.
Mr. Nelson. I will answer as quickly as I can, but it goes
to effectively trying to constrain the fleet that has engaged
in this obfuscation behavior that we are seeing, that is
relying on behavior so that----
Mr. Nunn. Mr. Nelson, is this ship currently under sanction
for carrying illicit----
Mr. Flood. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Nunn. ----SINCERE 02, yes or no?
Mr. Nelson. I can't----
Mr. Nunn. It is the SINCERE 02.
Mr. Flood. Mr. Nunn, your time has expired.
Mr. Nelson. We will come back and either provide a briefing
or----
Mr. Flood. The gentleman from New York, Mr. Lawler, is now
recognized.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Nunn. It is a U.S. insurance company.
Mr. Lawler. Really quickly, can you answer his question?
Mr. Nelson. Again, I will have to come back and provide a
precise answer for you.
Mr. Lawler. Do you not know or you just can't say in this
setting?
Mr. Nelson. I think it is worthwhile to describe the work
that we are doing with the P&I clubs here and in other flagged
jurisdictions, in the context of how we are investigating
vessels to----
Mr. Lawler. The question has been asked of you at least 3
times since November. Can you provide an answer expeditiously,
like, this week?
Mr. Nelson. We will try to provide an answer expeditiously.
Mr. Lawler. We are here today at a time of heightened
concern with America and our allies around the globe facing
serious crises and threats from adversaries and terrorist
regimes emboldened and on the march. These adversaries are
working together to undermine our national interests and
advance their agendas. In the wake of the appalling terrorist
attack against Israel on October 7th, it is clear that we must
work to confront Iran and its surrogates in the region with a
strong sanctions regime.
It has been reported that the impacts of this
Administration's relaxed approach to enforcing economic
sanctions has resulted in over $80 billion flowing into the
Iranian regime's pockets. Some of these funds have almost
certainly ended up in the hands of Iranian-backed proxies and
terrorist groups in the region. Since October 7th, these
proxies have waged hundreds of attacks on American troops,
military installations, and on international maritime trade in
the Red Sea. Funding for these attacks could have come from
Iran's oil trade, which is primarily driven by China's
significant purchases.
With that said, I would like to follow up on something Mr.
Lucas touched on, which is my concern regarding China
purchasing the vast majority of Iranian exports. I know you
said earlier that you couldn't say exactly how many Chinese
financial institutions you have sanctioned for facilitating
this trade. It appears there is still a serious and potentially
growing issue. So, I would just follow up with, why are we
allowing Chinese banks to get away with evading these sanctions
and funding these groups, and do you believe that we are fully
addressing this relationship between China and Iran with the
tools you have or is there more that must be done?
Mr. Nelson. Thanks for the question, and obviously, we
share the concern. I think the dynamic with the smaller,
``teapot,'' refineries that are purchasing this oil is twofold.
One, the refined product is used for a domestic audience, so
there isn't a touchpoint to the international financial system
in terms of necessarily the easy repatriation of those profits
back to Iran. And two, the challenge that we often find
ourselves in is the financial institutions that are being
relied on for those transfers, again, don't have touchpoints to
the international financial system.
What we are trying to do is nonetheless focus on those
touchpoints to the international financial system that do rely
on in how Iran is getting the profits from those sales back
into country, focused on ways we can further inhibit the
transfer of the oil. Designating the ships and the vehicles and
the ghost fleet that are carrying sanctioned oil because they
carry it for Iran, they carry it for Russia, they carry it for
a bunch of these rogue regimes, and we have had some success in
identifying those touchpoints. Just as recently as last week,
we sanctioned an IRGC-QF front company that was a China oil and
petroleum company. As we are seeing those touchpoints to the
international financial system, we can take disruptive action,
and the DOJ was able to seize $110 million that was going to
the IRGC-QF. We are doing that, but the touchpoints to the
international financial system are really where we have been
focused.
Mr. Lawler. Okay. I want to touch on something raised by
Mr. Issa. ActBlue Charities allowed a Palestinian academic and
cultural boycott of Israel to fundraise on its platform for 2
years until repeated calls by the examiner to address this were
heeded. The Palestinian Campaign for the Academic and Cultural
Boycott of Israel (PACBI) is a founding member organization of
the Palestinian BDS National Committee, which is a committee
that has included Palestinian national and Islamic forces, a
coalition represented by U.S.-designated terror groups, such as
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad, Hamas, the Palestinian Liberation
front, and others.
Under Secretary Nelson, Mr. Issa sent you this letter on
September 21, 2023, asking multiple questions regarding whether
ActBlue Charities has raised funds for international terrorism
through its fundraising, collaboration, and inquiring about a
review. It is my understanding he has still not received a
response, so can you answer? Have you conducted any such
review, and will you respond to Representative Issa?
Mr. Nelson. We will, of course, respond to the letter.
Mr. Lawler. Have you conducted any such review yet?
Mr. Nelson. I will have to go back and talk to my staff,
but we will respond to the letter.
Mr. Lawler. So at this moment, you are not aware of any
such review?
Mr. Nelson. I am not currently aware of any.
Mr. Flood. Gentleman, your time has expired.
Mr. Nelson. And just to confirm, we----
Mr. Flood. Mr. Nelson, his time has expired. You will have
the opportunity to respond in writing.
I would like to thank Under Secretary Nelson and Director
Gacki for their testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
I ask you, our witnesses, to please respond no later than
April 12, 2024.
With that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:40 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

February 14, 2024

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
