- OVERSIGHT OF THE FINANCIAL CRIMES ENFORCEMENT NETWORK (FinCEN) AND THE OFFICE OF TERRORISM AND FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE (TFI)

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE FINANCIAL CRIMES
ENFORCEMENT NETWORK (FinCEN)
AND THE OFFICE OF TERRORISM AND
FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE (TFI)

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY,
ILLICIT FINANCE, AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 27, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-16

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-394 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JUAN VARGAS, California
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           RITCHIE TORRES, New York
YOUNG KIM, California                SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE LAWLER, New York                BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
Subcommittee on National Security, Illicit Finance,
and International Financial Institutions

BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri, Chairman

ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio, Ranking Member
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
YOUNG KIM, California, Vice          BILL FOSTER, Illinois
Chairwoman                       JUAN VARGAS, California
ZACH NUNN, Iowa                      JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
April 27, 2023...............................................     1
Appendix:
April 27, 2023...............................................    33

WITNESSES
Thursday, April 27, 2023

Das, Himamauli, Acting Director, Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network (FinCEN)...............................................     6
Nelson, Hon. Brian E., Under Secretary for Terrorism and
Financial Intelligence, U.S. Department of the Treasury........     4

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Das, Himamauli...............................................    34
Nelson, Hon. Brian E.........................................    48

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Luetkemeyer, Hon. Blaine:
Study by the The Anti-Human Trafficking Intelligence
Initiative and the University of New Haven's Center for
Forensic Investigations of Trafficking in Persons..........    56
Written statement of the American Gaming Association.........    79
Financial Crimes Compliance (FCC) Rulebook...................    94
Written statement of FinClusive..............................   101
Letter to Attorney General Merrick Garland, dated February 1,
2023.......................................................   107
Project on Government Oversight Fact Sheet...................   109
Texas Association of Business report entitled, ``Anti-Money
Laundering Regulation, Correspondent Banking, and the
Adverse Economic Effects for the U.S.-Mexico Bilateral
Relationship,'' by Robert Shapiro, with Isaac Yoder, dated
April 2022.................................................   112
Transparency International U.S. report entitled, ``Up to the
Task? The state of play in countries committed to freezing
and seizing Russian dirty money''..........................   164
War on the Rocks report, ``Incentivizing Whistleblowers to
Combat Sanctions Evasion,'' by Alex Zerden and Arshan
Barzani, dated April 27, 2023..............................   217
Loudermilk, Hon. Barry:
Letter to Himamauli Das from the American Fintech Council,
dated April 3, 2023........................................   226
Letter from Treasury, dated April 26, 2023...................   232
Pettersen, Hon. Brittany:
Opening statement of Representative Beatty...................   235
Nelson, Hon. Brian E.:
Written responses to questions for the record from Chairman
McHenry....................................................   236
Written responses to questions for the record from Ranking
Member Waters..............................................   260
Das, Himamauli:
Written responses to questions for the record from Chairman
McHenry....................................................   242
Written responses to questions for the record from Ranking
Member Waters..............................................   270
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Luetkemeyer.................................   282
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Beatty......................................   284
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Meuser......................................   286

OVERSIGHT OF THE FINANCIAL CRIMES
ENFORCEMENT NETWORK (FinCEN) AND
THE OFFICE OF TERRORISM AND
FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE (TFI)

----------

Thursday, April 27, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on National Security,
Illicit Finance, and International
Financial Institutions,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:03 p.m., in
room 2220, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Blaine
Luetkemeyer [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Luetkemeyer, Barr,
Williams of Texas, Loudermilk, Meuser, Kim, Nunn, De La Cruz,
Ogles; Gonzalez, Nickel, Pettersen, Vargas, and Gottheimer.
Also present: Representative Davidson.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The Subcommittee on National
Security, Illicit Finance, and International Financial
Institutions will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Welcome to our humble and confining room today. Sorry about
this, but we have multiple hearings going on, and we drew the
short straw. But anyway, today's hearing is entitled,
``Oversight of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
(FinCEN) and the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence
(TFI).''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Under Secretary Nelson, Director Das, thank you both for
being here today. Proper oversight of administrative agencies
by Congress is an important responsibility we exercise to
ensure those very agencies are fulfilling their statutory
responsibilities and adhering to congressional intent. For far
too long, FinCEN has operated under the radar, quietly amassing
new authorities that, frankly, would shock the American
citizens. The amount of information FinCEN has access to likely
makes our intelligence community very jealous. It is imperative
that Congress pull back the curtain on these authorities and
the ways in which FinCEN uses them. Along with a seemingly
ever-expanding list of authorities, it has become clear that
the burden on investment for the immense regulatory burdens
FinCEN places on financial institutions is lacking.
In February, I sent a letter to Attorney General Garland
about Section 6201 of the Anti-Money Laundering Act (AMLA) of
2020. This letter was my response to a jaw-dropping report that
outlines the Department of Justice's (DOJ) failure to track
statistics on how it uses Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) reports,
despite statutory mandates. The DOJ's disregard for that
section of AMLA 2020 and its inability to state the usefulness
of the data begs the question of whether the burdensome
reporting is worthwhile.
Without objection, I request unanimous consent to submit a
copy of this letter into the record.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
Neither of our witnesses sustained control of how the DOJ
uses BSA data. I know that. But this is DOJ's issue, and it is
emblematic of the larger problem before us today. FinCEN and
the Treasury Department have shown themselves to be unable to
properly balance national security with limiting burdens on
those they regulate, for example the ongoing Beneficial
Ownership rulemaking.
Earlier this month, I joined a letter, led by Chairman
McHenry and Senator Whitehouse, on your most recent notice and
request for comment on the Beneficial Ownership form that small
businesses will have to fill out. We had six Members of the
House and six Members of the Senate, including Chairs and
Ranking Members, join a letter to push back on what should have
been a straightforward notice. This FinCEN notice was so off-
base that Congress had to put forward a bicameral and
bipartisan response to tell you that enough is enough. During a
time in American politics where Republicans and Democrats can
rarely agree, we all are able to rally around the fact that
FinCEN is not getting it right. I hope you read our message
loud and clear.
The Corporate Transparency Act (CTA) was created to be a
strategic tool to target bad actors abusing our financial
system, while simultaneously reducing the editorial burden on
both small businesses and regulated entities. FinCEN's proposed
Beneficial Ownership rule fails to reduce the burden on
financial institutions by forcing them to collect information
that the law clearly states that FinCEN should be collecting.
Moving on to sanctions, we need to demand accountability
from Treasury for its refusal to stop Russia from waging war on
Ukraine. As the Institute of International Finance has shown,
Russian imports are stable from a year ago, with Chinese
exports making up for Western goods. The Treasury has allowed
sanctioned Russian banks to use the U.S. financial system to
rake in energy-related revenues, and it worked to roll back
tough European Union (EU) sanctions on Russian crude. Treasury
appears to care more about the oil market and Democrats'
electoral prospects than Putin's war or Putin's war crimes.
This is shameful.
In China, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) continues to
perpetuate genocide against the Uyghurs. While Treasury has
sanctioned a number of foreign leaders around the world, top
officials in the Chinese Politburo have been spared. There is
no excuse for this inaction. History will not judge this
Administration kindly if Under Secretary Nelson and his
colleagues refuse to punish Beijing for its controversies.
With that, the Chair now recognizes the vice ranking member
of the subcommittee, the gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms.
Pettersen, for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am sitting in
the seat today as vice ranking member of the subcommittee
because Ranking Member Beatty is unavailable, and I would like
to ask for unanimous consent to include her opening statement
in the record.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you. And I thank you all for being
here today, and for the critical work that you are doing to
protect our country from domestic and international terrorism
and to stop criminals who specialize in drug, human, and
firearms trafficking from utilizing the American financial
system to exploit people throughout our communities.
One area of your focus that is a top priority for me is
working together to stop the flood of fentanyl into this
country. Like too many Americans, my family has been impacted
by the opioid crisis. My mom's addiction began with the over-
prescription of opioids, which led to heroin, and ultimately
fentanyl, when it started to take over the drug supply chain in
2016. Unfortunately, my mom's story is not unique in Jefferson
County or in Colorado or in the United States as a whole. The
opioid epidemic is now more lethal than ever as we continue to
see drugs become more and more potent and easier to traffic.
We have seen the devastating impacts of overdoses and
fentanyl poisoning across this country and around the world.
Addressing this crisis with the urgency and dedication needed
to save lives and protect our kids is going to require
significant resources for agencies like yours to stop the drug
cartels from utilizing our financial system to launder money,
and to support better coordination between agencies, as well as
stopping the widespread distribution and sale of illicit drugs
through social media platforms and payment apps. The agencies
you represent play an essential role in all of this.
TFI and FinCEN are not solely working in prevention.
Instead, your agencies specialize in identifying criminal
activities and then using the intelligence to detect and
disrupt their activities. As a mom of a 3-year-old, I want to
thank you for what you and your team are doing to protect our
country, and I look forward to discussing your essential work
in more depth, including the updates on the Anti-Money
Laundering Act of 2020 and the Corporate Transparency Act of
2020, which, after being fully implemented, will likely
represent one of the most-significant efforts in decades to
combat the financing of terrorism and other criminal activity
that threatens the United States.
I am deeply concerned with the budget reductions that were
just passed out of the House yesterday and what this means for
our national security and the future of our country. The Office
of TFI and its subagencies, like FinCEN and the Office of
Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), are already understaffed. If the
cuts that just passed in the House budget were to go into
effect, the capacity and capability of these agencies to
effectively do their jobs will be seriously curtailed. We will
see significant staff cuts, and potentially, program cuts. I
know that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle also
care deeply about these issues, and and we must forcefully
speak up against these budget cuts that will make our country
less-safe and will hinder the important work that agencies like
yours are undertaking every day. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you.
With that, today we welcome, first, Brian Nelson, the Under
Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence at the U.S.
Department of the Treasury. Prior to joining Treasury, Mr.
Nelson was the chief legal officer at LA28, the organizing
committee for the 2028 Olympic and Paralympic Games in Los
Angeles. His previous government service includes roles as a
senior policy advisor, policy chief, and general counsel in the
California Department of Justice.
And second, Himamauli Das, the Acting Director of the
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN). Prior to his
role as Acting Director of FinCEN, Mr. Das was most recently
chief legal officer with Compliance Consultancy, K2 Integrity,
as well as an advisor with CM International, Global Government
Relations and Public Policy, and Crowell & Moring LLP. His
prior roles at the Treasury include General Counsel, Assistant
General Counsel for International Affairs, and Acting Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Trade and Investment.
We thank each of your taking the time to be here today.
Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to present your
oral testimony. And without objection, each of your written
statements will be made a part of the record.
Under Secretary Nelson, you are now recognized for 5
minutes for your remarks. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE BRIAN E. NELSON, UNDER SECRETARY FOR
TERRORISM AND FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE
TREASURY

Mr. Nelson. Thank you so much, and good afternoon, Chairman
Luetkemeyer, Vice Ranking Member Pettersen, Chairman McHenry--
who joined us earlier--as well as the distinguished members of
the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with
you about the Treasury Department's efforts and achievements on
Anti-Money Laundering/Countering the Financing of Terrorism
(AML/CFT) and the critical work that Treasury's Terrorism and
Financial Intelligence Office (TFI) does to safeguard the U.S.
and international financial systems.
In the past few years, the demand for expertise has grown
exponentially. In the past year alone, the Department has
played a central role in a range of national security
priorities, including in the response to Russia's further
invasion of Ukraine. Simultaneously, we understand that illicit
actors have taken advantage of gaps within the U.S. and
international financial systems.
One of TFI's core missions is to close these exploitable
gaps. We do this in a number of ways, including by promulgating
regulations for a comprehensive and risk-based AML/CFT
framework, identifying typologies of illicit finance,
collecting, analyzing, and sharing information, strengthening
international AML/CFT standards, taking enforcement actions,
and engaging the private sector and non-governmental
organizations. This approach gives TFI flexibility in
responding to systemic threats to the domestic and
international financial systems. It also enables us to balance
national security and economic considerations while mitigating
the unintended consequences of our authorities, including
sanctions.
Sanctions continue to be a very effective tool of U.S.
foreign policy. In response to Russia's aggression in Ukraine,
our efforts included issuing 4 Executive Orders, over 80 new or
amended general licenses, over 200 frequently-asked questions,
and more than 2,300 new or amended designations. Working with
allies, we have immobilized Russia's central bank reserves held
in partner countries and sanctioned and de-SWIFTed some of
Russia's largest banks.
Our sanctions have degraded Russia's ability to replace
over 10,000 tanks and pieces of equipment lost since the start
of this war, forced production shutdowns at key defense
facilities, and caused shortages of essential components for
tanks and aircraft. Russia is also running out of munitions,
and they are turning to Soviet-era weapons. Meanwhile, with
your support, we and our allies and partners have provided
Ukraine with state-of-the-art military equipment. Our work, of
course, continues, and we are focusing on disrupting Russia's
efforts to evade our sanctions.
As the largest economy in the world, the U.S. must close
the gaps in our own domestic AML/CFT regime, while increasing
transparency and accountability globally. The latest AML/CFT
tools are available because of the bipartisan Anti-Money
Laundering Act of 2020 (AMLA). Implementing the AMLA and the
Corporate Transparency Act is my top priority. For example,
starting on January 1, 2024, many companies formed or operating
in the United States will need to begin to report information
about their Beneficial Owners to FinCEN. This is a key step to
making our financial system harder for illicit actors to
exploit. We are also developing guidance materials and a
helpline to assist small businesses and help minimize reporting
burdens while ensuring the information remains valuable for law
enforcement.
Beyond our regulatory agenda, we must continue to address
the de-risking of financial institutions, which can
disproportionately affect the humanitarian community, small
nation-states, and underserved populations. This work is
critical to maintaining the strength of the U.S. financial
system. On April 25th, the Treasury Department released its
first-ever de-risking strategy, which identifies key customer
categories often impacted by de-risking, top causal factors
behind de-risking, and policy options for combating it.
Through all of this work, our partnership with the private
sector and civil society is truly paramount. I am focused on
further bolstering this needed dialogue. We also are continuing
to lead the world in mitigating the illicit finance risks of
emerging technologies and other evolving threats, including the
use of digital assets. TFI has published multiple risk
assessments on the topic of digital assets, including releasing
this month a decentralized finance risk assessment, the first
by any country in the world.
I will conclude, but I just want to stress that this work
has only been possible because of the dedicated men and women
of TFI, and I am deeply grateful to work side by side with them
every day. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Under Secretary Nelson can be
found on page 48 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Under Secretary Nelson.
Director Das, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HIMAMAULI DAS, ACTING DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL CRIMES
ENFORCEMENT NETWORK (FinCEN)

Mr. Das. Thank you very much. Subcommittee Chairman
Luetkemeyer, Subcommittee Vice Ranking Member Pettersen, and
Full Committee Chairman McHenry, thank you for the opportunity
to testify before this subcommittee.
First, I would like to thank both the Subcommittee and the
Full Committee for your support of FinCEN's work. As you know,
our mission is to promote national security and protect the
American public by working with our partners and stakeholders,
law enforcement and national security agencies, financial
regulators, and financial institutions to prevent financial
crimes from undermining the integrity of the U.S. financial
system. And I would like to thank those same partners for their
collaboration in ensuring an effective AML/CFT framework, one
that protects the American public while at the same time works
to minimize burdens for the American taxpayer and small
businesses. I would also like to take a moment to express my
heartfelt appreciation to the FinCEN team. They continue to
make Herculean efforts and deliver amazing results despite
significant headwinds.
I am pleased to report that FinCEN is working hard to meet
our many new and longstanding mandates, and I would like to
highlight a few of our efforts over the past year.
First of all, as Under Secretary Nelson mentioned,
implementation of the Beneficial Ownership information
framework continues to be a top priority. We have dedicated
significant resources and all of our recent annual funding
increases to this effort because enhancing corporate
transparency and exposing anonymous shell companies will have
real benefits.
Criminals too often take advantage of opaque shell
companies in ways that hurt American taxpayers. In fact, just
10 days before we issued the final reporting rule on Beneficial
Ownership information, DOJ announced Federal criminal charges
against 47 defendants for their alleged roles in a $250-million
fraud scheme that exploited a federally-funded child nutrition
program during the COVID-19 pandemic. Among other things, the
defendants created dozens of shell companies to receive and
launder the proceeds of their fraudulent schemes.
And opaque shell companies are being abused by foreign
actors and drug trafficking organizations to undermine national
security. For example, opaque shell companies were used to
facilitate sanctions evasion by a Chinese national who used
U.S. businesses to facilitate the supply of military and
metallurgical items to Iran. In the future, the Beneficial
Ownership information database will help to provide enforcement
with efficient access to the Beneficial Ownership information
that it needs to investigate and indict criminals who hide
behind shell companies.
Increased transparency can also help honest U.S. businesses
that are both being defrauded and are being put at a
disadvantage when competing against criminals who exploit
vulnerabilities in our system in order to evade taxes and hide
their illicit wealth. That is why we are working hard to get
three things done before the new rules go into effect.
First, we are carefully reviewing public comments so that
we can finalize the regulatory framework and the forms needed
to report Beneficial Ownership information. Second, we are
designing and building the IT framework so that we can ensure a
secure and confidential database. And third, and most
importantly, we are reaching out to stakeholders, small
business groups, and State agencies, and at the same time,
working on guidance so that we can ensure that small
businesses, many of whom may never have heard of FinCEN,
understand their obligations, and so that reporting Beneficial
Ownership is as streamlined and as straightforward as possible.
We also continue to work hard to ensure that the U.S. has
an effective and risk-based AML/CFT framework. The Anti-Money
Laundering Act (AMLA) provides a clear roadmap to achieve these
objectives, to enhance feedback loops, to allow financial
institutions to focus on high-value reporting and higher risks,
to provide examiner training and focus on risk-based
supervision, and to modernize the AML/CFT framework. We
recognize that we have a lot of work to do and that these
efforts will require sustained engagement over time, close
collaboration with all stakeholders, and a fully-staffed FinCEN
team.
In closing, I would like to stress two important points.
First, the reporting that FinCEN receives from financial
institutions is invaluable to policymakers, to OFAC, and to law
enforcement and national security agencies to stop the Russian
government from misusing the global financial system to fund
Russia's war efforts, and to track fraudsters who prey on
Americans and small businesses. Simply speaking, America is
safer because of it. And second, trust and confidence in how we
manage and secure this information is fundamental. That is why
we are working closely with the Office of the Inspector General
(OIG) to address their concerns on an expedited basis.
I would like to close by reaffirming that FinCEN is
dedicated to the mission of protecting U.S. national security,
and the integrity of the U.S. in global financial systems, and
we look forward to continuing this collaborative relationship
with all of you. Thank you again, and I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Acting Director Das can be found
on page 34 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you, gentlemen. You both did
very well, and you stayed at the 5-minute mark. I appreciate
your respect of time.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
In my opening statement, I mentioned that DOJ has failed to
track BSA statistics. I was referencing an August 2022 GAO
report entitled, ``Bank Secrecy Act: Action Needed to Improve
DOJ's Statistics on Use of Reports on Suspicious Financial
Transactions.''
Acting Director Das, are you familiar with that report and
my letter about the lack of findings?
Mr. Das. Yes, I am, sir.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Okay. Within the report, GAO
highlighted only two agencies, the IRS Criminal Investigation
(IRS-CI) and the United States Secret Service, as having the
ability to collect data on their use of BSA reports. Has FinCEN
worked with either of those agencies to connect them with all
of the other law enforcement partners that have failed to track
and report this data to DOJ?
Mr. Das. Yes, sir. We have worked with IRS-CI, we have
worked with the U.S. Secret Service, and we have worked with
other law enforcement agencies to have a conversation around
how to better improve their tracking of statistics around the
use of BSA reporting, and we will continue to engage with them
on this effort to be able to improve those statistics. In fact,
we recently published a FinCEN 2022 Year in Review, which
included a number of statistics where we engage with law
enforcement to better track some of this information, and we
continue to work to improve that tracking of information. This
will be a continuing effort, and I am committed to doing it.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Under Secretary Nelson, can you
describe how you have encouraged the DOJ to improve statistics
on their use of the BSA report?
Mr. Nelson. We have consistently heard from law enforcement
partners about the usefulness of SAR reporting, and, of course,
as Mr. Das noted, we are making efforts to track their use of
the reports more closely. I would just step back and note that
FinCEN has really, I think, done an admirable job of playing
the broker between financial institutions and law enforcement
to ensure that the BSA reporting that law enforcement is
receiving is very valuable in connecting financial institutions
directly to law enforcement and continuing to make sure that
there is an effective feedback loop between both law
enforcement and financial institutions.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. If I have time, I want to come back
to this issue, but I have a couple of questions that I want to
make sure we get to first.
Director Das, you talked about the IG report, working with
the IG on some things. The IG report is coming out shortly. We
haven't gotten it yet, but I understand that there are 28 areas
of concern in that report. Are you working with the IG to
address all of those issues?
Mr. Das. Yes, sir. We are engaged in a constructive
relationship with the Office of the Inspector General, and we
are working with them constructively in terms of addressing the
concerns that they have already raised to us with respect to
the various dimensions of their reports. While we haven't seen
the draft reports yet, with respect to each of the four
elements of the audit, we have already started aggressively
working to implement and address their concerns. And, in fact,
we are making substantial progress on that front, and we are
engaged with the Office of Inspector General on a regular basis
to be responsive.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. When we get our hands on the report,
we are going to look at it very carefully, and we may either
have another hearing or ask you to report in written form to
some of the stuff that is in there. So, we will continue to
work with whatever they find.
Under Secretary Nelson, you are kind of all things with
regards to sanctions. I sit on the China Select Committee. We
are concerned about China invading Taiwan. We have just had a
very instrumental situation, a learning moment from Russians
invading Ukraine. We weren't ready with regards to sanctions.
We did everything after the fact. My question to you is the
same one I posed to Fed Chairman Powell a few weeks ago.
Knowing that this is going to happen--I don't think anybody
would deny that it is not a matter of if, it is a matter of
when--have you folks at Treasury started to work on a program
where you start identifying individuals, entities, and
countries that you are getting ready to sanction?
Mr. Nelson. As you know, we don't preview our sanctions
actions, but Treasury Secretary Yellen has been clear as
recently as last week that we will use all of the tools in our
toolbox.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. You don't have to tell what the plan
looks like. Are you putting together a plan? That is all you
have to say.
Mr. Nelson. As I said, I appreciate the question and the
spirit of the question. We just don't preview the work that we
are doing.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Okay. I assume you won't answer this
question either, but I am curious, because what we did against
Russia was to get our allies together to help us with the
sanctions. Are you doing this now, talking with allies and
getting more allies together so that we can have some friends
when this all happens, to be able to put something together
very quickly?
Mr. Nelson. One of the conversations that we have engaged
in quite significantly with allies and partners is supply chain
resilience, diversifying supply chains, and, ``friendshoring,''
as the Secretary has described it, so that is a conversation
that is ongoing. I was just in Europe last week having those
conversations with partners and allies.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Okay. Thank you very much. My time
has expired. I now recognize the vice ranking member, Ms.
Pettersen, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
again, Under Secretary Nelson and Director Das, for being with
us.
As I have mentioned, something that is very important to me
is addressing the opioid epidemic. And I think that any
American, any citizen that you talk to would support in general
the work that you are doing, but they would probably have a
harder time tying back to the impact that your work is bringing
to their community. And when I think about the opioid epidemic
specifically, all of us who are sitting up here today are
losing countless lives every day needlessly in our districts
because of fentanyl. Can you give a real-life example of what
you have been able to do to disrupt drug cartels and the
distribution of illicit drugs like fentanyl?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you. Thank you for that question, and as
you can imagine, this is a top priority for me, and for the
Treasury Department. The very first trip I took as Under
Secretary was to Mexico and I was just recently at the border
having exactly this conversation.
At Treasury, we have been focused on how we can disrupt the
money laundering activity that really is the base of the flow
of not only fentanyl to the United States, but also the
precursors and the equipment that it takes to press the pills.
And frankly, recently, we have done a number of actions to go
after both the transnational criminal organizations that are
involved in the fentanyl production, but also really focused,
as recently as, I guess, 2 weeks ago, on working across the
whole of government with partners at DOJ, DEA, and DHS to go
after whole networks of individuals.
We designated, again, a number of the suppliers of the
precursors from Treasury designation. There were a number of
indictments also revealed, but it was a multi-jurisdictional
global effort to really try to get after the networks that are
supporting this. And that is sort of the key, I think, the
value add that we bring at the Treasury Department is we focus
on those sorts of financial networks that really undergird the
shipment of these drugs. That includes mapping the networks,
trying to identify what they are, and then opportunities for
disruption, which include the use of our sanctions.
Ms. Pettersen. Great. Thank you. And I have already
mentioned how important your work is to the security of the
United States and the security of the people in our
communities. I am deeply concerned about the budget that was
just passed yesterday and the impacts that it will have on your
ability to continue to do your work and protect the United
States. Can you talk about exactly what these cuts would mean
for your agencies?
Mr. Nelson. I really appreciate that question. As the
Secretary noted just a few weeks ago, should we be faced with
such a cut, TFI, writ large, but really, OFAC, would be
particularly challenged in the imposition of our sanctions
authorities. As you all know, we have imposed sanctions to
address really every issue at the forefront of national
security. Their effectiveness and our ability to enforce them
would be diminished significantly. Our ability to go after
future bad actors would be compromised. And we are, as you can
imagine, constantly investigating ways we can strengthen our
sanctions, and that work would also suffer.
We also think it would come at a particularly terrible time
given all of the work that we are doing in support of Ukraine
in the context of Russia's illegal invasion of that country,
and the signal it would send to partners and allies to receive
that cut and going to the point of closing gaps within our own
system, the ability to identify Russian money and assets here.
I will stop there.
Ms. Pettersen. I only have 30 seconds left, but I wanted to
discuss what additional authority you all could utilize to
actually address the mass distribution of illicit drugs through
the social media platforms and other cash apps, so I will
follow up with you in writing. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you. The gentlelady yields
back. I now recognize the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr,
who is also the Chair of our Subcommittee on Financial
Institutions, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this very
important hearing. Under Secretary Nelson, we will work with
you on your budget, and a 1-percent increase every year is not
a cut--let me clarify--but we do need to prioritize funding for
OFAC because you have a lot of important work to do. I am
currently working on legislation that would block all U.S.
investment in Chinese military and surveillance companies
listed on Treasury's Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial
Complex Companies List (NS-CMIC List), as well as DOD's Chinese
Military Companies List, and Commerce's Entity List and
Military End User List. Can you describe the impact a U.S.
investment ban would have on these companies' access to
capital, and what impact would this have beyond the ban on
publicly-traded securities?
Mr. Nelson. I am tracking your bill, and I appreciate the
question and certainly the spirit behind it, and I would note
that is actually a different part of the Department of the
Treasury. It is the Office of Investment Security that will do
outbound investments, so I am happy to take that back and work
closely with them and provide technical assistance on that
piece of legislation.
Mr. Barr. Thank you. And I know the Administration is
working on an outbound investment screening effort as well. We
want to work with Treasury on that.
Mr. Nelson. We are happy to do that.
Mr. Barr. As Treasury promulgates the CMIC list, what
sectors specifically should OFAC pay particular attention to in
order to make sure U.S. investors are not unwittingly financing
Chinese entities that threaten our national security?
Mr. Nelson. At Treasury, we have obviously been
particularly focused on those entities that have been involved
in gross human rights abuses. As recently as a couple of weeks
ago, we designated an entity that was providing satellite
support for the Wagner Group. So, we are deeply focused on
getting after those entities within China and, frankly,
anywhere in the world that are providing support that is going
to be meaningful to Russia on the battlefield, and that has
been our focus.
Mr. Barr. And also I would just, and my bill will get at
this, but critical sectors--semiconductors, AI, dual-use
technologies that could compromise our national security,
military surveillance companies--we want those entities
targeted. Can you describe China's sanctions evasions
capabilities in light of its anti-foreign sanctions' laws, its
pursuit of a central bank digital currency (CBDC), the increase
in de-dollarized cross-border trade, and also their attempt to
create their own Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial
Telecommunications (SWIFT) system that would run counter to the
West's SWIFT program?
Mr. Nelson. Yes. Obviously, we are watching that very
closely. We at Treasury just put out a report on the future of
money and payments, which called for a Treasury-led interagency
group. And my office is responsible for the national security
implications of a CBDC here, and obviously we are developing
that in the context of looking at the eCNY.
Clearly, China has a really poor record of responsible
behavior in cyberspace and has used technology to surveil and
repress its population. So, this is something that we think can
pose a heightened risk and create a significant consumer
protection risk as well as risks for illicit finance. We are
tracking it very closely, and we are working on sort of policy
options in the context of the work group.
Mr. Barr. Yes. And as we look to a potential response and a
multilateral sanctions response to a cross-strait invasion of
Taiwan, we need to be very aware of China's sanctions evasions
capabilities with this alternative to SWIFT. I think they are
learning from what is happening in Ukraine. I would note also
that not a single member of the Politburo standing committee of
the Chinese Communist Party has been sanctioned by OFAC despite
the global pandemic, the genocide against the Uyghurs, the spy
balloon over key sensitive military sites, and the illegal
police stations in our country. That is something I would ask
Treasury to take a look at.
Finally, on fentanyl, a follow-up to the good question from
my colleague, how important is it that we target the Chinese
government officials who allow for and support fentanyl
trafficking and precursor production? I think we need to do a
more vigorous effort to sanction entities that are ultimately
responsible up the chain for fentanyl production and poisoning
our people.
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for that perspective. We are working
very closely with partners at DEA, DHS, and really across our
government to try to identify those entities in China and
globally that are critical nodes in the production and then the
facilitation of fentanyl to the United States. So, that is
something that we will continue to focus on and we welcome,
again, sort of the partnership and thinking through what is the
best way to get after those facilitators.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Under Secretary. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. With that,
we recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gonzalez, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
ranking member, and I really appreciate you being here, Under
Secretary Nelson and Acting Director Das. I have some questions
that are a follow-up to a hearing that we had just recently in
this committee, which was called, ``Follow the Money.'' It was
a hearing related to the fentanyl crisis in this country, which
is a top issue for me, and I think it is a top issue for many
Members of Congress.
Representing a border district, we are regularly a backdrop
in the news in this country. What we are trying to see is how
we can be helpful in this committee to both of your
organizations in creating policy that allows you to access more
information, to attract the money, and also work with our
counterparts in Mexico. I would like to ask what ideas you have
that you would suggest to this committee, that would be helpful
and are not available now to you.
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for that, and I would offer that we
are certainly open to all additional suggestions. But let me,
if I can, just step back and give you a sense of what our
multi-pronged strategy has been. First, we work largely using
FinCEN, in partnership with FinCEN, mapping the transnational
criminal organizations and financial networks. And then, we
require financial institutions, again, using FinCEN's
authorities, to report suspicious activity to generate leads
for law enforcement.
We work closely with the private sector, of course, and
then we work to target sanctions to the extent we are able to
identify and then cut off those transnational criminal
organizations from their members and the enablers from the
international financial system because, again, for a lot of the
precursors, Chinese money-laundering organizations rely on the
international financial system. We are looking to see if there
are regulatory gaps that we need to close, and we are happy to
get back to you on that.
Mr. Gonzalez. I would love to hear from you on that issue.
Mr. Nelson. And then obviously, working with international
partners, because it is just not a U.S. problem, but it is one
that touches everyone around the globe.
Mr. Gonzalez. That is right. And in the same hearing, it
was indicated that the administration in Mexico, the present
administration under President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador has
not been as helpful as previous administrations. How would you
assess the state of the relationship between Treasury and your
Mexican counterparts with respect to our shared counter-
narcotics priorities?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, I would assess that it is strong. I
visited with counterparts in Mexico City right after I was
confirmed, and I joined the high-level security dialogue here
in Washington, D.C., a couple of months ago. I have been to the
border to hear more from our partners on our side about ways we
can work more closely with Mexico to get after this. And I
think all of that work is starting to show up in the way we
have gone after these organizations. In fact, just today, we
designated a Jalisco network that was involved in timeshare
fraud, which is a huge money generator for them. And again,
significantly, being able to get at these networks that are
doing a lot of things--drug trafficking, human trafficking and
the like--has been sort of a critical strategy, that using
Treasury authorities, we have been able to support the overall
governmental effort.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. Director Das, in terms of FinCEN
dealing with their counterparts in Mexico, how is that going,
and are you all making some headway? Are you working together
in finding and tracking how resources are being transferred not
only through apps, but obviously wire transfers, trade-based
money laundering, and other sorts of things?
Mr. Das. Absolutely, and thank you for that question. We
have a positive relationship with our counterpart, the
Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU), and a positive and
constructive information-sharing relationship with them. We
share suspicious activity reporting involving opioids and
fentanyl as well. We are working collaboratively with them on a
number of different fronts in terms of cooperation with law
enforcement and cooperation with the FIU. We recently
participated in the North American Drug Dialogue with Canada
and our Mexican counterparts to consider ways to collaborate
and cooperate and share information more proactively. In the
near term, we will have a trilateral working group that will
essentially be a workshop to enhance ways to share typologies,
red flags associated with money laundering and fentanyl. And
then, we are also working on enhancing our memorandum of
understanding and our collaborative relationship with the FIU.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. I think I am out of time, so I
yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
Everybody has done a great job of hitting the 5-minutes' worth
of speaking and asking questions. We want to make sure we
continue that. We probably have folks here at 4:00, so we want
to make sure we get to everybody. We should be able to do that
if we are all respectful of each other's time.
With that, the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Williams, who is also the Chair of the House Small
Business Committee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
very much. And thank you all for being here. FinCEN has
identified combating human trafficking and smuggling as one of
its top priorities. Reports are showing a concerning increase
in online child sexual exploitation being monetized through the
U.S. financial sector. FinCEN has the ability to enforce
existing regulatory requirements through the Patriot Act to
prevent the facilitation of online child exploitation and sex
trafficking through the U.S. financial sector. However, I have
not seen any steps taken by FinCEN to address the risk of
monetizing these horrific crimes.
So, Acting Director Das, please elaborate to us on what
actions FinCEN is taking in its oversight role of the financial
services industry to prevent the monetization of child abuse
and sex trafficking?
Mr. Das. Thank you for that question. We take this issue
incredibly seriously. It is a top priority of ours. We work
very hard to combat online child sexual exploitation, and we
are working with law enforcement and financial institutions
with respect to online child sexual exploitation. We have done
so through a number of different fronts.
First of all, a key part of the issue is raising awareness
with financial institutions and other stakeholders. We have
issued advisories and alerts around human smuggling and around
human trafficking. In fact, in 2021, we issued a notice on
child sexual exploitation and child sexual abuse materials as
well. As a result of those notices and advisories, we have had
a significant uptick in the number of suspicious activity
reports that have been filed by financial institutions, which
provides a significant baseline for law enforcement to be able
to identify, investigate, and prosecute this type of activity,
and we will continue to do so.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you. And as a Representative
from Texas--I represent the great State of Texas--I might say
that things are not good at the border, and they are not under
control. Have you been to the border in the last year?
Mr. Das. I have not been to the border, sir.
Mr. Williams of Texas. I have seen firsthand the crisis
happening at our southern border. With these millions of
migrants flooding across our borders, human trafficking has
become a growing issue, as you know, and this increase in human
trafficking has led to an increase in the online hosting of
child sexual abuse material. A major concern right now is that
age verification and consent controls implemented by online
platforms are being bypassed.
Again, Mr. Das, how is FinCEN working to develop an
effective standard for age and consent verification?
Mr. Das. Thank you for that question. Again, we work with
financial institutions with respect to suspicious activity
reporting. And where financial institutions identify that they
have reason to know of suspected violations of law or
regulation, we receive those reports. We work with law
enforcement to review those reports and then to support law
enforcement in their efforts to investigate and prosecute these
crimes. Again, we are working to review those reports as well
to raise awareness with respect to those issues.
In terms of the southwest border, in 2023, just a few
months ago, we issued a human smuggling/human trafficking alert
with respect to the southwest border specifically because of
the concerns with respect to human smuggling and human
trafficking in that area. And we continue to focus on that
region in terms of the concerns there.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. Last month, the Treasury
Inspector General appeared before our Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee, and in his testimony, the
Inspector General highlighted a robust plan to release four
major reports throughout the year regarding FinCEN's management
of the Bank Secrecy Act database. I want to highlight that the
Treasury Office of Inspector General (OIG) has over 30 findings
and recommendations for FinCEN management as a result of these
audits. That is an astounding number, a large number of
recommendations considering the size of FinCEN in combination
with the scope of the audit.
One part of the audit that alarms me is the number of
external users that have access to the FinCEN database. Your
office has 470 memorandums of understanding (MOUs) with local,
State, and Federal law enforcement and intelligence components.
This means that thousands of people have access to financial
transactions other than the sensitive Bank Secrecy Act (BSA)
database, which sometimes FinCEN itself may not even know
about. Quickly, how do you plan to address the numerous
recommendations made by the OIG, and when will that work begin?
Mr. Das. Thank you for that question. It has already begun.
We, again, take the protection of BSA data and the management
of BSA data incredibly seriously. Again, as I mentioned, we
have a constructive relationship with the Office of Inspector
General. We have received their findings and recommendations
and are reviewing their concerns. We have already started
action to implement a number of their recommendations with
respect to various dimensions of the report even though we
haven't gotten the reports yet. And we will continue to press
for it on an expedited basis to implement the recommendations.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you very much, and I yield
back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Nickel, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you, Chairman Luetkemeyer, and Vice
Ranking Member Pettersen, and thank you to our witnesses for
joining us today.
My first question is regarding the Financial Crimes
Enforcement Network's (FinCEN's) Exchange Program. And I just
have to say I have only been here for 4 months, and maybe this
is an area of bipartisan agreement, but the use of acronyms in
Washington is just off the charts. Maybe at some point, I will
just give in and keep using the acronyms all the time, but I am
still at the stage now where it is a lot to talk in a language
that my constituents just don't understand. But at least one
time, when I can say FinCEN over and over, I said, ``Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network.''
Acting Director Das, my first question is to you. This past
February, the Federal Trade Commission released data
demonstrating that American consumers reported losing $8.8
billion to fraud last year. That is an annual increase of over
30 percent. Unfortunately, North Carolina ranks 12th among
States in fraud reports, costing my constituents and other
North Carolinians almost $150 million in losses.
Fraudsters and scammers often employ the same techniques
and technologies to abuse financial and government systems and
the like with the ultimate goal of stealing money. FinCEN's
Exchange Program, which facilitates public/private sector
collaboration and information sharing to combat financial
crime, is critical. Can you speak to whether the FinCEN
Exchange Program's resources have kept pace with the increase
in financial fraud and scams we are experiencing, and if not,
what more can Congress do to support FinCEN's Exchange Program?
Mr. Das. Thank you for that question. We are very focused
on concerns around fraud, around cyber events associated with
fraud, and around business email compromise. And we are very
focused on ensuring that we develop the information, review
suspicious activity reports, and work with law enforcement to
be able to combat fraud in many different dimensions. We
recently issued something called a financial trends analysis,
with respect to business email compromise associated with
business intrusions and fraud associated with that. We have
also issued a notice or an advisory around mail theft-enabled
fraud, and check fraud, which is another serious issue, just to
be able to highlight for financial institutions some of the
typologies and red flags associated with these types of fraud.
So, this is an issue on which we are incredibly focused.
With respect to responding to fraud as well, we have
something called a Rapid Response Program, which helps us work
with law enforcement here in the United States and our foreign
counterparts to be able to track and then freeze funds
associated with fraud that occurs here in the United States,
cyber-enabled fraud that occurs here in the United States. And
that program has had an incredible amount of success in terms
of freezing funds associated with cyber-enabled fraud. In the
past year, we have frozen $174 million associated with cyber-
enabled fraud.
With respect to FinCEN exchanges, this is an incredibly
useful tool for us to be able to bring together law enforcement
and financial institutions to discuss a range of different
types of predicate crimes and illicit activity. We focused on
issues around Russian sanctions evasion and a number of other
dimensions as well. This year, we conducted, so far, eight
FinCEN exchanges, and we have more on the horizon as well, and
we will be open to considering U.S. FinCEN exchanges around
fraud.
Mr. Nickel. And what more can we do, briefly?
Mr. Das. Again, from our perspective, it is incredibly
important, again, against the backdrop of the resource
constraints that we have, to be able to ensure that we have the
teams to be able to work with law enforcement and financial
institution to continue to consider the types of reporting that
we receive and then to engage proactively with financial
institutions.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you. Switching gears a little here, I
wanted to share my gratitude and appreciation to sanctions
officials at the Treasury Department's Office of Terrorism and
Financial Intelligence for their hard work and dedication. Over
the years, demands on the Department have risen dramatically
given U.S. sanctions on Russia in response to Putin's
unprovoked attack on Ukraine. Under Secretary Nelson, given the
increase in U.S. sanctions, is the current budget of the Office
of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence sufficient? Do you have
the resources you need?
Mr. Nelson. Given obviously the work, as you noted, to
support Ukraine and continue with the strategic aim of limiting
the resources Russia has to continue to prosecute this war, as
well as to diminish its war-fighting capacity by going after
his critical material, we are surging obviously, not only in
OFAC, but across TFI. In our requested budget for the coming
fiscal year, we have asked for additional resources to meet
those needs.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. Now, we go
to the distinguished gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk,
who is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you both
for being here today.
Mr. Das, I would like to thank you for Treasury's swift
response to a letter that Chairman Luetkemeyer and I sent to
you about Sections 6204 and 6205 of the AML Act of 2020, which
I would like to insert for the record, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Loudermilk. One thing I have noticed since I have been
in Congress is that agencies tend to respond a lot quicker
around appropriations season. I am not saying that was the
intention there, but I did notice in the letter that the lack
of funding was highlighted as one of the reasons that we
haven't received the reports that were required by Sections
6204 and 6205. Those were supposed to be to Congress within a
year of January 1, 2021, and we still have not received those
reports.
Now, the reason we ask for information, and my concern is,
I am not sure, based on what was in the letter and some
comments that you have made recently, that you are really
taking congressional oversight very seriously. The reason that
we want this is for legislative purposes. Now, you may not
agree with the legislative purpose we have, but that is our
role, and by law, that is what you are supposed to respond to.
Mr. Das, my first question is, when specifically did FinCEN
begin working to carry out the requirements of Sections 6204
and 6205?
Mr. Das. Thank you for that. Again, it is incredibly
important for us to think through how to improve and enhance
and make the AML/CFT framework more effective. We have been
working on the suite of reports in the AML Act around enhancing
and improving and modernizing the AML/CFT framework since I
have been on the job.
Mr. Loudermilk. When did that begin?
Mr. Das. That was in September of 2021, and we have been
working incredibly hard across the full range of dimensions
with respect to enhancing the AML/CFT framework. We issued a
request for information (RFI) with respect to the Section 6216
report, which is the report to modernize, streamline, and
update the AML/CFT regulations, in December of 2021. The
comment period closed. We received 140 comments, and we have
been reviewing those comments in consulting with over two dozen
agencies in terms of identifying and developing recommendations
with respect to Section 6216.
A number of the comments that we received in the context of
that request for information also applied to some of the issues
covered by the 6204 and 6205 reports, which relate to SAR and
CTR thresholds and automation around Suspicious Activity
Reports (SARS) and Currency Transaction Records (CTRs). We have
been actively considering the various comments that have been
made, and we have been thinking through how to best address
those comments, the recommendations made in those comments, and
then to think through how to best work with our counterpart
agencies in terms of finalizing the best recommendations.
Mr. Loudermilk. Let me reclaim my time, because I have some
other questions, and I am not sure we really got the answer
that we are looking for in there, because I am still looking
for the reports that are supposed to come to Congress, and now
we are over a year beyond that time frame. And I understand
resources are an obstacle, but let me also bring up that in
2022, FinCEN received over 4.3 million SARs across all
industries, which is a 43-percent increase from 2021.
Now, if you are looking for a needle in a haystack, that
haystack is growing, and I don't see how you store that much
data securely, let alone analyze this amount of data. In this
committee's conversations with former FinCEN leadership, they
agree that the data is overwhelming, and they called into
question whether the BSA reporting framework is useful at all.
Given the fact that the DOJ has failed to provide information
on the usefulness of BSA data, do you think that FinCEN would
be more effective and less strained for resources if the
monetary thresholds for CTRs and SARs were raised?
Mr. Das. Thank you for that question. Again, law
enforcement and our national security partners have
consistently reaffirmed the value of SARs as well as the other
information that we receive. Again, as part of our efforts to
develop the reports under Sections 6204 and 6205, one of the
key issues that we are considering is how and whether to raise
the thresholds across a number of dimensions, as well as
considering whether or not to automate the filing.
Mr. Loudermilk. So, that is something that you are looking
at. That is something we are looking at that as well.
Mr. Das. That is something that we are looking at.
Mr. Loudermilk. That is why these reports are so critical,
and I am moving forward with legislation to increase those
thresholds. I will give you an example. When the CTRs were done
in the 1970s, it was a $10,000 threshold. If we were to adjust
those for inflation today, it would be over $80,000. We want to
be able to make your job more effective, to get to the bad guys
and filter through less, and basically make the haystack
smaller. It is more effective that way. From an intelligence
background, and from a military and security background, you
are more effective when you have less noise in what you are
looking for.
Again, I am out of time, and I want to respect the
chairman's request, so I will submit the rest of my questions
for the record. But, Mr. Das, we expect to have those reports
sooner rather than later.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. With that,
we will go to the distinguished gentleman from California, Mr.
Vargas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
your convening this very important hearing, and Vice Ranking
Member Pettersen, thank you very much for being here as well.
Today, the Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign
Assets Control (OFAC) sanctioned four senior officials of
Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Intelligence
Organization. I appreciate that the Treasury Department has
increased the pace of sanctions designations targeted in Iran
over the past year. However, I believe the pace of designations
is woefully inadequate, given the scope of Iran's violations.
Under Secretary Nelson, what are you doing to increase the
effectiveness of our Iran sanctions?
Mr. Nelson. I just want to affirm that we are profoundly
concerned about Iran in a range of activities, including the
abuse of its people, destabilizing activities in the region
obviously, the development of its nuclear program, and what we
perceive to be a growing role in Russia's war of aggression
against Ukraine.
As you noted, we have dramatically increased the pace of
designations in all of those categories. I can just give you a
flavor of what we are focused on. We have designated a number
of individuals involved in aiding the regime's crackdown on
peaceful protests and demonstrators, including 11 just last
month, 4 earlier this week, and 73 since last year. We have
issued a general license to expand the availability of U.S.
communications-related services and software to be available to
Iranians, given the regime's crackdown on communications
technology, and that is something that I have been following
very closely.
And then, we have continued to sanction people and
companies that support Russia's unjust war, and just last week,
we sanctioned a procurement network supporting Iran's UAV drone
program, which is a significant area of concern for us. We have
previously designated 19 individuals and 9 entities involved in
that program. We are also taking action against Iran trade and
petroleum and petrochemicals. Obviously, that is a huge source
of revenue for them.
Mr. Vargas. Let ask you a little bit about that----
Mr. Nelson. Yes, please.
Mr. Vargas. ----if I may interrupt you.
Mr. Nelson. Of course.
Mr. Vargas. Again, thank you for that answer. I think that
Iran is one of the most dangerous countries in the world and
especially, obviously, as they are racing towards a nuclear
weapon. Do you know how much oil Iran is currently exporting,
and how much revenue is generated from these exports, and how
do these figures compare to 3 years ago?
Mr. Nelson. I don't have that in front of me, but
obviously, I can----
Mr. Vargas. Could you give me a sense of how much?
Mr. Nelson. I don't have a sense for you, although I can
say that just a couple of weeks ago, we designated 36 or so
entities that were part of a network of facilitating the sale
of petrochemicals, and we believe that network is worth
billions of dollars.
Mr. Vargas. Again, I am very concerned about that because I
don't think that our efforts have been very successful in doing
this, just to be honest with you, so I hope that we continue to
push on this.
Now, I did want to talk a little bit about fentanyl.
Obviously, it is a problem that we have all heard about. You
said today, I believe, that you have been down to the border.
When you were there, did you speak to anybody to ask, where
does most of the fentanyl come through the border? Does it come
through the land port of entries or in between the land port of
entries?
Mr. Nelson. I believe, as I recall, it was all of the
above, was a form of the answer.
Mr. Vargas. No, it is not.
Mr. Nelson. No?
Mr. Vargas. No, it is not. Over 90 percent of the fentanyl
comes through the actual land port of entry, not in between. In
fact, I am always interested when people start talking about
all these millions of people who are crossing without
documents. Very little fentanyl comes through there. It mostly
comes to the actual port of entry, and, in fact, it usually
comes through trucks that are examined, but not very
thoroughly, and also through vehicles.
I have been there many, many times. I live in San Diego. I
live on the border. I have represented the actual California-
Mexico border for 30 years. I do ride-alongs and other things,
and it is very interesting how some of the sophisticated
technology that we have now captures it. But I am always
interested in understanding that. When you talk to the Border
Patrol, they all tell you that most of it comes right through
there. In fact, it is going down now, but during this whole
time of COVID-19, over 75 percent of the people who actually
get caught sneaking in this fentanyl, this terrible drug that
is killing our people, are American citizens.
Mr. Nelson. I had the opportunity to visit one of the
stations that scans the trucks and made the point about sort of
the networks of drivers to move the fentanyl through these--
that is your point--very large vehicles.
Mr. Vargas. My time is up, and I thank the Chair very much.
Thank you.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser, one
of the new members of our committee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the ranking
member as well. First question, regarding sanctions on the
fentanyl issue, funding coming out of China, payments being
made into Mexico, which, by the way, has turned, in many parts,
into a gangland, not due to ports of entry but due to the
horrific situation at the border. And 75 percent, we talk about
100,000 deaths, 80,000 or so from fentanyl, and yet, we are
trying to make excuses or not do anything about it. So, maybe
you are doing something about it by cutting off some of that
funding. Have you found any? Have you found any funding? Have
we sanctioned? Have we put people in jail?
Mr. Nelson. Are you talking about Chinese Money Laundering
Organizations?
Mr. Meuser. Yes. Precisely, through the drug dealers, the
very wealthy drug dealers that have been created throughout
Mexico.
Mr. Nelson. Yes. We have done a risk assessment on this,
and we have found that these professional money laundering
organizations are being used to finance, frankly, using our
infrastructure----
Mr. Meuser. My only question is, have you caught any?
Mr. Nelson. We have, yes. We have designated Chinese Money
Laundering Organizations (CMLOs) in the past, and we can send
that----
Mr. Meuser. Okay. So, we are catching them. That is where I
wanted to go. Thank you.
Acting Director Das--and I am changing subjects--Congress
passed the Corporate Transparency Act (CTA) in 2021 to increase
information sharing between financial institutions and the
Federal Government. CTA goes into effect next year and would
require most companies to report information known as
Beneficial Ownership, with which you are well familiar. My
understanding is that FinCEN's proposed rule does not allow
banks to use this information beyond the opening of an account.
Do you think that financial institutions should be able to use
this Beneficial Ownership information and the registry for
purposes other than onboarding the customer?
Mr. Das. Thank you for that question. Again, our proposed
rule proposes specific scope for the access that financial
institutions have to Beneficial Ownership information as well
as the purposes for which they could use Beneficial Ownership
information. There were a number of comments on this point.
Mr. Meuser. Yes, there were.
Mr. Das. We have been reviewing those comments intensively
and considering how best to approach the final rule on this
point. So, we are working on that, and, again, we are still in
the policy process with respect to an outcome on that.
Mr. Meuser. Good, because it seems to make a lot of sense
to be able to use the information for other important purposes.
And that is the criticism that you have been receiving, but it
is very good to hear that this is going to be very carefully
reviewed, and that you will take industry input and come up
with what you think is best. That is very encouraging to hear.
I don't need to ask any more questions on it then. That is
good.
I do want to ask you, within the customer information
program which is designed to ensure customer certainty without
burdensome regulations for the fintechs, it has come to me that
getting the full Social Security number on fintechs, where
credit cards mostly need the four digits, is a concern for
those types of lenders. Is there a good reason that is the
case, or is that something that you are considering looking at
making more efficient for these lenders?
Mr. Das. Thank you for that question. That is an issue that
has come to us. We are taking a look at it. We have an
application pending as to whether or not to permit that. And
again, that is something that we are considering internally and
working through, and looking at it fairly across all of the
different dimensions for the purposes of ensuring that we can
confirm identity, and ensuring that we implement a risk-based
approach towards our regulatory framework, but also to ensure
that we are able to ensure that financial institutions know who
the actors are behind the accounts as well. So, that is a
question at which we are taking a serious look.
Mr. Meuser. That is very good to hear as well. I look
forward to following up with you on that. Lastly, I am just
going to go back to the China trade related to fentanyl. If you
have an initiative, first question is, is that a core mission
for FinCEN, finding out who is delivering and the type of
funding that is taking place, the illicit financing of this
huge, illicit drug industry that is taking place? And second,
if you provided a request for funding for that purpose, my
guess is you will have strong bipartisan support to catch this
awful cartel, right? I have run out of time, so I will yield
back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Do you want to answer that very
quickly, Director Das?
Mr. Das. Yes, absolutely. We have a dedicated team focused
on the issue of fentanyl. We are using all of our tools and
authorities to be able to better understand the financial flows
associated with fentanyl in our work that we are doing with the
DEA as well. This is an issue in which we are engaging, we are
using our authorities on to collect information, and then we
are trying to better understand the money laundering networks
associated with opioid trafficking on this front and engaging
with law enforcement.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Very good. The gentleman yields back.
With that, we will go to Mr. Nunn, the distinguished gentleman
from Iowa, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nunn. I am very grateful, Mr. Chairman, and to the
witnesses, thank you so much for being here today. As we look
at what the Financial Services Committee, and actually, the
Agriculture Committee, is doing in the digital assets space,
there are just a few of us who are serving in this crossover
role between commodities and securities. One of the things that
we have found in both, and I was just coming between each
committee right now, is that there seems to be a lack of a
regulatory environment or structure that really provides the
rules of the road. And there is a lot of talk about people
jumping in and framing it without necessarily talking to each
other, which is where I applaud the Chairs of both the
Financial Services and the Agriculture Committees for working
well on this in the House.
I also, as a military member myself and someone who spent
over a decade in counterintelligence working in illicit
financing, want to thank the Treasury for being such a strong
leader in this. And that is why this morning, I introduced the
bipartisan, bicameral Financial Technology Protection Act of
2023, with my colleagues, Representative Himes, Senator Budd,
and Senator Gillibrand. Specifically, what this legislation
would aim to do is look at an independent financial technology
working group to include terrorism and illicit financing.
Treasury was very helpful in providing some feedback to that
and helping us shape it. Specifically, in this working group,
Mr. Nelson, I want to highlight that this includes our senior
levels from the DOJ, the FBI, the CIA, and FinCEN as partners
in this, just to name a few.
As we look forward on this, Mr. Das, I would like to begin
with you. This working group's intent is to conduct independent
research on terrorists, how their illicit financing works, and
how they fund things going forward. It would be a window into
how this is operating, particularly now that we are looking at
digital assets as being a key mode for these individuals to
finance themselves, everything from the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps (IRGC) to cartels south of the border. One of the
things that you had brought up here was your wealth of
knowledge related to illicit finance and the use of digital
assets. In your view, is this something that Treasury, along
with other senior representatives from both the government and
our private-sector partners, should further explore to combat
and really get their arms around the scope of illicit
financing?
Mr. Das. Thank you for that. At FinCEN, we currently have a
number of engagements where we have public/private
opportunities to exchange information. We have a program called
the Innovation Hours Program, where we meet with private-sector
stakeholders, and we use our FinCEN exchanges to exchange
information with private-sector stakeholders and law
enforcement around issues involving digital assets and payment
modernization, and to be able to understand the illicit finance
risks. Again, these are ongoing conversations. We plan on
continuing these conversations as we think through the risks
and the impacts on our regulatory framework.
Mr. Nunn. Has it been helpful?
Mr. Das. Those conversations have been incredibly helpful
for us to be able to understand the lay of the land with
respect to where innovation is going and what illicit finance
risks are associated with that. They have also been incredibly
helpful for law enforcement, and for us, to be able to
communicate some of those illicit finance risks to those
innovators and entrepreneurs that are developing new systems.
Again, for us, what we see over and over again is that
technology is incredibly important to be able to provide
financial services to customers across-the-board. But often, it
is important for those technology innovations to ensure that
compliance is built in and that they understand what the
compliance framework is.
Mr. Nunn. Mr. Das, I appreciate that. I think the feedback,
particularly from the private sector where the innovation is
going, is key. Let me get to the second part of this. In 2020,
I believe, you put out a request for feedback or FinCEN did,
but I have not seen any of that feedback reported out. My
question here is, when you get feedback from market
participants, particularly on the private side, on any proposed
rule change, what are the primary concerns with any proposal
going forward, and do we have a timeline in which we here in
Congress are going to get to see that?
Mr. Das. Thank you. I think you are referring to a couple
of proposals that were made in late 2020 with respect to
digital assets. Those proposed rulemakings had a number of
comments; I think one of them had about 8,000 comments, and the
other had 2,000 comments. We have been reviewing those, and
they raised some very complicated policy issues for us.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you. Three years on, are we going to get to
see that report?
Mr. Das. We are still working through a final rulemaking
with respect to all of those comments.
Mr. Nunn. Okay. We would like to see that sooner rather
than later. If there is not a need for one, then let's move
forward.
Under Secretary Nelson, I want to follow up on what the
Chair asked. I know we don't advertise what our sanctions
regimes are, but we also know the danger of not having a
sanctions regime that is effective and timely. Sanctioning
Russian oligarchs' yachts clearly has not slowed down the war
in Ukraine. My concern here is, is there a plan in place for
the situation with the Taiwanese Strait specifically?
Mr. Nelson. Again, I will just----
Mr. Nunn. If you are not going to comment, that is fine,
but I do want to highlight that the intractable and secondary
effects of a sanctions regime against a nation like China, if
it is not thought out ahead of time, will have massive
ramifications. Are you considering that?
Mr. Nelson. One of the things that we have done, just
briefly--and I would be happy to give you some more information
on this--is to set up a Sanctions Economic Analysis Unit in
order to really go after sort of the effect of our sanctions,
mitigations, and then sort of do an after-action every time we
do a sanction so that we can be more effective.
Mr. Nunn. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Nelson. And thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. De La Cruz, for 5
minutes.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing this afternoon, and thank you to the
witnesses for taking the time to appear before the committee
today.
Several times, in listening to the questions from my
colleagues, I have heard that you all are working on the
report, you haven't had the resources yet, and there has been a
delay of year to up to 3 years, as my colleague, Mr. Nunn,
indicated.
My question is for Acting Director Das. Do you still have
any employees working remotely?
Mr. Das. Yes, ma'am, we do.
Ms. De La Cruz. Why are Federal employees in national
security roles working remotely?
Mr. Das. We have a range of employees across our 300-person
workforce. Many of them come in to work on a regular basis in a
classified environment to work in sensitive compartmented
information facilities (SCIFs), and they come in regularly.
They review the information in a classified setting, and they
process that information in a classified setting. We are
incredibly mindful of the security considerations around the
use of our data, whether it be BSA data or classified
information. We have other functions, for example, management
functions, that don't require employees to come in on a regular
basis, and a telework environment is a suitable environment for
them because they are not handling classified information or
BSA information.
Ms. De La Cruz. So, how are you ensuring that your remote
workers are not handling any classified or sensitive
information?
Mr. Das. No remote workers are handling classified
information outside of the workplace.
Ms. De La Cruz. Will you be bringing any of these remote
workers back to the workforce or bringing them back to the
office full-time?
Mr. Das. We are currently considering the OMB guidance that
was recently issued with respect to telework and thinking
through what our policy will be going forward. We will be
considering the best way forward on this front given all of the
needs----
Ms. De La Cruz. What guidance?
Mr. Das. OMB guidance.
Ms. De La Cruz. OMB. And what is OMB?
Mr. Das. OMB is the Office of Management and Budget, out of
the White House, and they have recently issued guidance with
respect to consideration by agencies of their telework policies
in light of the end of the pandemic. And that is guidance that
we are considering and working very closely on with our
counterparts at the Treasury Department to think through how to
best implement it.
Ms. De La Cruz. So, the remote workers are still as per the
pandemic. Is that correct?
Mr. Das. We have been changing our policy over time to meet
health needs and security needs, but, again, we are incredibly
mindful of the security and confidentiality of our
information----
Ms. De La Cruz. And you would say health needs as in COVID?
Mr. Das. As in COVID, yes.
Ms. De La Cruz. Okay. Under Secretary Nelson, earlier this
year, I introduced H.R. 1076, the Preventing the Financing of
Illegal Synthetic Drugs Act. This bill, approved by this
committee, requires the Government Accountability Office (GAO)
to carry out a study on how illicit finance supports drug
traffickers peddling fentanyl and synthetic drugs. I am
grateful to Chairman Luetkemeyer for his leadership in this
subcommittee and I'm looking forward to my measure coming to
the House Floor.
Under Secretary Nelson, what steps has your office taken to
prevent the financing of illegal drugs and the harms they have
caused in our communities? I guess more importantly, why does
your office repeatedly cite the International Emergency
Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) instead of more-targeted
authorities granted by Congress, like the Fentanyl Sanctions
Act?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for that question. Just generally, we
use all of the authorities, obviously, that we have under
IEEPA. There is an Executive Order that President Biden issued
at the end of 2021 which provided additional authorities to go
after not only the supply chains undergirding fentanyl, but all
drug trafficking. So, that is an authority that we have used
frequently over the course of the last year. It is an authority
that has allowed us to sanction and really escalate our
narcotic sanctions across the global supply chain, which has
been a strategic focus of ours because that is where we feel
like we can have the most impact to really get after these drug
trafficking organizations and transnational criminal
organizations that are facilitating, obviously, the flow of
this horrible drug.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you so much.
I have one last comment for Director Das. With COVID
already being lifted and the rest of the world, especially the
private sector, working, I think it is time to bring people
back to the office.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Ogles, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Ogles. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think one of the
concerns I have for really both Agencies, the Financial Crimes
Enforcement Network and the Terrorism and Financial
Intelligence Office, is priorities, and this is not a hostile
line of questioning. It is just more information-gathering.
But when I look back since 2001, FinCEN has collected over
350 million currency transactions in the backdrop of increased
activity from Russia, the Mexican cartels, and Chinese
corporations, not just the CCP but the Chinese corporations.
What are you doing specifically because, again, when I look at
this, it is 350 million records. That is primarily innocent
Americans versus these actors that we know are leveraging the
U.S. economy to finance their own military operations. They are
using our economy to undermine our country, our own economy.
Mr. Das, what are you doing specifically to divert
attention away from innocent Americans and over to the CCP, to
Russia, and to the cartels?
Mr. Das. Thank you for that. We are very focused on current
illicit finance threats, particularly Russia. We have done
quite a bit of work since the Russian invasion of Ukraine in
terms of issuing advisories and alerts on Russia's sanctions
evasion, and on efforts by Russian oligarchs and elites and
proxies to evade sanctions and hide their assets here in the
United States and elsewhere. We have issued an advisory with
respect to export control evasion jointly with the Commerce
Department's Bureau of Industry and Security. And we have
issued one with respect to how Russian oligarchs and actors are
using the commercial real estate sector to hide assets as well.
We have been reviewing the information in suspicious
activity reports (SARs). There has been a significant uptick in
terms of SARs related to that, and working with our
counterparts at OFAC, at main Treasury, and in law enforcement
to be able to evaluate the types of information that we are
getting across those ranges of suspicious activity reports, and
then working with them to identify the networks, and then
helping them investigate and prosecute with respect to all of
that. Again, that is the number-one priority for us, and we are
taking a look at current information to address those concerns.
Ransomware is another significant priority of ours. And we
are working very closely with the Department of Justice and
other agencies in better understanding ransomware actors, the
types of technology and strains that they use to commit
ransomware attacks, and then how they are using money
laundering tools in cryptocurrency exchanges to hide their
assets as well to track and trace those assets and then to go
after those assets.
We recently designated, under one of our tools called
Section 9714 of the National Defense Authorization (NDAA),
which allows us to identify foreign financial institutions that
are a primary money laundering concern in connection with
Russian illicit finance, an entity called Bitzlato, which is a
Hong Kong-based cryptocurrency exchange that is linked to
Russian illicit finance, Russian ransomware, and darknet
markets as well, to be able to prevent that entity from
interacting with the U.S. financial system as well. And again,
as I have mentioned before, we are working on fentanyl and are
very active on that front.
And again, across a range of activities, we are very
focused on recent threats, in collaboration with Under
Secretary Nelson and under his leadership, as well as with law
enforcement, OFAC, and other agencies.
Mr. Ogles. Kind of switching to China, Mr. Nelson, Treasury
prohibits buying securities linked to the Chinese military-
industrial complex, but a lot of the corporations that are
privately held, secondary investment or market, are
participating in the U.S. economy, again funding China's
military complex. So, it is an end run around our own
regulations. What are we going to do as we go forward to target
these corporations that are worth billions of dollars that are,
again, players in our own economy and funding our enemy?
Mr. Nelson. A couple of things----
Mr. Ogles. And you have about 30 seconds. We are out of
time.
Mr. Nelson. It is a----
Chairman Luetkemeyer. This is a very important question. I
want an answer on this one. We are going to take whatever
amount of time it takes.
[laughter]
Mr. Nelson. ----close the gap. And I think we have
identified and have been working on a couple of really
important areas in this respect. The first is obviously the
work that we are doing to implement the Corporate Transparency
Act, so we see the Beneficial Owners behind domestic and
foreign corporations. The second thing that we are looking at
very closely is investment advisors, because we are looking at
the risk associated with investment advisors and not being able
to see the true revenue source behind the investment advisor,
and that could come from Russia, China, and a bunch of other
places. And the third sector that we perceive there to be risk
is real estate, so we are looking there.
To your point, we are trying to close what we perceive to
be gaps within our own system so that these bad actors can't do
all of the things that I think you accurately described, take
advantage of our people, of our American businesses for their
own illicit gains.
Mr. Ogles. Thank you, sir. Mr. Chairman, I will just close
with this comment. When we look at what has happened with the
banking system in the United States, if I am a bad actor, and
when I say bad actor, I mean a foreign country, the next attack
is probably economic. And the 350 million records--it is not a
grandmother on a fixed income and you are tracking her
transactions. We have to start doing a better job of attacking,
targeting, and limiting China and Russia in our economy. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. With that,
we go to the gentlelady from California, Mrs. Kim, for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this very
important hearing. Recently, the North Korea People's Assembly
adopted a new law, in September 2022, that allows the Kim Jong
Un regime to strike first with nuclear weapons if the regime
feels threatened. In other words, that means the law will give
the Kim Jong Un regime the unprecedented authority to utilize
nuclear weapons for any reason. In 2022, the regime hit a
record number of missile tests, as we know, and the Kim Jong Un
regime, each time they do the test, they improve its ability to
strike the continental United States with an intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM), so it is concerning.
And a recent investigation by the Financial Times exposed
how the Kim Jong Un regime utilizes its criminal networks to
smuggle oil into North Korea and get access to foreign currency
to finance their nuclear weapons program. The investigation
tracked a foreign vessel, the UNICA, that made 23 journeys into
North Korea to deliver oil and petroleum products.
So, Under Secretary Nelson, can you tell us what the
Treasury is doing to stop vessels like Unica and cut North
Korea off from their ability to get hard currency and oil
coming from other countries, specifically from Russia and
China?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for that important question.
Obviously, North Korea's weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and
ballistic missile program is a top priority, not only of the
Treasury Department, but across our government, for all of the
reasons that you have expressed. Using our tools, we have
focused on trying to identify the procurement networks that are
directly tied to the WMD program. And we have, I think done
almost 2 dozen sanctions related to companies and entities that
are supplying the actual material that North Korea needs to
build its missiles and its weapons of mass destruction.
The second thing that we have been focused on is, to your
point, going after the revenue generators, and those come in a
couple of different flavors. One, we have the IT workers who
generate a substantial amount of revenue for the regime.
Working with FinCEN, we have worked to identify the trends and
typologies for financial institutions, the companies----
Mrs. Kim. Yes, thank you. I just wanted to make sure that
you see more urgency from the Treasury Department to make North
Korea sanctions more effective, but now I want to switch gears
to another topic.
The Corporate Transparency Act directs FinCEN to collect
information in a form and manner that ensures information is
highly useful, but the information in the registry will not be
highly useful unless it is validated by FinCEN. But to my
knowledge, the Agency has not publicly stated that it intends
to validate the information reported. Without that validation,
bad actors may report false or inaccurate information to the
registry. Does FinCEN intend to validate that information
reported to the registry? If so, what validation solutions is
FinCEN considering?
Mr. Das. Thank you for that question. Again, in the
response to the comments to the notice of proposed rulemaking
(NPRM), we heard loud and clear the importance of validation,
and we agree with the importance of validation. Again, this is
an issue that is front and center for us in terms of thinking
through how to achieve this, and it presents a range of
considerations for us that are pragmatic considerations. There
are legal considerations, cost considerations, and then a
number of questions with respect to how to implement validation
as well.
Mrs. Kim. Do you need support from Congress? If so, what
type of support do you need from us so that FinCEN can validate
the information reported to the registry? Can you be specific
about what help you need?
Mr. Das. Absolutely. We are working through a number of
considerations regarding constraints there may be with respect
to legal constraints. Our ability to access other databases as
well, whether they be public databases or commercial databases,
that will allow us to validate this information in an effective
and fluid way. That is one of the things that we are
considering right now as we talk to stakeholders is, what is
the range of available databases, and what is the quality of
the databases, in our ability to validate that information. And
these are issues that are front and center for us, along with
the cost considerations of validation and verification. So, as
we walk through all of these considerations--pragmatic, legal
costs, and other related considerations--we stand ready to work
with you, and we will get back to you on that.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. I will yield back, even though I had
another question to ask.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady yields back. The
gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Davidson, who is also the Chair of our
Subcommittee on Housing and Insurance, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the chairman, and I thank our
representatives from Treasury and FinCEN as a component of
Treasury. Thanks for the work you do, and for the people who
aren't here that you represent and serve, thank them from us as
well.
Earlier this week, FinCEN announced the renewal and
expansion of its geographic targeting orders (GTOs). This is
the 14th time FinCEN has issued a real estate GTO, because
these orders expire after 6 months. GTOs themselves are rarely
noteworthy, but as the Chair of our Housing and Insurance
Subcommittee, I believe it is important to highlight how these
targeting orders have changed over time. GTOs began as all-cash
purchases over $1 million in cities like Miami and New York,
but now cover purchases of $300,000-plus residences in 10
cities, 42 counties, 13 States, and Washington, D.C. The
exception to this is an astonishing low threshold of $50,000 in
the City and County of Baltimore.
FinCEN has a difficult mission, and we understand that.
However, I would like to reiterate that these geographic
targeting orders should be more targeted. They are essentially
warrantless spying on American citizens most of the time. So, I
fear that FinCEN is hoping to chip away with every renewal
until it eventually collects data on every cash purchase of
every piece of real estate in every city across the country.
And that is why I requested that my draft legislation, the,
``Civil Liberties Protection Act of 2023,'' be attached to the
hearing today. It would create a position of a civil liberties
officer within FinCEN to monitor and potentially reel in these
overly-broad actions by FinCEN, which can undermine housing
purchases and, frankly, engage in warrantless spying of
American assets, especially those carried out with digital
assets.
Acting Director Das, with regard to GTOs, at what point do
you believe they cross the line and infringe on Americans'
right to privacy?
Mr. Das. Thank you for that. Again, from our perspective,
we take privacy considerations very seriously in the work that
we do. We work very closely with our legal counsel in terms of
ensuring that our geographic targeting orders are appropriately
scoped and they are within the confines of the law. With
respect to the GTOs and the real estate GTOs, we hear
consistently from law enforcement that they are incredibly
valuable in their ability to be able to understand how
criminals use real estate to launder money and the proceeds of
crime, including drug trafficking, corruption----
Mr. Davidson. How do you actually measure that? You get
these reports, and I have asked in the most-classified setting
as possible. I am happy to travel. I am happy to have you all.
We have a SCIF that is supposed to be secure here, and we are
saying, give us some metrics. Show me a case where something
that you collected using these GTOs solved a crime. You pick
your issue with the Beneficial Ownership rule. We are
supporting, frankly, infringing on the civil liberties of
American citizens, but give us the evidence. If people ask for
the support, they want the law, they want to make it legal to,
frankly, infringe on the 4th Amendment. How do you measure the
effectiveness?
Mr. Das. On a number of different fronts--as we prepare a
new round of GTOs, we consult very closely with law enforcement
in terms of----
Mr. Davidson. I know they have a desire, but can you share
with us a case? I am happy to schedule a meeting to look at it
in a SCIF or anything, but show me a case where what you
collected resulted in a solved crime.
Mr. Das. Now, 40 percent of the GTOs, the reports that we
receive with respect to GTOs on real estate, correlate to
suspicious activities that we received through reporting from
financial institutions. Again, there is a strong correlation
between the reporting that we receive----
Mr. Davidson. I understand, thanks, and, look, it is all
correlated. I am looking for cause and effect. If you want to
keep spying on American citizens, you are going to have to show
why.
Under Secretary Nelson, I would like to briefly touch on
OFAC and the ongoing coordination with our allies to uniformly
impose these sanctions. Whenever an entity or individual is
sanctioned, does OFAC take steps to ensure that our allies are
also utilizing their sanctioning authority, and what does that
look like? I am particularly concerned about NATO countries,
like Bulgaria, that aren't supporting our sanctions.
Mr. Nelson. No, thank you for that. Yes, actually, we work
very closely with the EU, the U.K., and the 30 other partners
and allies every time we designate someone in the context of
Russia's invasion of Ukraine. We have different legal
standards. Obviously, we have different authorities. But we
have consistently, since the time of Russia's invasion to now
15 months later, worked with our partners and allies, and have
coordinated around target sectors and individuals, and we
continue to try to align our designations as closely as we
reasonably can given that we have different legal authorities,
but that cooperation----
Mr. Davidson. Thanks for your follow-up, and my time has
expired. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you for yielding back. With
that, we have finished our round of questioning. I would like
to thank the witnesses for being here today. I have one quick
comment for Director Das. A couple of times, you have talked
about your budget and wanting to have more money for this. We
understand there are always more demands, but as you can see,
with the questioning we had here today, you don't have people
back at work, and you have so many millions of SARs and CRTs
that are never utilized, and are never examined. And that is a
waste of people's time and energy.
If I was going to approve your budget, I would ask you to
give me an outline of how you are going to save money, how you
are going to start putting your people to work to maximize
their ability to get the job done, cut back on all the SARs
that don't infringe, as the gentleman just said, on people's
civil liberties, as well as enable you to do your job. At some
point, there has to be a point here that this can meet, and we
are not there. And if you want to come to us for a budget
request, if I am in this Chair to make that decision, you don't
get a penny until you show me how you can save some money,
because I don't think that we need to allow this kind of
activity to go on without some accountability.
With that, without objection, I would like to enter the
following document into the record. It is an American Fintech
Council letter to FinCEN regarding the customer information
program rules.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:41 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

April 27, 2023

[all]
