- MERGER POLICIES OF THE FEDERAL BANKING AGENCIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MERGER POLICIES OF THE
FEDERAL BANKING AGENCIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
AND MONETARY POLICY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 1, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-89

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-461 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Monetary Policy

ANDY BARR, Kentucky, Chairman

BILL POSEY, Florida                  BILL FOSTER, Illinois, Ranking
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri             Member
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia, Vice      BRAD SHERMAN, California
Chairman                         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AL GREEN, Texas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          JUAN VARGAS, California
YOUNG KIM, California                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
May 1, 2024..................................................     1
Appendix:
May 1, 2024..................................................    39

WITNESSES
Wednesday, May 1, 2024

Anderson, James L., Deputy General Counsel, Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC)...................................     4
Dowd, Ted, Acting Senior Deputy Comptroller and Chief Counsel,
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Anderson, James L............................................    40
Dowd, Ted....................................................    54

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Barr, Hon. Andy:
Written statement of the Bank Policy Institute...............    60
Comment letter from PNC to the OCC, dated April 11, 2024.....    62
Anderson, James L.:
Written responses to questions for the record from Chairman
Barr.......................................................    82
Dowd, Ted:
Written responses to questions for the record from Chairman
Barr.......................................................    88

MERGER POLICIES OF THE
FEDERAL BANKING AGENCIES

----------

Wednesday, May 1, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Monetary Policy,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy Barr
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Barr, Posey, Luetkemeyer,
Williams of Texas, Loudermilk, Rose, Timmons, Norman,
Fitzgerald, Kim, De La Cruz, Ogles; Foster, Sherman, Meeks,
Scott, Green, Beatty, Vargas, Casten, and Pressley.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Chairman Barr. The Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Monetary Policy will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Merger Policies of the
Federal Banking Agencies.''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Mergers of financial institutions can promote competition
and generate cost savings that can then be passed on to
consumers in the form of lower interest rates on loans, reduced
fees, and higher interest paid on deposits. Clear expectations
and timeliness surrounding merger reviews are critical so banks
can make informed decisions about whether to pursue a merger
when approval is likely or withdraw an application when it is
not. Bank mergers, especially those involving mid-sized
regional banks, help preserve a robust banking system and
promote competition. They also allow community banks to
overcome onerous regulations and meet technology needs. It is
far better for distressed banks to sell themselves than to fail
and rely on FDIC receivership, which would result in
significant costs to the Deposit Insurance Fund. Those claiming
that regulators, ``rubber stamp merger applications,'' either
lack understanding of the merger processes and economics or
purposely misguide the public about the facts.
We have heard from Federal banking regulatory officials
that they value breadth in our banking system, which is the
envy of the world and includes small community banks and
regionals which serve consumers and businesses in our
communities and large banks that compete in the global arena.
Recent actions by the FDIC and the OCC to update their merger
review processes, however, do not conform with regulators'
claims that they value our broad and diverse system. As
numerous prominent witnesses in the subcommittee have noted,
the recent, fatally-flawed Basel III Endgame proposal sets up
economics that drive banks toward merger and acquisition
activity.
The Basel proposal, the Dodd-Frank Act, and an onslaught of
other recent flawed proposals impose unnecessary and
unjustified costs onto regional and small banks. Banks are
forced to try to spread those costs over added business lines
and activities, and the regulatory onslaught sets clear
incentives and the necessity for mergers and acquisitions.
At the same time, the FDIC and the OCC want to make mergers
more difficult, injecting sluggishness into their processes,
even for mergers that clearly meet the approval criteria under
the Bank Merger Act. With varying proposed conditions for
merger approval, the FDIC, the OCC, and the Federal Reserve
would be operating with different approval processes and
standards, injecting additional uncertainty incentives for
regulator shopping, and negative consequences for the dynamism
of our banking system. At a time when there are already many
questions about sequencing with the Department of Justice
(DOJ), the differing approaches to antitrust screenings put
forward recently by the FDIC and the OCC create more divergence
and increase the likelihood of confusion for institutions.
Today, we will try to get insights into why the opaque and
too often partisan policy positions of the FDIC and the OCC
have driven them to put forward their suggested new merger
guidelines. It should be noted that the FDIC proposal came out
in March of this year, which is odd, given that FDIC Chairman
Gruenberg and CFPB Director Chopra, in December of 2021, seemed
to have felt that working on mergers was so important and
urgent that they had to violate longstanding FDIC procedures
and engineer a thinly-veiled coup against the then-Chairman of
the FDIC.
Chairman Gruenberg and Director Chopra hit pause on their
urgency for more than 2 years before working to produce a
partisan FDIC merger proposal, reinforcing that they acted in
2021 to usurp the powers of Chairman Greenberg's predecessor.
The recent FDIC and OCC proposals are clear steps in the wrong
direction.
With that, I will note that there are three bills attached
to this hearing related to the merger processes. The first is
my bill, the Bank Failure Prevention Act, to improve the
timeliness and clarity of the merger application process. The
other two, the Business Loan Privacy Act, and the Small Lenders
Exempt from New Data and Excessive Reporting (LENDER) Act, work
to provide clarity over CFPB rules, which are part of the
onslaught of confusing and misguided regulatory efforts that
force mergers as banks need to spread their ever-growing
regulatory burden over additional business activities.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from Illinois, Dr. Foster, for 4
minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Chairman Barr, and thank you to our
witnesses for joining us today.
Since the 1980s, there has been a steady consolidation
within the U.S. banking system. In 1984, there were more than
14,000 commercial banks operating within the United States, and
today, that number is down to around 4,000. Some of this
concentration may be attributed to changes in the regulatory
and legal landscape. Some of it is due to the natural economies
of scale as banking becomes more and more digitalized. Some is
due to the simple fact that young people continue to move out
of rural areas and into the larger cities that are the natural
habitats of the larger banks.
But beyond structural changes, mergers and acquisitions
have been pursued by financial institutions seeking access to
new markets, economies of scale, and technologies that often
benefit the institution and its customers. In Congress, through
the Bank Merger Act and related legislation, we have rightly
recognized that not all mergers are created equal and that some
acquisitions can pose either threats or benefits to
competition, to financial stability, and to Americans' access
to financial services, particularly in historically-underserved
communities. And for that reason, Federal banking regulators
are tasked with the responsibility of reviewing bank mergers to
prevent the resulting institutions from undermining financial
stability and the financial needs of Americans.
Maintaining a healthy-sized distribution in the banking
industry is of bipartisan concern. When I was a business owner,
I saw firsthand the value of having a diverse banking system
with a wide distribution of bank sizes. Having multiple banks
in a community competing for your business strengthens the
negotiating power in those small businesses and households and
forces banks to compete for their business, often leading to
better terms, interest rates, or service. Americans are better
off when we have options, and we should strive for a
competitive marketplace for banks of all sizes from community
banks to global systemically important banks (G-SIBs).
In 2021, President Biden issued an Executive Order
encouraging regulators to take steps to promote market
competition across our economy, specifically directing the
Department of Justice and Federal banking regulators to review
and strengthen their bank merger policies. And today, we will
discuss the state of the American banking industry and proposed
updates to the merger review policies of the OCC and the FDIC.
The proposals naturally and rightly increase scrutiny of
complex mergers among the largest banks, focusing on key risk
indicators like rapid growth, which partly contributed to the
failure of Silicon Valley Bank last year. The proposals face an
emphasis on integration planning to ensure that the resulting
institutions and their management will operate in a safe and
sound manner. The proposals will also ensure that the affected
communities have an opportunity for their voices to be heard.
Both the FDIC and the OCC are currently accepting comments on
these proposals, and I encourage the regulators to actively
engage with the comments they receive, at least those that are
not AI-generated bot nonsense.
Americans benefit from a strong and diverse banking system
with competition at all levels, so I look forward to hearing
the perspectives of our witnesses who played a key role in
developing these proposals. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. Today, we welcome the testimony of James L.
Anderson, Deputy General Counsel at the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, and Mr. Ted Dowd, acting Senior Deputy
Comptroller and Chief Counsel at the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency. We thank each of you for taking the time to be
here.
Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony. And without objection,
each of your written statements will be made a part of the
record.
Mr. Anderson, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF JAMES L. ANDERSON, DEPUTY GENERAL COUNSEL, FEDERAL
DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION (FDIC)

Mr. Anderson. Thank you, Chairman Barr. Chairman Barr,
Ranking Member Foster, and members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to appear today to discuss the FDIC's
role in bank merger transactions. My written statement today
will summarize the statutory framework under which the FDIC
evaluates bank merger transactions, the current merger
application submission and review process, and finally,
recently-proposed updates to the FDIC's Statement of Policy
(SOP) and proposed SOP on bank merger transactions.
The FDIC is one of three Federal banking regulators with
responsibility for evaluating transactions subject to the Bank
Merger Act. Section 18(c) of the FDI Act, which codifies the
Bank Merger Act, prohibits an insured depository institution
from engaging in a merger transaction without regulatory
approval. The FDIC has jurisdiction to act on transactions that
involve insured depository institutions (IDIs) in which the
acquiring, assuming, or resulting institution is an FDIC-
supervised institution. The FDIC also has jurisdiction to act
on any merger application that involves an IDI and any non-
insured entity, notwithstanding the IDI's charter.
In assessing merger applications, the FDIC evaluates each
application against the same statutory factors under the Bank
Merger Act, regardless of the size of the parties to that
transaction. Those factors include monopolistic and
anticompetitive effects, the financial and managerial resources
and future prospects of the existing and proposed institutions,
the convenience and needs of the community to be served, the
effectiveness of any IDI involved in that proposed merger
transaction in combating money laundering activities, and the
risk to the stability of the U.S. banking and financial system.
The FDIC implemented its responsibilities under the Bank
Merger Act by codifying regulations, issuing a statement of
policy on bank mergers, and publishing an Applications
Procedures Manual. Although there has been a significant amount
of consolidation in the banking sector over the last 30 years,
due in part to mergers and acquisitions, there has not been a
significant review of the implementation of the Bank Merger Act
by the banking agencies in that time.
Accordingly, the FDIC Board of Directors approved a Federal
Register Notice on March 21st of this year, seeking public
comment on proposed revisions to the agency's Statement of
Policy (SOP), which is our proposed SOP on bank merger
transactions. The proposed SOP reflects significant regulatory,
legislative, and industry changes, including the Dodd-Frank
adoption of the financial stability test. The proposed SOP
would update, strengthen, and clarify the FDIC's approach to
evaluating transactions that are subject to the Bank Merger
Act. Additionally, concurrent with the proposed SOP, the FDIC
is seeking comments on proposed revisions to its supplemental
section of the Interagency Bank Merger Act Application.
In conclusion, extensive consolidation has occurred in the
banking industry over the last 30 years, some of which is
certainly due to bank mergers. In that light, the effectiveness
of the regulatory framework in meeting the requirements of the
Bank Merger Act is critical to the future safety and soundness,
financial stability, community accountability, and
competitiveness of the banking system. As such, conducting a
review of that framework and seeking public comment on the
review process is certainly warranted.
The FDIC will continue to collaborate with other Federal
banking regulatory agencies as it considers the appropriate
framework for reviewing bank merger transactions. The FDIC
remains committed to engaging with the public, industry
stakeholders, and, indeed, Members of Congress in support of
this mission. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Deputy General Counsel Anderson
can be found on page 40 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. Thank you. Mr. Dowd, you are now recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TED DOWD, ACTING SENIOR DEPUTY COMPTROLLER AND
CHIEF COUNSEL, OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY (OCC)

Mr. Dowd. Thank you. Chairman Barr, Ranking Member Foster,
and members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to testify today
to discuss the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency's
review and consideration of bank merger applications. I
currently serve as the OCC's Acting Senior Deputy Comptroller
and Chief Counsel, and oversee the agency's legal and licensing
activities, including applications for bank mergers and other
business combinations.
The process by which the OCC considers bank mergers
involving national banks and Federal savings associations is
governed by Federal law and regulation and the OCC's licensing
manual on business combinations. The OCC carefully reviews each
bank merger application received and must provide approval
before a bank may consummate a merger.
The OCC supports a diverse and competitive banking system
and appreciates the value that community, mid-sized, and large
banks provide to the communities and businesses they serve. Our
bank merger application review process allows for robust and
thorough consideration of statutory and regulatory factors as
well as public input into the process.
Under the Bank Merger Act, the OCC is required to consider
five factors when conducting reviews of bank mergers. These
include: one, the effect on competition; two, financial and
managerial resources and future prospects of the banks
involved; three, probable effects on the convenience and needs
of the community served; four, banks' effectiveness in
combating money laundering activities; and five, the risk to
the stability of the U.S. banking and financial system.
Separately, under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), the
OCC is required to assess an applicant's record of meeting the
credit needs of its entire community, including low- and
moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with safe and sound
operations.
The OCC also considers several regulatory factors,
including the capital level of a resulting bank; conformity of
the transaction to applicable law, regulation, and supervisory
policies; purpose of the transaction; impact on the safety and
soundness of the applicant bank; and the effect on the
applicant bank's shareholders, depositors, creditors, and
customers.
Public input is important to the OCC's review of bank
merger applications. To facilitate transparency, the OCC posts
the public portion of applications on its website and initiates
a formal comment period for at least 30 days. The OCC carefully
considers all comments received from the public, including
comments from public meetings or hearings.
The OCC recognizes the importance of ensuring that the bank
merger process reflects the economic realities of today, and
results in healthy and sound mergers. In February of 2023, the
OCC hosted a public all-day symposium on the bank merger
process to explore the effects of mergers on competition,
financial stability, and community convenience and needs.
Information from the symposium informed the OCC's more-recent
efforts to update its analytical framework for bank mergers.
Toward this end, the OCC is committed to working with the
Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and the Department of Justice to
ensure appropriate coordination and collaboration in each
agency's consideration of bank merger applications.
In addition, earlier this year, the OCC issued a proposal
to update its rules and policies for bank mergers to enhance
transparency around the decision-making process under the Bank
Merger Act. It includes a policy statement that describes
features of applications that are generally consistent with OCC
approval, and those that raise supervisory or regulatory
concerns. The proposed policy statement seeks to provide more
information and clarity around our decision-making. For
example, it notes that applications where the acquiring bank
has satisfactory supervisory ratings, no open enforcement
actions, and no fair lending CRA, Bank Secrecy Act, or consumer
compliance concerns, along with other features, are consistent
with timely approval. We recently extended the comment period
on the proposal until June 15th, and encourage all stakeholders
to provide comments.
In conclusion, ensuring continued diversity and competition
in the Federal banking system is of critical importance to the
OCC. As the OCC continues to work with other regulators and the
DOJ on updating its analytical framework related to bank
mergers, we are also taking steps to improve the processes by
which we consider bank merger applications and the transparency
around our decision-making. We welcome further engagement on
these matters. Thank you, and I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Acting Senior Deputy Comptroller
Dowd can be found on page 54 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. Thank you to our witnesses for their
testimony. I see that the ranking member of the full Financial
Services Committee, Ms. Waters, has arrived. Would the ranking
member like a minute for an opening statement?
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. I appreciate that, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you. As bank mergers continue to be rubber
stamped by regulators, people across America pay the price
through higher junk fees and predatory actions. For example,
after Wells Fargo's mergers, it became too big to manage and
repeatedly broke the law, harming millions of consumers. If
mergers like these continue, we will be left with only a
handful of megabanks that will be empowered to fleece everyone.
Following the news of Capital One's proposed merger with
Discover, I urged the government to block it, and led a letter
with 15 Committee Democrats to the bank regulators to
immediately strengthen their merger reviews. I am pleased that
the OCC and the FDIC issued vote proposals to do that, although
the Fed has not.
And I just have to mention two things quickly. One is that
there is a lawsuit against Wells Fargo because African
Americans were denied refis, 50 percent of what they tried to
get. And then, there is another one where Wells Fargo used
Latino employees to literally fleece Latinos in the way that a
product was being produced.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Waters. We just have to know about these. Thank you
very much, and I yield back.
Chairman Barr. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired. We will now turn to Member questions. The Chair now
recognizes himself for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Dowd, I really enjoyed a recent conversation I had with
Acting Comptroller Hsu, and I appreciate his thoughtfulness on
this topic. As I communicated to him, my view is that it far
too often takes 12 months or more to approve a merger
transaction and, in some instances, even longer than 12 months.
Ironically, my Democrat colleagues contend that this long,
drawn-out process is a mere rubber stamp, but isn't that just
too long, Mr. Dowd? Can you describe some of the negative
consequences for shareholders and employees when applications
are pending for a long length of time?
Mr. Dowd. Thank you, Chairman Barr. I appreciate the
question, and it is a very important question in terms of how
the Federal banking agencies consider bank merger applications
that are in front of the agency and in our coordination with
our peer regulators at the Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and the
Department of Justice. I will say that in general, the
complexity of the application is highly correlated to the
timing of a decision on the application. When you think about
the bank merger applications and business combination
applications that come before the OCC, the vast majority of
those are processed in what I would characterize as a very
timely and quick fashion----
Chairman Barr. Just reclaiming my time, Mr. Dowd. For those
that are not processed in a timely manner, the concern is that
customers, shareholders, and employees of the target bank are
left on the hook indefinitely, to see share prices drop and
employees depart. We have seen this recently with target banks.
To avoid this, can you or the OCC support legislation that
ensures applications are processed in a timely manner and
deemed complete in a set timeframe? I am from Kentucky and we
like basketball. It is kind of like a shot clock--we would like
to see a shot clock. The answer can be no, but the regulatory
purgatory, the indecision, is what we are concerned about here.
Mr. Dowd. Understood, and I think the analogy is one that I
relate to and I would think many at the OCC relate to. I do
have a Knicks fan behind me, so we will dispense with that. I
was born in Springfield, Massachusetts, the home of the
Basketball Hall of Fame.
Chairman Barr. Very good.
Mr. Dowd. I am very familiar with the concept of a shot
clock. More importantly, I am familiar with the legislation
that you and your staff have been working on with the OCC and
our staff. I believe that we have had some very productive
discussions on that front, and we look forward to continuing
those discussions with your staff. And I think there are many,
many important and valid ideas for consideration of that
proposal.
Chairman Barr. Thank you. I look forward to continuing to
work with the OCC on that, and I value that collaboration. Mr.
Dowd, let me talk about these community benefits agreements. In
current law, or under the OCC's proposed rulemaking, does a
bank need to enter into a community benefits agreement in order
for you to conclude that the merger application would meet the
convenience and needs of the community?
Mr. Dowd. The short answer is, no. I will say that the
engagement between banks involved in a merger application and
community benefit groups can be very helpful in terms of
thinking forward on the convenience and needs factor, which is
obviously 1 of the 5 statutory factors that has to be
considered and has to be reconciled before there is a decision
with respect to approval on a bank merger. So in general, they
can be helpful.
Chairman Barr. Yes.
Mr. Dowd. But they are not necessary.
Chairman Barr. And this is actually where the rubber meets
the road. Even if it is not required as a matter of law or
policy, it is still required as a practical matter in cases
where a community group has filed an adverse comment on a
merger application. And my concern here is that the agencies
are outsourcing the convenience and needs prong of the
statutory review factors by requiring a community benefits plan
to get merger approval, even if it is just de facto. And that
effectively confers upon the community groups a great degree of
leverage to extract favorable deals, sort of a blackmail or
extortion situation, if I may state it frankly. Maybe, the OCC
doesn't see it that way, and certainly, community groups don't
see it that way, but I can tell you that banks that face
thwarted deals see it that way. Is the OCC sensitive to that?
Mr. Dowd. We are sensitive to it. We consider it one part
of the process, and I will conclude by saying we do have a
notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR), and we welcome comments on
that issue and all other related issues.
Chairman Barr. My time has expired. I have more questions,
but we will need to move on. I appreciate the feedback. The
gentleman from Illinois, Dr. Foster, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Chairman Barr, and, again, to our
witnesses.
First, a quick question on sort of the process of how this
works. As you are reconciling the various and sometimes
competing factors involved in a merger decision or regulatory
approval for a merger, how is it done? Is there some sort of
point system where if you get enough points, it will get
approved? Is there a committee vote? How formal is this?
Mr. Dowd. Thank you for the question. It is a very good
question. It is a comprehensive and holistic process. We start
with the five factors that are articulated in the Bank Merger
Act that are required considerations for the OCC and the other
Federal banking agencies, so effect on competition, financial
and managerial resources, and future prospects, convenience and
needs, BSA, AML compliance, risk to the financial system and
financial stability.
And beyond that, we have regulatory factors in Part 5 of
the OCC's regulations that is a regulation implemented
consistent with the Bank Merger Act. And on that front, we
consider the capital level of the resulting bank, conformity of
the transaction or the ability to conform with applicable law,
regulations, supervisory policies, purpose of the transaction--
--
Mr. Foster. Yes. My question was, okay, you have all these
factors. Some may be positive. Some may be negative. How do you
add them all up to a decision? What is the logic of the final
decision given all of these factors, some of which may be
positive or negative?
Mr. Dowd. It is facts and circumstances. Of the factors
that I mentioned, there are some applications that come in the
door, and they are very clean on many of those factors. There
are some factors where we will have additional questions and we
will focus effort on those additional factors, but in general,
it is facts and circumstances.
Mr. Foster. Okay. And I understand the inputs. What is the
mechanism for the final decision? Is there one person who just
decides? Is there a committee, and everyone leans back in their
chairs and votes? What is the mechanism once you have evaluated
all of these competing, potentially conflicting requirements?
Mr. Anderson, can you help me out here?
Mr. Anderson. I can try. At the FDIC, there is not a
mathematical formula, which is part of the question you were
asking. It is a very iterative process. We do take the very
same statutory factors that the OCC looks at, and, frankly, we
go through and try to match up the information that is provided
to see if, ultimately, those factors can be resolved. And to
the extent that each of those factors is resolved positively,
if you will, then the FDIC will approve the application. If we
are not able to resolve each of those factors positively, then
we will make a recommendation either to deny the application or
to allow it to go to the Board because the FDIC----
Mr. Foster. Okay. I think I understand. It is essentially
subjective, which may be the right answer here. Now, yesterday,
I discussed the topic of mergers and acquisitions with a group
of Illinois community bankers and some from my district. And
specifically, in anticipation of this hearing, I asked them
about the amount of time that it has taken them to get an
answer regarding the outcome of merger applications at their
smaller banks as they have filed with your agencies. The group
have no complaints about the timeline, and they said that they
would typically receive a response well within 90 or perhaps
120 days.
I recognize that there is concern for members of this
committee that it takes too long to resolve a merger
application. At least for the community bankers that I spoke
with from Illinois, this doesn't seem to be a concern. However,
I would expect that the review process would naturally take
longer as the size and complexity of the merging institutions
increases. So to the extent that we might consider a shot
clock, a legislative time limit on regulatory approvals, it
seems like the time should be appropriately scaled to the size
and complexity of the contemplated merger.
So, Mr. Dowd, in your experience, does it take longer for
the OCC to confidently review a merger between banks with
hundreds of billions of dollars in assets than a merger of
smaller banks?
Mr. Dowd. I would say just a natural function of a
potential merger between two large institutions adds complexity
to the transaction and the review that needs to be conducted by
the regulators to ensure that the resulting bank at the end of
the process is a bank that can operate in a safe and sound
manner, and has the appropriate systems and controls in place
to comply with applicable law and to operate in a safe and
sound manner. Again, I will note that the NPR that the OCC
recently issued does list a number of features that would be
consistent with timely approval, including satisfactory
supervisory ratings, no open enforcement actions, and fair
lending.
Mr. Foster. Okay. I am afraid I am running out of time
here, but thank you for your response.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, is now recognized.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Chairman Barr. Have either
one of you ever worked in a bank?
Mr. Anderson. I have not.
Mr. Dowd. When I was in college, I was a bank teller.
Beyond that, I have never worked in a bank.
Mr. Poesy. How would you know, each of you, what kind of
impact local banks have on their communities? I think it is
something you consider in making decisions. How do you have
that insight? How do you gain that insight?
Mr. Anderson. Sir, to your point, I have not worked at a
bank, but we certainly have people at the FDIC who have; we do
have people at the FDIC with that type of expertise. And I
would say that they are the staff who review an application,
review those statutory factors and weigh the application, if
you will, against those statutory factors to take a look at
those concerns.
Mr. Dowd. I would agree, and endorse everything that Mr.
Anderson said. I would also elaborate on that a little bit to
say that at the OCC, our core mission is bank examination,
which means that we have examiners on the ground at banks at
the largest institutions.
Mr. Posey. Okay. Next question. Do your rules say anything
about putting loans on a nonaccrual basis if the loan is
greater than the appraisal of the collateral?
Mr. Dowd. The current OCC notice of proposed rulemaking
that is out for comment to----
Mr. Posey. No. I am not talking about the proposed rule. I
want to know if your rules prohibit putting a loan on
nonaccrual simply because the collateral is lower than the
loan?
Mr. Dowd. I would have to look at the rule. Off the top of
my head, I do not know the answer to that question.
Mr. Anderson. Unfortunately, neither do I. I would have to
look at the rule as well.
Mr. Posey. Okay. So, you wouldn't know if the regulators
have ever violated that rule?
Mr. Anderson. Again, I would have to look at the rule.
Mr. Dowd. Sitting here now, I don't have the information I
would need to answer that question, but I would be happy to
have our staff engage with you and your staff, and I think that
is a question that we could answer very quickly following this
hearing. We just need to look at the rule.
Mr. Posey. Mr. Chairman, we ought to have OCC regulators in
here sometime to find out how it really works since the guys at
the agency don't know.
Mr. Dowd, how does the OCC account for increased
competition from non-bank financial institutions, like
fintechs, in assessing the competitiveness of bank mergers?
Mr. Dowd. Thank you. It is a very good question. Going back
to the statutory factors in the Bank Merger Act, we have to
consider the effect on competition, we have to consider the
convenience of needs of the community served. So in that
process, I think it is natural to look at not just what the
landscape of the banking community is in a particular
community, but also how financial services are delivered in
general, both within that community and on a basis of scale
throughout the United States.
One of the things that our NPR addresses is the idea that
we have these principles from 1985 with the Department of
Justice about how bank mergers can be considered, and I think
there is at least a recognition within the OCC that the
landscape and the manner in which financial services in
general, and banking services in particular, have been
delivered since 1995 has evolved considerably. We do need to
think about that, and that is part of what we are doing with
our notice of proposed rulemaking.
Mr. Posey. Mr. Anderson, does your research suggest that
larger banks have a greater or lesser capacity than smaller
banks to diversify holdings to help reduce risk, and how is
that addressing your analysis?
Mr. Anderson. I'm sorry. Can you repeat the question?
Mr. Posey. Yes. Does your research suggest that larger
banks have a greater or lesser capacity than smaller banks to
diversify holdings to help reduce risk, obviously, and how is
that discussed in your merger analysis?
Mr. Anderson. I am not certain that is discussed in our
merger analysis. I would say that is something that we would
have to look into.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The
ranking member of the Full Committee, the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Waters, is now recognized.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. Mr. Dowd, I appreciate
that the OCC recently extended its public comment period for
the proposed merger of Capital One and Discover. I and many
others are strongly opposed to that merger, and it is important
that the OCC, along with the Fed, conducts robust due diligence
and gives affected workers, consumers, small business owners,
and communities the opportunity to share their views on the
merger. I also appreciate that in the OCC's proposal to improve
its merger reviews, you are considering ways to convene more
public hearings on large, consequential bank mergers. The
proposed merger of Capital One and Discover would seem to meet
this test if it were approved. It would form the 6th largest
commercial bank, and would also be the largest credit card
lender in the United States. Accordingly, will the OCC commit
to holding multiple public hearings on this proposed merger so
that members of the community can have their voices heard?
Some may be wondering why I put so much time and attention
on examining these mergers, and thinking, oh my goodness,
mergers are good for the economy. You should be doing
everything that you can to make sure that it occurs in a timely
manner, as you are being told by some on the opposite side of
the aisle.
Wells Fargo has taught us a lesson. Wells Fargo is the 4th
largest bank, and we know that they are too-big-to-fail, and
they became big because of these mergers in which they have
been involved. And now, they are being sued for race
discrimination and mortgage lending practices, and Wells Fargo
workers have alleged that anti-Latino bias in predatory
mortgage schemes is what is going on at Wells Fargo. So, you
can thank Wells Fargo and all of its mergers for the size that
it is and the way that it has conducted itself. That is why we
have to know more about these mergers. OCC, are you thinking
about more public hearings?
Mr. Dowd. Thank you, Ranking Member Waters. That is an
excellent and a timely question. I am not in a position to talk
about any particular merger that is pending before the OCC, but
I will say that the policy statement that is attached in the
OCC's NPR on bank mergers is helpful and instructive on this
point. And paraphrasing, there is a presumption in that policy
statement that there is a lien for public hearings for
institutions or applications that involve the merger of
institutions that exceed over $50 billion in total consolidated
assets.
So, with that as background in terms of what the OCC has
most recently said with respect to the value of public meetings
on these large merger transactions, I will also add that it is
the belief at the OCC that the public comment process, both
written and in public meetings, is critical and vital to
understanding all of the multiple facets to these transactions.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. Thank you so very much. I just want
to remind everybody that this merger will create the 6th
largest commercial bank, and Capital One will be the largest
credit card lender in the country. This is not small stuff,
this is big stuff, and we must pay attention and we must
understand what we are doing to support mergers without knowing
exactly where they are going, what they are going to do, and
how the public would be harmed in some ways. So, I thank you
very much for your attention to public hearings.
Years ago, the communities would absolutely be contacted,
and we would form partnerships with all of the locals who were
interested, all of the stakeholders. We would go to these
public hearings, and we would have a say, and that was even
before I was an elected official. I am looking for more of
this. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady yields back. The gentleman
from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, is now recognized.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't really
know where to start on all this because it is very frustrating
to me to see the regulators in front of us this morning who
handle the ability of banks to be able to merge, to be able to
protect themselves, to be able to do business in the
communities they do business in, and we have seen in the last 2
years the lack of regulatory oversight, the inability to do
your job, your ability to close a merger on these banks--
Silicon Valley, Signature and those other banks--in a very,
very, very short time, weeks, days, and here we are talking
about mergers that sometimes take years. What is the
difference?
Mr. Anderson, what is the difference?
Mr. Anderson. I am not certain I am understanding your
question, sir.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Well, in an emergency situation, you can
figure out how to streamline, cut red tape, and make things
work, but in a situation where you are sitting there strangling
these other banks to keep them from merging, which they on
their own have decided to do, and we will get into the reasons
here in a minute, but you are strangling them from being able
to do that. It takes weeks and weeks, sometimes years to get
that done. Why?
Mr. Anderson. Certainly, Congressman, that is not our goal.
Our goal is to process----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I didn't say it was your goal. I am asking
why it is happening.
Mr. Anderson. I would say that we certainly have to look at
each application based upon the facts and circumstances of
those applications. I would certainly say the vast majority of
merger applications that we get do not take years and years to
resolve. There are some----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. No, Mr. Anderson, it takes months to do
that. I have been in the middle of mergers, two or three of
them myself. It takes months to get this done. There is no
reason for that. I think our chairman has it right; we need a
shot clock on you guys to make sure that you do this job and do
it correctly and keep the uncertainty from happening to the two
banks involved. This is nonsense.
Mr. Anderson. Congressman, I understand your question, and
as I indicated earlier, our proposed SOP is out for comment.
Those are the exact type of comments that we would appreciate
receiving, and we will take them under consideration.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. One of the problems we have is that the
amount of regulations flowing is just inordinate. It is
unbelievable. I saw an article this morning, and I had to read
it 3 times to make sure I read it correctly, but the article
said that since January 1st, this Administration, the Biden
Administration, has promulgated now and codified a trillion
dollars' worth of new rules and regulations. That is right,
with a ``T,'' a trillion dollars' worth of regulations. We have
had testimony in some of the committees I have been on that
over the last 3 years, it is $150 billion per year. The first 4
months of this year just blows that all out of the water. And a
lot of this, not a lot of this trillion-dollar stuff, but a lot
of the other rules and regulations involve banks and the cost
of doing business for them.
Yesterday, I had a bunch of independent community bankers
in my office, and we were talking about the rules and
regulations. I said, well, do you realize that there are
thresholds on some of these rules that you don't have to abide
by? You know what their comment back was to me? They said, you
know what? That threshold is irrelevant, because what is going
to happen is the regulators are going to come in, they will
kind of wink and nudge and say, you know what? It would be a
good idea if you kind of comply with these things because you
know what is going to happen. It is all going to roll downhill.
You guys have a problem from the standpoint of perception
of your rules and regulations and the way you administer those,
and the cost that is involved is prohibitive for the banks to
continue to do this. I see the small banks in my area. They are
one by one failing and being merged with other ones because
they can't keep up with what is going on. And then, when they
try and merge and try and salvage this stuff, it is very
difficult for them to do that. I have one bank in my district
that failed over 2 years. That is untenable. It cannot happen.
So I guess my question to you is, do you ever go back after
you have merged these banks and take a look at the communities
and the effect that the merger had on the communities?
Mr. Anderson. We certainly examine these institutions, and
to the extent of this----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I didn't ask whether you examined the
institutions. I know the examiners show up and look at the new
merged bank, and you have two communities, for instance, and a
bank merged over here into this bank over here. Do you ever go
back and look at this other community and see how it has been
affected?
Mr. Anderson. As I said, we examine these institutions. We
examine them for CRA and the like, so I think we do.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Do you make sure that the surviving bank
actually is fulfilling its commitment to do whatever you did in
the merger agreement?
Mr. Anderson. I think one of our goals would be to ensure
that ultimately this----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I didn't ask you whether it is a goal, Mr.
Anderson. I asked if you do it.
Mr. Anderson. We do it through our examination process,
yes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. You do it through your examination
process. It is very concerning to me because I think if you
don't understand the effect--and Mr. Posey asked the question
of whether you guys have ever worked in a bank yourself--of
what is going to happen with your decisions, it is very
frustrating to me to see here that you are making those kind of
decisions and really don't have any way of following up on them
and seeing if you actually did the right thing. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from California, Mr. Sherman, is now recognized.
Mr. Sherman. Back in the summer of 2021, very early in the
Biden Administration, he signed an Executive Order saying that
the four agencies dealing with bank mergers--the DOJ, the Fed,
the FDIC, and the OCC, two of which are represented here--
should provide updated guidelines and regulations for approving
bank mergers. And yet here we are, and the two agencies before
us here have at least issued proposed regulations. The other
two, your two partners, aren't even here to explain why they
haven't done anything at all, at least as far as publishing
proposed regulations.
The ranking member led 15 House Democrats in urging all
four of you to move forward quickly. What is the state of
progress with regard to issuing new merger guideline policies,
and when do you think your agency is going to turn its proposed
regulations into final regulations? Go ahead?
Mr. Anderson. Congressman, our proposed SOP is not a
regulation. It is purely a statement of policy, and so it is
proposed----
Mr. Sherman. But is it a proposed statement?
Mr. Anderson. It is a proposed statement of----
Mr. Sherman. Proposed. So, when do you go all the way to a
statement of policy?
Mr. Anderson. Our hope is that we will get comments over
the next 60 days and that we will eventually finalize that
statement of policy as we move forward. We don't have a
specific date in mind.
Mr. Sherman. And do you need to wait for your three sister
agencies to act before you have a different approach?
Mr. Anderson. With respect to our statement of policy, we
do not.
Mr. Sherman. Okay, and I will ask our other witness. When
are you going to have a final statement of policy or
regulation?
Mr. Dowd. Let me start by saying that we are aware of the
Executive Order. We take the Executive Order very seriously.
Mr. Sherman. Yes, I know. Please get to my question.
Mr. Dowd. Pardon me. I think the question----
Mr. Sherman. When are you going to have it done?
Mr. Dowd. Obviously, there is a process, so we have
issued----
Mr. Sherman. When are you going to get it done?
Mr. Dowd. The comment period runs until the middle of June,
if I am remembering correctly, approximately mid-June. We will
go through the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) process of
evaluating comments.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. When are you going to get it done? Just
a date, the time, a month, a year?
Mr. Dowd. It is a function of the administrative process.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. I am going to go on to another question.
I am reclaiming my time. I am going to go on to another
question.
Usually, we deal with bank mergers. This is, in a way, a
credit card processing merger. Visa has $2.4 trillion in
transactions; MasterCard, $1.1; and American Express, a little
under $900 billion. Discover is much smaller, $182 billion, and
not a real competitor to the triopoly. We have learned in New
York in dealing with scandal sheets and newspaper tabloids,
this whole idea of, ``catch and kill.'' Has Capital One
committed in a legally binding way that they are not trying to
capture and kill Discover, that they will not just move the
Discover people over to Visa or MasterCard and eliminate this
potential competitor? Do either of you have an answer?
Mr. Dowd. I am happy to start.
Mr. Sherman. I think it is a yes-or-no question. Have they
made the commitment or not?
Mr. Dowd. I am not in a position to comment on any pending
application for the OCC, but in general, we will look at all of
the statutory and regulatory factors, including the factors
that are on point with the issue that you are posing.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. I will ask the other witness.
Mr. Anderson. Congressman, the application that you are
talking about is not before the FDIC, so I actually can't
comment on that.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. You folks are bank prudential
regulators, so it is in your DNA to see whether the banks are
successful and healthy and profitable. To what extent can you
balance that with your other objective to make sure that
merchants and consumers are getting a fair deal? Can you do
that in the scope of being an agency where 99 percent of the
people you work with are focused on bank prudential security?
Mr. Dowd?
Mr. Dowd. I think the answer is, yes, I think we can
balance those interests. We do so in each Bank Merger Act
application by going through those statutory factors.
Mr. Sherman. I would urge all the bank regulators who look
at this to make sure that we don't lose. This is an opportunity
to turn Discover into a real competitor in this space or, at
the other extreme, see it eliminated as even a potential look
competitor. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Williams, is recognized.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you to the witnesses for being here today.
When people hear the word, ``merger,'' they automatically
think something bad, but mergers can be good for the banking
industry. Mergers are a sign that banks are providing for the
financial needs of the customers and communities they serve.
Mergers can help banks become more effective competitors,
generate cost savings, and promote healthy competition in a
robust banking system.
However, on the other side, mergers are sometimes conducted
out of necessity, such as when banks can't afford the expensive
compliance costs that come along with burdensome regulations,
which forces banks to consider mergers in order to spread these
regulatory costs over a wider book of business. So, this threat
of overwhelming compliance costs due to regulatory cliff effect
ends up hurting the regional and community banks, which are put
under pressure to merge when they are subject to enhanced
capital liquidity requirements from the Federal banking
agencies and financial regulators.
So, Mr. Anderson, can you expand on what the FDIC is doing
to address the anticompetitive effects of burdensome
regulations for small community banks and what the FDIC can do
to mitigate the potential negative effects as proposed changes
to its merger review framework may have?
Mr. Anderson. As you mentioned, we have an obligation under
the Bank Merger Act to look at the competitive effects of any
merger. We look at that from the geographical and product
markets. We take a look at the other competing entities in
those marketplaces as well. We take a look at the deposit
concentrations as a proxy for bank services, but we also look
at other services. So, I think we ultimately look at those
competitive factors and try to address the concern you just
raised.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Yes. Regulations are killing
community banks, in case you don't know that. I continue to
hear from banks in my district that regulators are slow to
review merger applications and that the review process lacks a
clear set of expectations, and we have talked about that today.
Bankers do not want to have to devote time, money, and
resources to pursue a merger when the approval process is just
going to be dragged out and delayed by regulators. The role of
the Federal regulators should be to improve the merger process,
not make it more burdensome for the institutions applying.
So, Mr. Anderson, again, what is the average time the FDIC
has to review a merger application?
Mr. Anderson. I can't speak to every year. I can say that
last year, the average time was approximately 109 days once the
application was received. I think potentially a better measure
is that in terms of when an application is deemed substantially
complete, typically, around 68 days has been the turnaround
time. Our goal is to hit 60, to do that in 60 days on a typical
case, and we meet that goal approximately 60 percent of the
time. We did that last year, as well as the year before.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. Now, in July of 2021,
President Biden issued an Executive Order that would create a
whole-of-government approach to competition policy. This is
counterproductive, and just as we have seen with the regulatory
regime of the Biden Administration, more government involvement
in the free market does not work.
And under this Executive Order, banking regulators were
tasked with updating their guidelines on banking mergers to
provide more-robust scrutiny of the merger process. The FDIC
and the OCC have both published their updated guidelines, both
of which do nothing to benefit bank mergers. The OCC's proposal
does more harm than good by removing key provisions that would
streamline and expedite the application review process, further
clogging the already-increasing backlog of applications. Now,
while the FDIC's proposal would discourage mergers altogether,
it further disadvantages banks and the customers they serve. So
putting aside the damage these proposals will do on their own,
it is shocking how different they are from each other.
Depending on the structure of a proposed merger, an
applicant could have to get approval from multiple banking
agencies, and if these proposals are adopted, banks may have to
try and comply with conflicting merger review regimes, which
would lead to significant uncertainty.
Mr. Dowd, has the OCC considered the damage, confusion, and
regulatory burden that could be placed on banks by having to
follow conflicting guidelines from multiple different
regulators?
Mr. Dowd. I'm sorry. I didn't understand the question.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. Mr. Dowd, has the OCC
considered the damage, confusion, and regulatory burden that
could be placed on banks by having to follow conflicting
guidelines for multiple different regulators?
Mr. Dowd. The OCC considers all aspects and potential
implications, both positive and negative. When we propose to
implement new rules, guidelines, and policies, we consider it
on balance. So, thinking about a merger application that is
front of the OCC, in the abstract, we don't think about it as
positive or negative. It is the attributes of that application
that are important to the OCC.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, is
now recognized.
Mr. Scott. This is a very important and a very timely
hearing. Mr. Anderson, under the proposed rules, lenders with
more than $50 billion in assets would now face FDIC hearings
examining whether a merger was in the public interest. Is that
right?
Mr. Anderson. That is the proposal, that we would have
public hearings for mergers that would have----
Mr. Scott. While those with combined assets of $100 billion
would have to clear more stringent hurdles to ensure that they
do not pose a risk to our financial system. Is that right?
Mr. Anderson. That is the way the proposal is written at
this point, yes.
Mr. Scott. Today, 47 banks in the United States, out of
more than 4,500 banks, have over $50 billion in assets, and 32
are above $100 billion in assets, so my question to you, Mr.
Anderson, is this. What is the evidence or indication that the
current financial environment or pressures on earnings of some
of the U.S. regional banks could lead to prolonged
concentrations in our banking sector?
Mr. Anderson. That is a very complicated question. I think
that is a question that the economists would probably be in a
better position to answer.
Mr. Scott. Let me ask you this. Can you express with full
confidence that all banks above $50 billion in assets have
access to sufficient liquidity to guard against unexpected
deposit overflows from uninsured depositors?
Mr. Anderson. I am not in a position to commit to that.
Again, there are probably people at the FDIC who are better-
positioned to answer that question, sir.
Mr. Scott. Also, Mr. Anderson, in your testimony, you
referenced the FDIC's merger review that would be broad in
nature and that the FDIC would consider the record of each
institution in complying with consumer protection requirements
and maintaining a sound and effective compliance system.
Mr. Anderson. That is correct.
Mr. Scott. As you are aware, however, when banks publicly
express that they are exploring a merger, time matters, and
uncertainties about progress and outcomes weigh on our
customers, local communities, employees, and shareholders. So
my question to you is, how can the FDIC assure our banks and
the public that regulators will make decisions that are in the
best interest of everyone promptly and fairly?
Mr. Anderson. I think that is what our proposed SOP is
actually getting at; it is trying to lay out exactly how the
FDIC reviews the statutory factors. It also is laying out the
type of information that we would need from those institutions
to be able to move quickly. So, I think that is really the goal
of the proposed SOP, and I think if we were able to move
forward in that space, we would be able to make those decisions
in the manner that you just mentioned.
Mr. Scott. Let me ask you this, Mr. Anderson. Just how will
the FDIC demonstrate that a bank merger subject to its approval
will result in an institution that is positioned to better meet
the convenience and needs of the community it serves?
Mr. Anderson. Well, as you mentioned, the statutory factor
requires that we consider the convenience and needs of the
community to be served. The proposed SOP talks about hoping or
wanting to have a resulting institution that is going to better
serve the community. We would look at their CRA rating at the
end. We would look at the products and services that they would
be offering that could be achieved through higher lending
limits or other new products and the like. And those are things
that we would consider as we move forward.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Anderson.
Mr. Anderson. Thank you.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk,
is now recognized.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
our witnesses for coming to testify today on behalf of your
respective agencies.
Like many of my colleagues, I am concerned that the banking
regulators have taken aggressive steps to discourage mid-sized
and community banks from partnering with fintechs to keep up
with technology and meet customer and regulatory expectations.
At the same time, the FDIC and the OCC have proposed revisions
to the bank merger review process that we are here to talk
about today, which I suspect will hamper banks' ability to
leverage economies of scale and the technological expertise of
other banks to fill the gap created by the hostile regulatory
treatment of bank/fintech partnerships.
Mr. Anderson, could you briefly discuss some of the
challenges community banks face when trying to keep up with
technology and meet the regulatory and cybersecurity practices
expected of them?
Mr. Anderson. We are certainly aware that those things are
costly to community banks, and we take those things into
account, if you will, when we are looking at a bank merger
transaction. So, we are aware of them. Obviously, to the extent
that community banks want to partner with third parties, that
is certainly appropriate, provided they are doing so in a
manner that ultimately allows the institution to operate in a
safe and sound manner. So, we certainly are aware of those
concerns.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Well, that is good to know. When you
compare the regulatory burdens that are put on a small
institution versus a large institution, it is clear to see that
when a larger financial institution has as much as one or two
floors of just regulatory specialists or compliance specialists
versus a small, two branch community bank which may fall under
a similar set of regulations, it is much more difficult on
those banks. With that in mind, do you think mergers might
allow banks to gain the economies of scale to make capital-
intensive technological investments?
Mr. Anderson. They can. That is possible.
Mr. Loudermilk. Does the FDIC view bank/fintech
partnerships as beneficial to mid-sized and community banks?
Mr. Anderson. They can be.
Mr. Loudermilk. Do you believe the FDIC is, or at least
strives to be, a politically-independent regulatory agency?
Mr. Anderson. I do.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Mr. Dowd, do you feel the same way
about the OCC, that it is politically independent?
Mr. Dowd. I do.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Well, that concerns me a little bit.
As contrast, Mr. Dowd, there is something that you said to one
of my colleagues earlier regarding the Executive Order by the
President which encouraged Federal banking agencies to re-
examine their policies on merger reviews under the Bank Merger
Act and Bank Holding Company Act. As far as I am aware, prior
to this Executive Order, the agencies hadn't given any
indication that they were contemplating changes to the merger
review process, is what I may derive from your previous answer.
Was Executive Order 14036 a contributor to the OCC's decision
to reassess its merger review process?
Mr. Dowd. I would say that the OCC is always looking at the
business of banking and, in particular, the evolution of the
business of banking. So when you get to the organic statute
that the national banks and the OCC operate under 12 U.S.C.
24(7), national banks may engage in the business of banking,
and obviously, the business of banking today looks very
different than it looked 10 years ago, 50 years ago, et cetera.
Mr. Loudermilk. But more specifically, from what I
understood from an answer you gave earlier, the Executive Order
was kind of a catalyst or you were giving attention to the
Executive Order. What I am asking is, is that Executive Order
one of the primary reasons that you are reassessing this?
Mr. Dowd. I would say the Executive Order and the landscape
of the delivery of financial services and the landscape of the
banking industry are all things that contribute to an OCC
decision to think about bank mergers and how we approach bank
mergers. Fundamentally, if you look at the way that the
agencies have approached it, there hasn't been meaningful
change since 1995.
Mr. Loudermilk. I think you are kind of skirting the
question here. Let me ask Mr. Anderson the same thing. Was
Executive Order 14036 a contributor to the FDIC's decision to
reassess its merger review process?
Mr. Anderson. Congressman, we were certainly aware of the
Executive Order. I think from the FDIC's perspective, our
statement of policy on bank mergers had not been updated for a
number of years. As Mr. Dowd suggested, the banking landscape
has changed dramatically, and we, frankly, thought it was
appropriate to take a look at our bank merger policy.
Mr. Loudermilk. It is very suspicious that both of your
agencies decided to take this on after that was made public. I
see I am out of time, so, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from California, Mr. Vargas, is recognized.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
it and, of course, the witnesses for being here. It seems like
a lot of the questions that you are getting from the dais up
here really should go to the economists and not the prudential
regulators. But since that is what we are doing, I am going to
ask a few of those myself.
When the chairman brought up the metaphor of the shot
clock, the amount of time that you would have in basketball on
the shot clock, Mr. Dowd, you seemed to have a moment of joy
today, the first one, maybe the only one, because you seem to
know about the Wildcats and you seem to know quite a bit about
the Knicks or someone behind you. But he actually mixed his
metaphors, because he spoke about basketball, but he also spoke
about purgatory. I am not familiar with purgatory in
basketball, but I am familiar with purgatory in Catholicism.
Purgatory is not a bad place. Everyone thinks that
purgatory is a bad place. If you are a Catholic, you know that
purgatory is not a bad place because it assures that you are
going to get to heaven. Purgatory is actually a very good
place. You go to purgatory to expiate for your moral failings
or for your sins. However, if you have a graver mortal sin that
you cannot atone for in purgatory, you actually go to hell.
That is why purgatory is good, because it means you only have
venial sins. So when he said that there is this time clock, and
I don't know how far I want to push this analogy because I just
thought about it today, but it just seems that if you do have a
merger or an acquisition and you put them in purgatory, that is
not necessarily bad, because they still have the opportunity to
merge, they still have the opportunity to accomplish what they
want to do.
With that being said, I do want to know how you take in the
needs of the community here, especially through public
comments, because again, purgatory can be very quick or it can
be very long. It depends on the number of sins. So again, would
you please comment on that?
Mr. Dowd. Sure. Let me start by saying that I am always
happy to talk about basketball, but I can see this is not the
forum to talk about basketball, so I will leave shot clock
analogies to the side. Your question about community
involvement, I think, is an excellent question, and it is a
question and it is a process that is critical to the evaluation
of a merger application that is before the OCC and how the OCC
approaches that merger application. Built within the process,
under the statutory factor of convenience of needs, the OCC is
legally required to consider the convenience and needs of the
community with respect to the impact or a potential impact of a
merger transaction.
Diving into that, what does that mean? That means we are
very interested in the views of the stakeholders, the potential
consumers of the resulting bank. So, when we have a potential
merger application, as I mentioned in my testimony, we put that
up on our website. We solicit public comment----
Mr. Vargas. If I could interrupt you just for one second,
because I think this is the point that I was trying to make,
the difference between an economist and a regulator, because
you take a look at the individualized decision in front of you,
just the bank. You don't take a look, necessarily, at the other
banks or the community in the area, I don't think. There is
some unfairness to look at the community itself and say, okay,
we are not going to allow this bank to merge because of issues
going on in that particular community. I know you take them
into account, but that is not necessarily the largest question
here that you have to settle.
And the reason I say that is because economists will take a
look and say that there are too few banks now because these
mergers and acquisitions have consolidated them in such a way
that there isn't the market competition that you need. But you
guys are looking at the banks individually, you are not looking
at them as a system, and it would be unfair to look at them as
a system when there is a particular application before you.
In fact, you can't even talk about the particular
application in front of you because you say that is unfair
because it is before us. Well, that is the case. I think that
is the problem that we are looking at, how do you solve the
larger problem, and that is something I think to which an
economist would have a better answer. That is why I think it is
a little difficult for you guys here. My time is up. I know you
want to answer. I apologize. Maybe you could answer that in
writing?
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back, and the gentleman
from Tennessee is recognized, Mr. Rose, who may be able to
explain what he witnessed in terms of regulatory purgatory in
Tennessee.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Barr, and Ranking Member
Foster, for holding this hearing, and thank you to our
witnesses for being with us today. I don't know anything about
purgatory, but I do know that my Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ,
died on the cross to answer for my sins, and if you believe in
Him and have faith in Him and repent, you can enjoy that as
well. So thank you again, gentlemen, for being here.
I would like to start by discussing some of the challenges
that community banking organizations face. Mr. Anderson, what
has the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation found in their
analysis of community banking organizations and, specifically,
their ability to keep up with technology to meet the growing
regulatory expectations to maintain cybersecurity and compete
for customers?
Mr. Anderson. I think it is fair to say that it is a very
competitive market. We recognize that there are certain
challenges that the community banks face given their size and
their ability or inability at times to grow to scale, so those
are certainly things that we are aware of and we try to factor
in as we supervise those institutions.
Mr. Rose. And I wonder, do you think that mergers are an
important pathway to allow these banks to gain the economies of
scale, frankly, that are necessary to meet these capital-
intensive technology investments that are required by the
changing landscape and by the changing regulatory landscape?
Mr. Anderson. In certain circumstances, they can be.
Mr. Rose. Okay. I would like to shift now and discuss the
situation that community banks actually face, which is a
dragged-out merger review and approval process. Delays in
merger approvals come with many risks, in my view, not the
least of which are cybersecurity vulnerabilities. While a
merger is pending, technology investments naturally wane, and
companies may see the departure of key employees who manage
cybersecurity risk. If a bank must wait several months for
approval, it becomes vulnerable to cyberattacks, frankly,
putting its depositors at risk.
Mr. Dowd, when the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency decided to remove streamlined applications and
expedited merger reviews in its proposed rulemaking, was there
any consideration given to the fact that depositors were
potentially being exposed to cyber criminals?
Mr. Dowd. Let me start by saying that national security is
extremely important to the OCC, and a bank's ability to comply
with BSA and AML requirements and laws is paramount to our
supervision of the Federal banking system. To the extent that
we have an application in front of us that raises questions or
presents issues with respect to a bank's ability to comply with
BSA and AML requirements, that is something that we take
extraordinarily seriously.
Mr. Rose. Mr. Dowd, I can't help but observe--and it is my
view of this new rulemaking--a new approach to mergers. My
first boss was pretty exacting, and he always was on to me
because I always gave him excellent work and prided myself--I
am a recovering lawyer--I will say, prided myself in getting to
the right answer. But he pointed out to me once after waiting a
long time for the right answer, that time is an element of
quality, and on that, I had failed.
This is my criticism of this process, and I would like you
to respond to it, is that delayed time, even if you are getting
to a perfect answer, makes that answer, frankly, imperfect, and
that is really what I am trying to get at. And I wonder if you
might respond to that and what impetus is there for you all to
do this in a timely fashion?
Mr. Dowd. I agree completely that a timely response is a
critical part of being an effective lawyer. With respect to the
particular issue we are discussing, I think it is important to
marry the first piece of what I said with the policy statement
that is attached to the OCC's NPR, and in that policy
statement, we at the OCC identify features that are consistent
with a timely decision on a bank merger application. There are
a list of them, I won't bother to read through all of them, but
critically on that list is that there are no Bank Secrecy Act
issues and there are no fair lending issues, no CRA issues. But
with respect to Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering (BSA/
AML), if an application comes in and it is clean, we are
prepared to act in a timely fashion with respect to that piece
of it.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, and I see my time has expired. I do
implore you to move as quickly as possible in this process.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Casten, is
recognized.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses. I guess I have some high-level questions and
observations, and you, hopefully, will agree with my
observations on the front end.
I am broadly very supportive of stringent reviews of merger
activity for financial stability reasons and for antitrust
reasons as well. As I think about your jurisdiction as you look
at a merger, it strikes me that both of you are primarily
focused on banks being able to carry out their functions,
whether AML, as you have mentioned many times, or the stability
of the bank and the banking system, and, to a somewhat lesser
degree, the antitrust questions, which I think sort of tip into
DOJ jurisdiction. And I guess what I am wondering is, all of
our discussion today has been focused on your narrow
jurisdiction. To what degree are you coordinating with the DOJ
or the FTC or other antitrust authorities when you make these
decisions, just at a high level?
Mr. Anderson. On a high level, on any merger, we have to
get a report from the Department of Justice. So we coordinate
with them in that manner, if you will, but we do have to make
our own independent determination, if you will, on those
competitive concerns.
Mr. Casten. Okay. And they would have to sign off as well
before your process is done?
Mr. Anderson. We have the authority to move forward on our
own.
Mr. Casten. In all cases?
Mr. Anderson. In all cases.
Mr. Casten. Okay. So maybe, that then gets to the two
scenarios that I am struggling with in my head. You have one
which always gets the press in the news that there is an
emergency sale--it is SVB, it is Signature, it is Merrill
Lynch, it is Lehman--and all of a sudden, there is a big bank
with a robust balance sheet, and you have to move quickly to
get in, and then after the fact, we say, well, did this lead to
greater banking concentration? That is one set of questions
that strike me where you have a tension between your
obligations from a stability perspective and how you think
about antitrust, and I guess what you are saying is you can
make that decision unilaterally.
Would you ever make that decision and say, once the dust
settles, we have to go through and separate this back out to
avoid some of the industrial concentration questions that
arise?
Mr. Anderson. I am not sure how I would answer that
question. That is a fair question. That is something I would
have to think about.
Mr. Casten. Because the implication there is that antitrust
is ignored in the moment and maybe is appropriate to be ignored
in the moment. Maybe there is only one bank that has the
liquidity to carry this out, but it sounds like there is never
an example where you unwind it afterwards.
Mr. Anderson. I think you are talking about an extreme
situation, when you are talking about a potential failure, and
that certainly raises a number of different issues that indeed
some of what you have raised. I would have to think a little
more about the question itself.
Mr. Casten. That gets to the second scenario that I am
struggling with a little bit, that as you look at existing
networks of mergers that are--some that we have talked about in
this hearing, and others that we don't know about yet, but
someone is going to announce next week and you will have to get
your pens out again. I think the size of all those mergers from
an asset concentration, from a deposit concentration, whatever
you want to measure, pales relative to the growth and deposit
base of JPMorgan and the Bank of America. And so, from a
concentration perspective, the organic growth in those banks
seems to dwarf what is happening on the merger side.
And I don't say that in any way to suggest that you
shouldn't be vigilant on the mergers, but how do you deal with
a scenario if you are saying, from a purely antitrust
perspective, that the factors driving concentration are not
issues that would trigger a review on your part. But on the
other hand, the factors that are creating scenarios where
someone might be a competitor to those large players to trigger
a review, how do you think about that from an antitrust
perspective?
Mr. Anderson. Again, that is a very interesting question. I
would have to get back with you on that. I'm sorry.
Mr. Casten. I will be the guy guilty of asking interesting
questions. I would love to know how you think about those
because, to come back to what I said at the start, I think
there is a tension between short-term stability and antitrust
measures. I want to believe that our regulators, and the
coordination across the regulators is doing that trade off
because if you are not, then it is on us to figure out how to
do it. And don't get me wrong, some of us are really smart, but
I want to make sure that the people who are down in the weeds
are in the lead on that. I welcome the chance to follow up with
you offline, and I yield back. Thanks.
Mr. Anderson. If you provide that question to us in
writing, we will certainly call.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Fitzgerald, is recognized.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Some of these
questions may be a little redundant, but rephrasing Mr. Posey's
question about whether or not you gentlemen ever worked in a
bank, I think that is significant. It has become more
significant because I am having a really hard time here this
morning understanding how hands-on this process is, if it is
hands-on at all. But as we know, mergers require significant
upfront and ongoing investment and a commitment of resources,
and that includes kind of finding a target, conducting due
diligence, and negotiating the terms of the transaction. Once a
target is identified, the banks have to prepare the appropriate
regulatory filings, engage with regulators, and prepare for the
post-approval business process.
Given all the upfront work that happens in a merger, it
should come as no surprise that few deals are really blocked,
because everything is kind of in order. So, let me ask you
this. Do the FDIC and the OCC currently believe the lack of
denials of bank mergers means that the framework is working, or
is it clearly ineffective at this point? M
Mr. Anderson, I would ask you to go first on that.
Mr. Anderson. I think we believe our framework is working.
I think, ultimately, we are evaluating the statutory factors
and coming to conclusions on that. Our process is such that, to
the extent that a merger is not going to meet the statutory
factors, it is a very iterative process, we would talk to the
institution and, frankly, let them know that we would be
recommending potentially a denial, and in many instances,
institutions withdraw. Overall, I think we believe that our
process is actually working.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Mr. Dowd?
Mr. Dowd. Thank you for the question. It is a very good
question and a question we should be asking ourselves on a
regular basis. I agree with Mr. Anderson. The process is
working, but I also recognize that there is always an
opportunity for improvement and refinement. And that is the
exercise that the OCC is engaged in right now, and one that I
would suggest that all of the Federal banking agencies and the
Department of Justice should engage in from time to time.
Mr. Fitzgerald. I don't think there is any doubt that the
consequences of the merger delays have a significant impact on
the banks involved, causing greater operational risk.
Certainly, expenses are going to increase as there is a delay,
and then the reputation of the bank. If you are a customer of
that bank, and we know how this works, there is kind of this
rumor mill that starts about who is going out of business and
who is going to remain in business, am I going to have to
switch accounts, am I going to have to get a new debit card?
All of these things happen in this process, and this is not
just a problem of the big banks. Obviously, for a smaller bank,
it is probably more significant.
So the uncertainty in the merger process limits
opportunities, I would say as well, but the banks just can't
simply hit the pause button. They must continue to market their
services, market their brand, and make sure that they are still
in business. It is a business, right? So, how do you consider
the costs of delays? Have you looked at these, have you
examined these and said, this is a problem for us if it is
having that type of impact on banks across the country?
Mr. Anderson, have you looked at this?
Mr. Anderson. We are certainly aware that at times,
applications have not moved as quickly as we would like. I
think that part of the proposed SOP and the updated Bank Merger
Act interagency application form that we put out for public
comment as well, part of that is to make it clear how we are
going to evaluate the statutory factors as well as to let
institutions understand, if you will, the type of information
that we need to make a decision. And I think, ultimately, our
hope is that by combining those two, we will come out with a
more efficient process and be able to move some of those
applications faster.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Mr. Dowd, is there any sense of expediency?
Is there any awareness of the impact you could be having on a
bank if, in fact, this work can't be done and done quickly?
Mr. Dowd. We are keenly aware of the issues that you have
raised. On the spectrum of small institutions, we process
those, in general, very quickly, very efficiently. With respect
to the larger institutions, those transactions are more
complex, and complexity drives timing. For a clean transaction
involving large banks, we have the ability to move very
quickly, and we are, again, keenly aware of the benefits, and
sometimes you need to move quickly on that front. But a lot of
it is dependent on what comes in on the application, and to the
extent that application arrives, that introduces----
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Dowd. ----safety and soundness and risk concerns for
what would be the resulting institution----
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Dowd. ----we want to ensure that we are on top of those
so that the ultimate institution that is approved----
Chairman Barr. I'm sorry. The time has expired. The
gentlewoman from Massachusetts, Ms. Pressley, is now
recognized.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today's subcommittee
hearing is entitled, ``Merger Policies of the Federal Banking
Agencies.'' The world of bank mergers and acquisitions really
may seem abstract for the everyday consumer, so I wanted to
just dial in on why this matters. The lack of bank competition
has real impacts that directly affect the interest you earn on
your savings account, your monthly mortgage, or your car loan,
ATM fees, and credit affordability, to name a few, and for
workers, it is well-documented that bank mergers often lead to
bank branch closures and job losses.
It is well past time for bank regulators to review bank
mergers through an antitrust lens and with a consumer
protection perspective. Failure to do so for decades has lined
the pockets of bank executives and shareholders while the
American public, whether urban, rural, or suburban, has
suffered and has seen costs rise.
In 1994, in the United States, there were over 14,000
banks. Today, in 2024, 40 years later, there are just 4,000,
and the 6 largest banks control more than half of the total
assets. This decline is not a coincidence nor happenstance.
Rather, it is a direct consequence of bank regulators' failure
to enforce antitrust laws in the banking sector. From 2006 to
2021, the Federal Reserve reviewed over 3,500 bank mergers and
approved every single one of them. This series of policy
choices has weakened our financial system, caused consumer
harm, and reduced competition among banks.
Mr. Anderson, and Mr. Dowd, bank mergers, in so many cases,
have proven to harm consumers with higher prices and more fees,
lower deposit rates, less access to credit, and bank branch
closures, which I care about. I represent a district in
Massachusetts, the City of Boston, where 10 percent of my
constituents are unbanked, and 20 percent are underbanked, and
where there are bank branch closures and job cuts. What steps
are the FDIC and the OCC taking to ensure that customers,
especially those from communities of color, and low- and
moderate-income communities, are not getting the short end of
the stick?
Mr. Anderson. It is a fair question, Congresswoman. I think
that as we analyzed the Bank Merger Act factors, the primary
ones that you are talking about, their effects on competition
and convenience and ease of a community with respect to
branches and the like, and to what extent those merged entities
are serving low- and moderate-income communities. I think, as
we look at what the resulting transaction is going to look
like, we are going to try to ensure that, ultimately, those
services are carried through. We look at the business plan of
the resulting institution over 3 years to take a look at the
branches that they are suggesting they are going to close as
well as open. So I think, ultimately, we will be looking at
those concerns and the resulting transaction.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. Mr. Dowd, while I appreciate that the
OCC issued its proposal to strengthen bank merger reviews in
January, some experts have said that your proposal is not as
strong as a proposal that the FDIC issued. Are you concerned by
the differences in your proposal from the FDIC's, and is your
agency open to incorporating more forms put forward by the FDIC
in their own proposal?
Mr. Dowd. The OCC is open to receiving comments from all
stakeholders who are affected or have an interest in our NPR,
so that would absolutely include consumers of banks, community
groups, all of the communities and people that you have
identified, and we welcome those comments. We want those
comments. Procedurally, it is a notice----
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. I'm sorry. I have one more
question I want to get in on the record. Apologies for
interrupting. My time is lapsing here. Mr. Dowd, can you speak
to how the OCC is considering financial stability and merger
reviews?
Mr. Dowd. It is one of the statutory factors that we are
required to consider. We do consider it, consistent with our
statutory obligation, and we coordinate with our peer
regulators at the Federal Reserve and, when appropriate, with
the FDIC. I will say, in a technical manner, there are often
numerous legal entities involved, so we will work with that on
the holding company piece.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentlelady from California, Mrs. Kim, is recognized.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to our
witnesses for spending time with us this afternoon in our
subcommittee.
My concern is that there is no consistency in the bank
merger review process, and the methods for approving or
disapproving are very opaque. I want to ask a question to both
of you. Will you please describe the efforts that your
respective agency is doing to improve predictability,
transparency, and efficiency in the merger review process?
Mr. Anderson. I think that is the very purpose of our
proposed SOP that is out today or that is out now. It is really
to lay out how the FDIC approaches each of the statutory
factors, and, for lack of a better way to say it, to provide
some meat on the bone, if you will, so that people can
understand how we do that. It is also an opportunity, if you
will, for us to make it clear the type of information that we
are going to want from applicants who are seeking to merge. So,
I think those are the steps that we have taken.
Mrs. Kim. Sure. Mr. Dowd?
Mr. Dowd. I agree with that, and I will say at its core,
that is what the OCC NPR and policy statement is after. We are
looking for ways to improve transparency and predictability
with respect to bank merger applications and how they are
processed, and to that end, again, if you look at the policy
statement, we identify features that, if you have these
features, those are consistent with a timely decision on a bank
merger application. If you are deficient in one or more of
those features, that is going to require and necessitate more
time to ensure that if we are approving an institution, that
the institution we are approving ultimately has the financial
and managerial resources, systems and controls, et cetera, to
operate in a safe and sound manner and to serve the needs of
its community.
Mrs. Kim. Both the FDIC's and the OCC's recent proposals,
as I reviewed them, seem to indicate that predictability and
transparency are not the end goals. So, Mr. Anderson, in your
FDIC proposal, there is a requirement that the combined bank
better meet the convenience and the needs of the community
served by combined entities. How will the applicants be able to
predict what the FDIC considers better meeting the needs of the
community?
Mr. Anderson. I think we have tried to lay that out a
little bit in the proposal. That is certainly something new
and, frankly, we are seeking comments on that, so I am
certainly interested in getting comments as we move forward. I
think that we talk about in the proposal that that can be met
in terms of increased lending limits, new products, and the
like, so those would be ways in which the resulting institution
can show that they are going to better meet the needs of the
community.
Mrs. Kim. And, Mr. Dowd, one focus of the OCC's proposal is
on the job losses or reduced job opportunities resulting from
the mergers, so will the OCC provide further clarity on what
would be considered acceptable or unacceptable job losses?
Mr. Dowd. Again, it is a notice of proposed rulemaking, so
I can't predict where a final rule will go. Obviously, the
Administrative Procedure Act has rules on what we can say, and,
more importantly, we don't want to front-run the process. But
the issue you raise is a very good issue, and we would welcome
comments on that point, and we will take those comments very
seriously when we decide how we construct and shape the final
rule.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. We are still seeing the ripple effect
of record-high inflation and high interest rates, and we saw it
with Silicon Valley Bank and First Republic Bank last year, and
we are seeing it with a number of other banks, like Republic
Bank in Pennsylvania, this year. My view is that we should make
it easier for some of the troubled banks to have an offramp
before it is too late to act.
So, would both of you speak of the financial stability
considerations that you take into account during the merger
review process? Do you consider the risk to financial stability
when a merger is not approved?
Mr. Dowd. We do consider financial stability in a merger
application. It is statutorily mandated that we consider
financial stability. So in that vein, we consider the size of
the resulting institution, the interconnectedness of the
resulting institution, the complexity of the resulting
institution, and if there is cross-border activity, what that
cross border activity is, and also ultimate resolution.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. I think my time is expiring, so I just
want to encourage both of you to consider the risk on both
sides of the aisle. Thank you again. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady yields back. The gentleman
from New York, Mr. Meeks, is recognized.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank both of
you for being here today and for your testimony, and I have
been listening upstairs and back and forth. This is, I think, a
very important hearing with very significant and important
ramifications.
When I look at what is going on, I generally believe that
bank mergers should be assessed on the merits, particularly the
individual application put forth and trying to determine also
what is in the best interest of the consumer, and on the other
side, so that way you can judge each on its merits as opposed
to just, it is only to see.
Also, if the application meets the regulatory criteria that
is outlined after a thorough review by all, and if that is the
case, then it may be fair that a merger be allowed to proceed.
So to that degree, I want to appreciate that the OCC and the
FDIC are working to provide more clarity because I also hear in
these cases the question is about clarity, which is important
to a lot of folks. So, clarity around what this process is, I
think is very important, and you trying to provide that clarity
is important.
Now, that being said, also from a big picture standpoint,
the consolidation of the banking industry is very concerning to
me. Community and regional banks play an essential role in a
district like mine and, thereby, affect my constituents. The
diversity of our banking ecosystem is one of the greatest
strengths, and when a bank branch closes and we start to get
banking deserts in my neighborhood, the neighborhood really
feels it.
Mr. Dowd, in your estimation, what is the impact of a more
consolidated banking industry, and how does this consolidation
affect our communities, and to what extent are these factors
taken into account when assessing a proposed merger?
Mr. Dowd. Thank you for the question. Let me start by
saying that I absolutely agree that a merger application should
be assessed on its merits. With respect to the statutory
factors that shape the consideration on the merits, convenience
and needs is critical, and as part of that, I think we look at
how financial services and banking services are delivered to a
particular community. Obviously, the banking world and the
financial services world has evolved in recent years, over the
last 5 years, over the last 10 years. But ultimately, the
question is, is the community getting the financial services,
and do they have access to the financial services that they
need consistent with the convenience and needs factor set forth
in the Bank Merger Act statute.
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Anderson, what is your viewpoint?
Mr. Anderson. I would agree with what Mr. Dowd said. That
is something that we certainly look at as we kind of evaluate
the convenience and needs statutory factor. You mentioned
branch closings and concerns in communities regarding that.
That is something that we would take into account when we look
at an application. We look at that application over kind of a
3-year period, if you will, and try to get an understanding of
what the proposed branch closings are. And as Ted mentioned, we
would really want to make certain that those communities, to
the extent that branches are closed, are still going to receive
banking services appropriately.
Mr. Meeks. Do you anticipate that this big picture dynamic
will play a larger role in the final proposal of reforms of
your merger and acquisitions review policies?
Mr. Anderson. You would have to kind of bring me back to
the big picture part that you are talking about.
Mr. Meeks. So, the big picture is trying to look at these
mergers individually to make the assessments that we are
talking about in regards to----
Mr. Anderson. Yes. I think we do have to look at every
merger based upon its own kind of factors, if you will, and
make that determination.
Mr. Meeks. Let me quickly shift, because I see we are
running out of time, to the FDIC meeting that took place last
week where two proposals relating to bank control were
considered. And at the meeting, Acting Comptroller Hsu remarked
that instead of creating opportunities for a turf battle, the
prudential regulators, namely the OCC, the FDIC, and the
Federal Reserve, should enhance their coordination and develop
a unified interagency approach to address issues related to
bank control.
Mr. Dowd, I think you were there. Can you elaborate on why
is that so critical to achieve?
Mr. Dowd. I apologize, Mr. Meeks. I am not quite sure I
follow the question.
Mr. Meeks. At the FDIC meeting last week, Comptroller Hsu
remarked that instead of creating opportunities for a turf
battle, people trying to fight for the various turf--I am
seeing that I am out of time--the prudential regulators, the
OCC, the FDIC, and the Federal Reserve should enhance
coordination, talking among themselves, so that there is
clarity.
Chairman Barr. The witness can respond for the record. The
gentleman's time has expired. It is a good question, though, so
we would appreciate you responding for the record.
The gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Ogles, is now recognized.
Mr. Ogles. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for being here. As most things run by the Federal
Government, the existing bank merger review process is slow, it
is unpredictable, and it is opaque. I think we are going to all
agree that it is important for bank merger policies to
encourage competition, which is one of the pillars of the free
market, yet not encourage increased regulations, including
those required by the Dodd-Frank Act, that would result in
driving banks to merge to afford compliance with burdensome
regulations.
And I think that is one of the things to note here is that
when you look at the larger banks versus your mid-sized to
large regional banks, the compliance costs are
disproportionately higher for the smaller and mid-sized to
regional banks, right? But competition is vital because it
naturally generates cost savings in the market that can be
passed on to consumers in the form of reduced fees.
My question for you both is, would it be helpful for
consumers, businesses, and financial stability overall if there
was increased competition with the largest banks, including the
global systemically important banks (G-SIBs)? Please explain,
Mr. Anderson.
Mr. Anderson. I think overall, competition is a good thing.
I would have to look a little bit closer on the question kind
of in the nuances that you mentioned, but overall, I think
competition is a good thing in that respect.
Mr. Ogles. Mr. Dowd?
Mr. Dowd. I agree wholeheartedly with Mr. Anderson that
competition is a good thing. The devil is in the details with
respect to the issues you raised, but I think we are perfectly
happy and would like to engage on that front.
Mr. Ogles. For both of you, when you look at the regulatory
regime and how it impacts your mid-sized and regional banks,
and when you look at rural areas, it is often your regional
banks that are your first lender, your first option. How is
regulation hurtful to the banking system? Mr. Anderson?
Mr. Anderson. I am not certain I would call regulation
hurtful. I certainly understand that compliance can be costly,
and I think that is kind of what you are getting at. So I
think, ultimately, as we move forward, our proposal is to try
to make it clear with respect to bank mergers what we expect,
if you will, and how we are going to view these statutory
factors and, hopefully, to the extent that we are talking about
a bank merger, make those costs go down, if you will, because
they will have an understanding of what type of information we
are going to require.
Mr. Ogles. What I would like to point out is, some of my
colleagues have pointed out that you have these banking
deserts, but in some cases, it is the regulatory regime that is
forcing the mergers because of the increased cost of
compliance. So whereas, the intent may be good to try to
regulate a space or an industry, in fact, it is creating more
harm than benefit. What is your response to that?
Mr. Anderson. It is a fair point. I certainly have heard
those types of concerns. I think those are the types of
comments that we would like to receive as part of our proposed
statement of policy, so I would welcome those comments.
Mr. Ogles. Mr. Dowd?
Mr. Dowd. I agree with Mr. Anderson. I would say that
regulation can be helpful at times. It can be a positive. In
fact, most of the time it is a positive, but I think there are
some issues----
Mr. Ogles. But when the regulation creates banking deserts
or limits access to credit, is it helpful?
Mr. Dowd. It is a very fair point that you raised. I would
like to talk in more detail about what the specific regulations
are and what the specific communities are that are being
affected, but I think that the issue raised is fair and valid,
and the OCC and my office would be happy to engage with you on
that.
Mr. Ogles. Mr. Chairman, you and I had spoken offline on an
important point, and, if I may, I will yield you the rest of my
time so you can discuss with the committee what you and I
talked about.
Chairman Barr. Thank you to my friend from Tennessee. Last
Congress, the CEOs of the G-SIB institutions were before this
committee, and I asked Mr. Moynihan, the CEO of Bank of
America, which institution was a greater competitor to Bank of
America--SunTrust alone, BB&T alone, or Truist, a combined
institution--and his testimony was undoubtedly Truist. So,
mergers sometimes can create competition, not undermine
competition, as that testimony demonstrated.
And I think, Mr. Dowd, Acting Comptroller Hsu has agreed
saying that there should be competition among large banks, and
simply prohibiting mergers of banks really locks in the
concentration among the existing megabanks, and I don't think
that is the right answer. That was a good point from the Acting
Comptroller. How should we reconcile that sentiment with the
OCC's proposal to impose a $50-billion size trigger for the
presumptive denial of an application?
Mr. Dowd. Can you clarify where we said that there was a
presumptive denial on $50-billion transactions?
Chairman Barr. My time has expired, so you can submit your
answer for the record, but it is principle number two under
your guidance, that the resulting institution will have total
assets of less than $50 billion. So, your new guidance, your
new proposal sets a $50-billion trigger for a presumption of a
denial.
Mr. Dowd. I am happy to look at that, and follow up with
your office. I am not quite sure I would look at it the same
way as a presumption of denial, but I think your question is
fair and we will follow up with you on it.
Chairman Barr. Thank you.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady from Ohio, Mrs. Beatty, is
recognized.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam Ranking
Member, and thank you to both of our witnesses for being here
today.
Let me start with you, Mr. Anderson. I would like to start
where we can talk about enhanced security and financial
stability. With the FDIC's consideration of enhanced scrutiny
of mergers that result in banks with $100 billion in total
assets, can you discuss the FDIC's reasoning behind this
potential enhanced scrutiny?
Mr. Anderson. I am not certain I would describe it as
enhanced scrutiny, but I think, ultimately, what we are saying
is that might result in an institution over $100 billion,
because of the size and complexity oftentimes resulting in
those institutions, they, in fact, may have a greater concern,
if you will, as it relates to financial stability. So, I think
we would look at it in that light. Again, it is out for
comment, and to the extent that is not the appropriate line, we
would certainly appreciate getting feedback on that.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Is this related, do you think, to the
recent regional bank failures that we saw last year, and if so,
how will enhanced review promote financial stability?
Mr. Anderson. Certainly, we learned a lot from the recent
failures, and, indeed, it is pretty clear that institutions of
that size could have a significant impact if they were to fail,
so I would certainly say we have learned something from that.
And indeed, that $100-billion mark is, as I said, something
that is out for proposal, but it is certainly something that we
have to consider.
Mrs. Beatty. Mr. Dowd, continuing in the same vein, is the
OCC considering adding a similar enhancement for mergers
resulting in banks with more than $100 billion?
Mr. Dowd. The OCC has a notice of proposed rulemaking and a
policy statement that is out for comment. We are open and
receptive to all comments, including comments that raised that
issue and the threshold you put forward.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Can you discuss other ways that the OCC
is considering financial stability in its merger review?
Mr. Dowd. With respect to merger reviews and the financial
stability prong of the Bank Merger Act, the OCC considers it at
the bank level, and then we also coordinate with our peer
regulators at the Federal Reserve, presuming there is a holding
company in the transaction. I would say there is almost
exclusively a holding company with respect to the larger
transactions.
We are also engaging with the FDIC, and we are considering
the financial stability factors that were articulated earlier:
the size of the institution, the sustainability of the
institution, and interconnectedness is obviously very important
for us on that front; the complexity of the institution; the
systems and controls at the institution in order to ensure
compliance with applicable laws; and also, the geographical
scope of the institution both domestically and internationally.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Anderson, I know there
has been a lot of focus on mergers of large banks. I would like
to ask about the merger of smaller banks. Many recent merger
deals include and produce, let's say, $20 billion to $100
billion asset range that falls short of that threshold for
enhanced prudential regulations. For example, UMB and Heartland
announced a deal just a few days ago that will create a
multistate bank, a $60-billion bank. In many cases, as in the
UMB deal, it will produce a bank that has a heavy concentration
of commercial real estate loans, in some cases upward to 40
percent, that regulators would not allow in a bank subject to
the additional enhanced supervision. Do you have any thoughts
on this, or should we be more concerned about this?
Mr. Anderson. I can't speak to a specific deal, but just
generally speaking, I think that as a bank supervisor who
examines these institutions, we certainly are going to take
those type of things into consideration. Whether it is
commercial real estate (CRE) loans or whatever it may be, those
are things that the FDIC and all the banking regulators take a
look at in our supervisory capacities.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Thank you, and my time is up.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Timmons, is recognized.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
the witnesses for being here today.
Mergers within the financial sector promote competition and
generate a robust landscape with banks that vary in size to fit
all individuals' needs. The White House and my colleagues
across the aisle take a different view in which they believe
bank mergers are leading to runaway consolidation and feel that
the government merely serves as a rubber stamp to these
transactions when, in fact, the process is already quite
strenuous.
The new proposals levied as a result of Executive Order
14036 are only going to make the merger application process
more opaque than it already is, creating unnecessary strain on
compliance departments and the workforce. Instead of
streamlining an already-difficult process, it appears your
agencies are seeking to make it more difficult.
Mr. Dowd, as part of its proposal, the OCC proposes
eliminating the expedited review process. Would you explain why
simple mergers or acquisitions that pose no competitiveness or
other risks could not be adequately reviewed in an expedited
manner?
Mr. Dowd. Thank you for the question. It is a good
question. For simple transactions, the OCC does process those
transactions on a timely basis, on a quick basis, and I would
expect that to continue. I think what the NPR does is it tries
to put a little more color and contour around those
transactions that are, for lack of a better description, simple
vanilla, do not raise significant supervisory issues, and
affirms that those transactions can be handled on a timely and
quick basis. The other part of what the NPR does, and
specifically in the policy statement, is it identifies features
with respect to transactions that are features that if they are
not met, could lead to, and I should say, will lead to enhanced
review. For example, an application----
Mr. Timmons. I just want to be clear. Are you eliminating
the expedited review process or are you not?
Mr. Dowd. I think the best way to think about it is, it is
being reframed and it is being explained in more detail.
Mr. Timmons. Okay. I appreciate that answer. I'm not really
sure I understand it, so I might have some follow-up questions.
I appreciate the fact that your agency's proposal contains a
statement of the OCC's General Principles for Merger Reviews,
including 13 indicators that are positive in applications that
the OCC would generally approve, and 6 negative indicators in
applications that the OCC would generally deny. Keeping it high
level, could you please give me a few examples of positive and
negative indicators and explain the rationale behind it?
Mr. Dowd. Sure. Let me start with the rationale and we can
go to the factor. The rationale is, what is the resulting bank
at the end of the transaction, and if the resulting bank is an
institution that we have looked at in the application process
and we are confident that the bank coming out at the end of
that transaction can operate in a safe and sound manner, can
comply with applicable laws and regulations, is able to meet
its fair lending needs, has a CRA program, et cetera, clean,
then that is the type of application that is consistent with
timely processing.
On the other hand, if you look at any of those factors, for
example, if there is a fair lending issue for one of the banks
in the transaction, if there is a BSA/AML concern with respect
to one of the banks in the transaction, that warrants
heightened scrutiny because, ultimately, what you are looking
at is the safety and soundness of the institution coming out at
the other end.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you for that. Mr. Anderson, unlike the
OCC, the FDIC does not clearly list the indicators it considers
when approving mergers in their latest proposal. Why did the
FDIC decide on this approach, and could you discuss how your
indicators compare and contrast to the OCC's?
Mr. Anderson. I think that what we try to do is lay out how
the FDIC is going to approach the statutory factors as well as
lay out the type of information that we want from proposed
applicants. And I think we are trying to put a little bit more
meat on the bones so that the applicants understand kind of how
we are going to view those statutory factors on a going-forward
basis. And I think, ultimately, we are hoping that the
combination of that plus the information that we are going to
receive will provide for a more efficient process.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you for that. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from South Carolina, Mr. Norman, is now recognized.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One of my questions
was, do regulations affect mergers? I can tell you right off
that they do. I was on a bank board for a number of years, and
we couldn't merge, just when the bank failures were taking
place, I think 15 years ago, with the Troubled Asset Relief
Program (TARP) in effect, and we couldn't buy banks and provide
banking services because of what it was going to cost in
personnel cost alone to administer the regulations. It has only
gotten worse since the Biden Administration has been in office.
What is the average time that you would say, assuming you have
all of the documentation, to review a merger application?
Mr. Anderson. I can't speak for every year at the FDIC. I
can say that in 2023, the average time from the point in which
an application is deemed substantially complete has been
approximately 68 days. In 2002, that was approximately 59 days.
Mr. Norman. Mr. Dowd?
Mr. Dowd. Thank you. I do not have that data in front of
me. I will say, in general, for transactions that involve
smaller institutions, our turnaround time is quite quick and
efficient. For larger, more complex transactions, it can take
longer, but I am happy to follow up with your office with more
detailed data.
Mr. Norman. The best way for us to be, and I understand
that you all need specifics to go by. If we write you a list of
concerns that we have with regulations that are in place for
you to respond to and I guess give a rationale for why they are
in place because time is money in banks, and I have had banks
in all this week that are very concerned about the time for
bank mergesr that it takes to review and that it puts the whole
banking system in limbo. So, is that the best way for me to do
that?
Mr. Dowd. We are always happy to have a dialogue, so if
your office wanted to submit a letter, we would be more than
happy to take a look at it, respond, and if additional
discussion would be helpful, we are always open to that.
Mr. Norman. Okay. Thank you. I think, as it has been said,
we just need clear guidelines and expectations of what is going
to be required, and it just hasn't happened, at least in the
last couple of years. What do you see as the major issues to be
resolved, and, I guess, what is the state of the progress and
how do you think the issues will be solved for the new merger
guidelines and the policies that are going to be proposed?
Mr. Dowd. At the OCC, we have issued a notice of public
rulemaking with a policy statement. The comment period on that
is open until, I believe the middle of June. Once we get all of
the comments and we evaluate them, we will then identify the
issues and proceed on a path forward, but I don't want to
prejudge the process.
Mr. Anderson. At the FDIC, we have our proposed statement
of policy on bank merger transactions similar to the OCC. It
has a 60-day comment period. Our hope would be to get the
comments in, review those comments, and then eventually find--
--
Mr. Norman. What is the expected time to review the
comments and to either modify or change the regulations?
Mr. Anderson. I don't have a specific date that I am aware
of. Again, it is going to be a function of the comments that we
get and taking a look at those and trying to determine what
changes, if any, we need to make.
Mr. Norman. How many people review the comments?
Mr. Anderson. I'm sorry?
Mr. Norman. How many people review the comments?
Mr. Anderson. It depends on the proposal.
Mr. Norman. Mr. Dowd, do you have any comment on that?
Mr. Dowd. Yes, that is exactly right. It depends on the
rulemaking. It depends on the complexity of the comments. On
one end of the spectrum, you have very complex rulemakings that
generate quite literally thousands of comments, and then, there
are rules at the other end of the spectrum that don't generate
as much interest. We calibrate our staffing and our response
with respect to the number and the complexity of the comments.
Mr. Norman. Okay. Thank you. I appreciate you being here. I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back.
I would like to thank our witnesses for their testimony
today. And, Mr. Dowd, just to finish the thought between you
and Mr. Timmons, and with me, when Mr. Timmons is talking about
the elimination of the expedited review procedures, and when I
referenced this second factor on the 13 indicators about the
resulting institution will have a total assets of less than $50
billion, I understand the OCC's take on that is that it is not
a presumptive denial for anything above $50 billion, but that
is the inference that is being taken. So, that is the feedback
that I would give you there. We will continue the conversation,
and I appreciate the dialogue.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
I ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as you
can.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

May 1, 2024

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
