- SEC OVERREACH: EXAMINING THE NEED FOR REFORM

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SEC OVERREACH: EXAMINING
THE NEED FOR REFORM

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CAPITAL MARKETS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

MARCH 20, 2024
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-84

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-394 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                   Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                           JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

Subcommittee on Capital Markets

ANN WAGNER, Missouri, Chairwoman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                   Member
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JUAN VARGAS, California
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York, Vice     WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
Chairman                           STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
MIKE LAWLER, New York                EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
March 20, 2024...............................................     1
Appendix:
March 20, 2024...............................................    41

WITNESSES
Wednesday, March 20, 2024

Burton, David R., Senior Fellow in Economic Policy, Heritage
Foundation.....................................................     4
Gulliver, John A., Executive Director, Committee on Capital
Markets Regulation.............................................     6
Schulp, Jennifer J., Director, Financial Regulation Studies,
Center for Monetary and Financial Alternatives, Cato Institute.     8
Thornton, Alexandra, Senior Director, Financial Regulation,
Center for American Progress...................................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Burton, David R..............................................    42
Gulliver, John A.............................................    63
Schulp, Jennifer J...........................................    84
Thornton, Alexandra..........................................    98

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Hill, Hon. French:
Written statement of the American Securities Association.....   113
Burton, David R.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   117
Gulliver, John A.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   119
Schulp, Jennifer J.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   120
Thornton, Alexandra:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   121

SEC OVERREACH: EXAMINING
THE NEED FOR REFORM

----------

Wednesday, March 20, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Capital Markets,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:09 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ann Wagner
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Wagner, Sessions,
Huizenga, Hill, Steil, Meuser, Garbarino, Lawler, Nunn,
Houchin; Sherman, Scott, Vargas, Gottheimer, Gonzalez, Casten,
and Nickel.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Also present: Representative Kim.
Chairwoman Wagner. The Subcommittee on Capital Markets will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time. Today's hearing is
entitled, ``SEC Overreach: Examining the Need for Reform.''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
I want to thank you all for joining today's hearing, where
we will address clear examples of regulatory overreach at the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The SEC's aggressive
and burdensome regulatory approach reveals the urgent need for
sensible reforms at an agency responsible for protecting
investors, maintaining fair, orderly, and efficient markets and
facilitating capital formation.
This hearing is specifically about examining the need for
reform--under either a Republican or a Democrat SEC Chair--but
reform at the SEC. SEC Chair Gensler's frenetic partisan
rulemaking agenda at the SEC has threatened the health of U.S.
capital markets and highlights the need for targeted
institutional reform.
Today's hearing will explore the negative consequences of
rulemaking based on theoretical assumptions rather than real-
world impacts, and the alarming absence of stakeholder input
and meaningful cost-benefit analysis during the rulemaking
process. None of these topics covered today should come as a
surprise to anyone who has paid attention to the SEC under
Chair Gensler.
Likewise, each of our proposed reforms is targeted and
practical. They will improve the 90-year-old agency, not
overhaul it. They will not remove investor protections or
kneecap the regulatory process or politicize an independent
Federal agency, despite what any Democrats may claim.
The problems and solutions highlighted today are clear to
any observer of the SEC, with countless examples proving that
the SEC, under Chair Gensler, would rather pursue partisan
policy objectives than adhere to its statutory mission.
Democrats might argue that Chair Gensler has acted in the
interest of investors. However, investors and companies in both
the public and the private markets know otherwise and have been
raising the alarm through both public comments and the courts.
For example, if Chair Gensler were truly concerned with the
interest of investors, wouldn't he provide more than 30 days
for market participants to review and comment on new rules?
Wouldn't he propose new rules that have been substantially
changed before they are finalized or encourage the thoughtful
cost-benefit analysis that clearly shows how the benefits
outweigh the costs of a new rule.
Moreover, if Chair Gensler truly believes our security
markets are, ``the envy of the world,'' as he often claims, you
would expect that he would propose new rules only when there is
an ambiguous data-driven need for such new rules. You would
also expect that he would provide a reasonable, staggered
timeline for companies to implement and comply with his massive
set of new regulatory requirements.
Instead, since taking office in 2021, Chair Gensler has
flooded the marketplace with roughly 60 new proposals and more
than 30 final rules. Many of these proposed and final rules
include sweeping new changes that were advanced without the
requisite statutory authority, without a comprehensive cost-
benefit analysis, or without satisfying the requirements of the
Administrative Procedure Act (APA).
The best example is the Climate Disclosure Rule which was
finalized earlier this month. As members of this committee have
made clear, the SEC is not an environmental regulator nor was
it given clear authority to finalize climate-related
regulations that will only burden American businesses with
serious costs.
The full Committee on Financial Services will explore that
rule in detail on April 10th. In the meantime, today we will
hear why our proposed slate of common-sense reforms is
necessary to prevent an activist agency from accomplishing
political objectives, sometimes in violation of the law.
This should not be a partisan issue. Members of Congress
from both sides of the aisle should be concerned any time an
agency oversteps its authority and should welcome the sorely-
needed reforms we will be examining today that improve the
rulemaking process at the SEC.
I would like to thank our witnesses for their testimony,
and I look forward to our discussion.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, for 4
minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Sherman. I am going to use the first minute to talk
about a housing issue and the effect of this new antitrust
decision on first-time homebuyers. If you buy a $500,000 house,
you are not just paying for the plumbers and the carpenters;
you are also paying for the real estate agents, and the bank is
financing that. So if you are going to buy a $500,000 home, you
need $50,000 for a 10-percent down payment.
Under the new system, the buyer is supposed to pay their
own agent or adviser. That would mean that they would have to
come out of pocket not just that $50,000 down payment, but
another $15,000 for their agent. We should pass a law that
makes it plain that when you finance a home, the loan should
include, as it does now, the amount being charged by the
agents. So, that same $500,000 home would get a $450,000
mortgage. If we don't do that, then a couple trying to build up
their down payment, instead of having to do that for 10 years
will end up spending 13 years before they can afford to buy a
home.
As to the matter before us, the rule in Washington is
clear. When the facts are with you, argue the facts. When the
public policy is with you, argue the public policy. And when
you have bad facts and you are wrong on the public policy,
scream about the procedure. And that is what the detractors of
the SEC are doing.
The fact is that we do need guidance to be published from
the SEC. When the SEC provides that guidance in the crypto
accounting area, then we are told, oh my God, we don't need
guidance. We just need a patina of regulation but not any real
regulation for the crypto industry, so they can give the
illusion that they are regulated.
I should point out that the SEC is finally doing what we
told them to do, by law, in the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010. We are
not watching a Nascar race. We are watching a turtle race in
which now, in 2024, the SEC is doing what we told them to do
back when I had hair. Okay, I still didn't have hair then.
I want to point out that this recent near government
shutdown has delayed initial public offerings (IPOs), because
anybody trying to raise money in the Capitol knew that the SEC
would have to shut its doors or might not shut its doors or
might shut its doors, and that has made it more difficult for
the United States to compete for capital worldwide by showing
that we had a workable government and financial system.
As to the length of time for commenting, the average that
the SEC is giving is 67 days. And the way to calculate that is
from the day the SEC publishes the proposed rule on their
website, not waiting many days later until it finally gets
published in the Federal Register.
Why is that more relevant? Because if you talk to
investors, or you talk to broker-dealers, they have all heard
of the SEC, and if they want to know what the SEC is doing,
they are going to go to SEC.gov. None of them have thought of
the Federal Register.
I was just at the New York Stock Exchange. A dozen people
mentioned the SEC. Not a single one of them mentioned the
Federal Register.
We need climate disclosures because they are material to a
material percentage of the investors investing in American
markets. And this idea that we are going to deprive investors
of the information they want because we don't want them to have
it is a bad approach. And thank God the SEC has gone in the
other direction.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The Chair now recognizes the ranking
member of the full Committee on Financial Services, the
gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, for 1 minute.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
The SEC has played a critical role over the past 90 years
in protecting investors from fraud and abuse and ensuring U.S.
corporations provide adequate information about themselves so
working families can make sound decisions with their money.
While the agency has done a solid job under the Biden
Administration, I believe there is still much more work to be
done. For example, we need transparency in the unregulated
private securities markets, and we need rules to stop corporate
executives from engaging in any work stock buybacks. And we
need more comprehensive climate risk disclosures that apply to
all issuers.
The SEC also needs to be fully funded so that it remains an
effective and relevant regulator for the next 90 years. So, I
look forward to this discussion today. And I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairwoman Wagner. Today, we welcome the testimony of:
David Burton, senior fellow in economic policy at the Thomas A.
Roe Institute for Economic Policy Studies at the Heritage
Foundation; John Gulliver, executive director of the Committee
on Capital Markets Regulation; Jennifer Schulp, director of
financial regulation studies at the Center for Monetary and
Financial Alternatives at the Cato Institute; and Alexandra
Thornton, senior director of financial regulation at the Center
for American Progress.
We thank each of you for taking the time to be here. Each
of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to give an oral
presentation of your testimony. And, without objection, each of
your written statements will be made a part of the record.
Mr. Burton, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF DAVID R. BURTON, SENIOR FELLOW IN
ECONOMIC POLICY, HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Burton. Thank you. My name is David Burton, and I am
the senior fellow in economic policy at the Heritage
Foundation. I would like to express my thanks to Chairwoman
Wagner, Ranking Member Sherman, and the members of the
subcommittee for the opportunity to be here this morning.
As the most important regulator of U.S. capital markets,
the Securities and Exchange Commission has a vital mission. We
need an effective cop on the beat to prevent fraud, to ensure
adequate disclosure, and to promote efficient markets if we are
to have a strong capital market, a vibrant economy, and to
protect and secure the savings of the American people.
Unfortunately, despite its glowing self-image, the
Commission does an increasingly bad job of discharging its core
functions. There are at least five reasons for this. First,
Commission resources have flowed into unnecessary management
support and ancillary functions while core functions have been
neglected. The SEC is managed exceedingly poorly and has been
for quite some time. Its organizational structure is unwieldy
and inconsistent with sound management practices. It is among
the most management-heavy and bureaucratic agencies in
government. Its information technology function is among the
most expensive and least effective in government. Oversight of
its contracting process is poor.
Second, it provides inadequate oversight of so-called self-
regulatory organizations (SROs). And in the aggregate, these
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to whom regulatory
authority has been delegated have personnel levels and budgets
that are comparable to the SEC itself.
Third, the Commission does an inadequate job of providing
the information necessary for policymakers, whether
Commissioners or Members of Congress, to make informed
judgments about the policy choices that they face.
Fourth, the Commission has failed to address current
regulatory issues, opting instead to pursue regulation by
enforcement or to largely ignore serious problems.
Fifth, and last, the Commission is now pursuing political
and ideological objectives that are unrelated to its core
mission.
In my written statement, I address all of these issues in
detail.
Under Chairman Gensler, massive amounts of Commission staff
time and resources have been diverted to ideological projects
that are unrelated to the Commission's statutory charge.
Entirely independent of the merits of his ideological
objectives, this pursuit is doing real damage, because the
Commission is increasingly ignoring its real job. Instead, it
is focusing on climate regulation, diversity, equity,
inclusion, board diversity, and various social justice
objectives under the rubric of human capital management.
The Commission is a securities regulator. Its mission is to
protect investors and promote efficiency, competition, and
capital formation. It is not meant to right every conceivable
social wrong nor can it do so. It is not an environmental
regulator. It is not the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) or the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. It is
not the Department of Labor or the National Labor Relations
Board (NLRB). It should discharge the mission that Congress has
given it.
I would like to briefly run through a number of the pieces
of legislation that the committee is considering. I will have
to do this quickly, but the legislation that would roll the
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) back into the
SEC is welcome. Creating the PCAOB was a mistake, and putting
it back in the government will restore due process,
transparency, and rulemaking protections normally associated
with government.
The SEC Regulatory Accountability Act is a very well-
drafted piece of legislation. It would codify in the Securities
and Exchange Commission the requirement to conduct rigorous
cost-benefit analysis in the rulemaking process and provide for
a robust and detailed retrospective review process. It would
also apply these requirements for the first time to the
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) and the
Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board (MSRB) by making the SEC
determine that they complied with these requirements before the
SEC approves those rulemakings.
The legislation that would require a Government
Accountability Office (GAO) study of the information technology
(IT) programs at the SEC are welcome. As I go into significant
detail in my written statement, the SEC's IT department is
among the most expensive in government and among the least
effective.
I am very sympathetic to the goals and objectives of the
legislation that would require a GAO review of the SEC cost-
benefit analysis and up to 10 rulemakings, and I go into some
more detail about that in my written statement.
I think the legislation requiring at least a 60-day comment
period for rulemakings is entirely warranted, particularly
given the size, scope, and complexity of the rules that the SEC
is putting out these days.
With that, my time has expired, and I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burton can be found on page
42 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Burton.
Mr. Gulliver, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
your oral presentation.

STATEMENT OF JOHN A. GULLIVER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
COMMITTEE ON CAPITAL MARKETS REGULATION

Mr. Gulliver. Thank you, Chairwoman Wagner, Ranking Member
Sherman, and members of the subcommittee for inviting me to
testify before you today on the topic of, ``SEC Overreach:
Examining the Need for Reform.'' My testimony today is my own
and does not necessarily reflect the views of the Committee on
Capital Markets Regulation or its members.
The United States benefits from the world's most-efficient
capital markets. This means that companies can raise the
funding needed to grow and investors can earn a return on their
savings at a low cost. The U.S. capital markets are, therefore,
critical for economic growth and prosperity.
The SEC is tasked with the vital role of regulating
approximately 3,600 public companies as well as the broker-
dealers, investment advisers, and other market participants
that presently provide 76 million U.S. households with the
opportunity to invest in our markets.
Over the past 3 years, under Chair Gensler's leadership,
the SEC has embarked on an unprecedented rulemaking agenda that
will have a major impact on the cost of being a public company
and investing in our markets.
The SEC has done so without a new statutory mandate or a
market crisis presenting the need for holistic reform. The SEC
has also not conducted a comprehensive analysis of how its
rulemakings will collectively impact public companies and
investors. Therefore, now is precisely the time to consider
whether reforms to the SEC's regulatory process are needed.
As with all Federal agencies, the SEC is required to
provide the public with an opportunity to comment on its
proposed rules. The SEC is also required to conduct an economic
analysis as part of each rulemaking, and SEC rules are subject
to review and reversal by the courts if they fail to comply
with these requirements.
Over the past 3 years, there have been significant
deficiencies with the SEC's regulatory process. Short public
comment periods for SEC rulemakings have failed to reflect a
proposal's significance and complexity. According to an
estimate by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets
Association (SIFMA), the average period of time for comment for
recent SEC proposals has been just 47 days. This has made it
difficult, if not impossible, for the public to fully analyze
and respond to the SEC's proposals.
The SEC has also, on several recent occasions, issued rules
on overlapping issues, such as the securities lending and
short-selling disclosure rules, but failed to consider their
aggregate impact or the interaction between those rules. This
has resulted in conflicting regulations, and the SEC's
securities lending and short-selling rules are now being
challenged in the Fifth Circuit on this basis.
Economic analyses by the SEC have also had major
shortcomings. The SEC's share buyback rule was recently
overturned by the Fifth Circuit due to flaws with its economic
analysis.
And the SEC's private funds rule, which is also being
challenged in court, also has fundamental issues with its
economic analysis. For example, the SEC asserted that there is
a lack of competition in the market for private equity fund,
venture capital fund, and hedge fund advisers.
However, the SEC ignored the fundamental metrics that both
government authorities and academic experts use to measure
whether a market is competitive. And the evidence on private
fund fees, performance, and industry concentration demonstrates
that the private funds market is highly competitive, thus
undercutting the SEC's economic analysis and Chair Gensler's
basis for the rulemaking.
Due to these various shortcomings, I support legislative
reforms to clarify and enhance the SEC's regulatory process. As
part of its economic analyses, the SEC should be required to,
one, clearly identify and substantiate that a market failure
exists and that a rule will address that failure; two, make a
reasonable determination that the benefits of a rule would
outweigh its costs; and, three, consider the effects of other
related rules, including proposals. These recommendations are
consistent with the SEC Regulatory Accountability Act.
The SEC should also be required to periodically review its
past rulemakings to identify rules that have been become
obsolete or ineffective, as is required now in the European
Union.
Congress should also establish a minimum comment period of
60 days for SEC rulemakings, and 180 days for complex rules.
This would be consistent with existing Federal agency
guidelines.
Thank you for the invitation to testify before the
subcommittee today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gulliver can be found on
page 63 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Gulliver.
Ms. Schulp, you are recognized for 5 minutes to give your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER J. SCHULP, DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL
REGULATION  STUDIES, CENTER FOR  MONETARY AND  FI-
NANCIAL ALTERNATIVES, CATO INSTITUTE

Ms. Schulp. Chairwoman Wagner, Ranking Member Sherman, and
distinguished members of the Subcommittee on Capital Markets,
my name is Jennifer Schulp, and I am the director of financial
regulation studies at the Cato Institute Center for Monetary
and Financial Alternatives. Thank you for the opportunity to
take part in today's hearing.
Regulatory decision-making by the Securities and Exchange
Commission directly impacts our securities markets. While the
stock market and the economy are not one and the same, the
ability of individuals and entities to raise capital to grow
their businesses and the ability to invest in businesses is the
backbone of American economic growth.
The SEC's mission cannot be and is not intended to be
carried out without accountability to elected officials and
input by the public. The SEC, however, falls short of this
ideal.
The Commission would benefit from reforms aimed at
increasing the agency's accountability and transparency,
ensuring adequate input and analysis for rulemaking, and
holding the agency to high standards in the exercise of its
functions.
First, congressional oversight is critical to ensuring the
proper functioning of the Federal Government. Regular testimony
by the SEC Chairman and Commissioners can increase the agency's
accountability and transparency and depoliticize the fact of
congressional oversight.
Other reforms to the SEC's enforcement authority can
increase accountability. The Commission's gag rule on settling
defendants silences critics who can help Congress and the
public hold the agency accountable. And the SEC's use of
administrative law judges similarly denies defendants and the
public of the accountability provided by independent judicial
courts.
Second, the Commission has a mixed record, at best, at
complying with the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), which
provides for public participation in the rulemaking process and
sets forth the basic standards for rulemaking.
The Commission has often inappropriately relied on agency
guidance and enforcement actions to create new regulation.
These tools produce less-certain and less-clear rules and can
result in unfair treatment of market participants, undermining
public trust in the agency.
Moreover, pursuing these pathways decreases regulation
quality by preventing public input, which is at the heart of
the APA's design for rulemaking. Under the APA, an agency must
provide a meaningful opportunity to comment on proposed rules.
The current SEC has advanced an aggressive rulemaking
agenda and has provided less opportunity for public comment.
These rule proposals have been complex and interconnected,
increasing the burdens to analyze and meaningfully respond.
Congress should consider setting a baseline for SEC comment
periods, ensuring appropriate time for public input. The
Commission should also repropose rules for public comment where
the rule is substantially revised from the proposal.
The SEC is also required by the APA to weigh and, where
possible, quantify the costs and benefits of a proposed
regulation. But the SEC's economic analyses often fail to
account for costs and rely on speculative benefits.
This is particularly apparent where the SEC's
interconnected rule proposals do not analyze the impact of each
proposal on the others. A clear, legislative cost-benefit
analysis requirement may assist in shoring up existing
obligations.
Third, the Commission continues to suffer from embarrassing
cybersecurity and information technology incidents. The
information that the Commission collects should be right-sized
by, for example, prohibiting investor personally identifiable
information in the Consolidated Audit Trail (CAT). This not
only avoids the question of whether the SEC can safeguard the
data, but also avoids serious constitutional concerns with such
surveillance.
The agency must also identify and promptly remedy
cybersecurity and information technology weaknesses. The SEC
recognizes for its regulated entities that managing cyber and
information risks is critical to the operation of the financial
markets. Yet, within the past 2 years, the SEC has been hacked
on X, not received public comments due to a glitch with an
internet comment form, and allowed enforcement staff to access
administrative law judge documents. Such issues have market
impacts and erode confidence in the agency.
To sum up, the Commission would benefit from reforms to
improve its accountability, responsiveness, and competence,
regardless of the Commission's policy agenda.
Thank you, and I welcome any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schulp can be found on page
84 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Wagner. We thank you, Ms. Schulp.
Ms. Thornton, you are recognized for 5 minutes to give your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF ALEXANDRA THORNTON, SENIOR DIRECTOR,
FINANCIAL REGULATION, CENTER FOR AMERICAN PROGRESS

Ms. Thornton. Thank you, Chairwoman Wagner, Ranking Member
Sherman, and esteemed members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for the opportunity to appear today.
In the interest of time, I will focus my oral remarks on
the Commission's rulemaking process and the Private Fund
Advisers Rule.
The Administrative Procedure Act (APA) does not require an
agency to make changes in response to every comment. Court
decisions are clear that the point of the APA process is for
the agency to make a reasonable effort to solicit relevant
information so that it can examine the relevant data and
articulate a satisfactory explanation for its action, including
a rational connection between the facts found and the choice
made.
This is not what is happening now. Instead, opponents of
SEC rulemakings are misusing reasonable administrative process
protections and turning them into years-long gauntlets for
agency actions. And a handful of relatively recent court
decisions have made this process even more burdensome on the
agency and thrust important rules into jeopardy.
These outside pressures have added unreasonable
expectations for the administrative process, impeding the SEC's
ability to do its job of protecting investors and promoting
fair, orderly, and efficient markets.
In response to attacks, the Commission appears to be
bending over backwards to allow for lengthy periods of comment
by routinely considering comments received outside the comment
window even though that is not legally required, and reopening
formal comment periods. And it now appears to seek to address
nearly every point raised by commenters, regardless of the
relevance or when received. Meanwhile, the Commission's
economic analyses are longer and much more complex.
The result of all of this analysis is paralysis. As the
agency's agenda shows, many rules sought by business and
investors respectively have yet to be proposed, much less
finalized. Larger companies, financial firms, and other market
participants often overwhelm the agency with letters, which far
outstrips the agency's ability to sift through the morass. The
agency simply does not have enough staff to engage in this
strained analysis for thousands of comments on every single
rulemaking.
One legislative proposal being considered today calls for
congressional disapproval of the Private Fund Advisers Rule
finalized last September----
Chairwoman Wagner. I would ask the witness to suspend for
just a moment. There seems to be a ruckus here in our--if you
would like to join us, we would welcome you, if you could just
sit quickly and quietly. You are most welcome.
My apologies, Ms. Thornton. Please do continue.
Ms. Thornton. Certainly. Now?
Chairwoman Wagner. Please do continue, ma'am.
Ms. Thornton. Private funds have grown in size, complexity,
and number in the past decade since the Dodd-Frank Act required
private fund advisers to begin registering with the SEC.
More than 5,000 SEC-registered investment advisers, roughly
35 percent of all SEC-registered advisers, manage about $18
trillion in private fund assets.
The SEC's Division of Examinations has found substantial
concerns with deficiencies of private fund advisers. In
response, the Private Fund Advisers Rule addresses common risks
and harms in an adviser's relationship with private funds and
their investors: lack of transparency; conflicts of interest;
and lack of effective governance mechanisms for client
disclosure consent and oversight.
The disclosures to address these are all squarely within
the SEC's authority to require from private fund advisers. This
essential rule takes on heightened importance, given the rapid
growth of private markets generally.
Today, teachers, firefighters, and millions of other
workers with public and private retirement plans are materially
exposed to the private markets, and private fund advisers have
significant control over these investments.
Over the past few decades, Congress and the SEC have
dramatically expanded exemptions from application of the
Federal securities laws, including ongoing public reporting
requirements. This has led to the explosive growth of private
markets, where more capital is now raised annually than in the
public markets. And while companies with a large number of
holders of record have long been required to begin public
disclosures, a loophole has allowed companies to effectively
avoid the law's application even if they have tens of thousands
of beneficial owners or shareholders.
Allowing extremely large companies that have thousands of
employees and sell to millions of Americans to avoid basic
disclosure rules invites waste, fraud, and abuses not unlike
those that predated the adoption of the Federal securities
laws. Exemptions are dismantling the securities laws that have
served the U.S. capital markets for so long and made them the
most-liquid and most-trusted markets in the world.
During debate over securities legislation in the 1930s,
Congress considered making the SEC a merit regulator with
authority to prevent securities offerings that did not meet
standards of quality. It rejected that idea with the
understanding that companies seeking capital from the public
would be required to make any disclosures that the SEC found to
be, ``in the public interest and for the protection of
investors.'' This language is repeatedly mentioned in the
statutes and legislative history of the securities laws.
But the wholesale exemption of securities offerings from
the public disclosure framework has undermined Congress'
intent. The solution is either to give the SEC a stronger hand
in making regulations aimed at protecting all investors from
investments they cannot possibly understand well enough to make
a sound investment decision, no matter how sophisticated they
are, or, alternatively, to shrink the exemptions, and close the
loophole, so that larger companies comply with the public
disclosure framework, and prevent the remaining private
companies from raising capital from retail investors, directly
or indirectly, without providing the same types of disclosures
that public companies make.
Thank you again for inviting me to testify today. I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Thornton can be found on
page 98 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Wagner. Thank you, Ms. Thornton.
Now, we will turn to Member questions, and I recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gulliver, I am deeply concerned with the quality of
analysis that SEC staff includes with many of its proposed and
final rules.
In the equity market structure proposals, for example, SEC
staff apparently cut and pasted the same economic analysis and
applied it to every rule.
My bill, the SEC Regulatory Accountability Act, requires
the SEC to consider specified factors before issuing
regulations. Could you explain how my bill would improve the
quality of the SEC's analysis, sir?
Mr. Gulliver. I think the most significant improvement is
it would require the SEC to identify an actual problem. There
is no problem in the U.S. equity market structure. The SEC's
economic analysis ignore the fact that the U.S. equity market
structure provides the lowest cost in the world. The cost to
trade in the U.S. is lower than it is in Europe, the UK, Japan,
Hong Kong, or any other developed market. So, I think that
would be a major improvement.
Chairwoman Wagner. And could you explain how higher-quality
analyses would promote better policymaking outcomes and prevent
overreach?
Mr. Gulliver. I think, most importantly, it is a
fundamental point of policy that the benefits of a rule should
exceed its cost. So, requiring that explicitly through
legislation would serve an important policy purpose.
Chairwoman Wagner. And we certainly need more specific
economic analysis than just literally cutting and pasting the
same analysis over and over again. It was stunning.
Mr. Gulliver, what would you say to Democrats who believe
there is nothing wrong with the quality of the SEC's economic
analyses?
Mr. Gulliver. I would say that issues with the SEC's
economic analyses have been raised by former SEC Chief
Economists from both Democratic and Republican Presidents.
Chairwoman Wagner. Yes.
Ms. Schulp, as Chair of the subcommittee, I am committed to
making sure unelected officials, like SEC Chair Gensler, remain
accountable to the American people. And as part of those
efforts, throughout this Congress I have brought each of the
SEC Division Directors in to testify before this subcommittee.
The Full Committee has also brought Chair Gensler in to testify
on several occasions.
Ms. Schulp, can you explain why it is important that
regulators testify before Congress on a regular and more-
frequent basis?
Ms. Schulp. First, this type of exchange of information
between Members of Congress and regulators is an important one,
and it supplements letters that go back and forth that might
not be answered.
Chairwoman Wagner. All the time.
Ms. Schulp. ----or may not be answered in an appropriate
manner. But it is also important to have a live back-and-forth
between a Member of Congress and the entity that it is
regulating in the public sphere.
It is very important to make sure that this is standardized
as well and happens regularly, so that it is not simply that
oversight happens when there is divided government.
Chairwoman Wagner. I wonder what impact might it have if
the full Commission, not just the Chair, were to regularly
testify before Congress? Would it remind the Commission of its
accountability to Congress and the American public?
Ms. Schulp. It should remind the Commission of such. And it
is also important, because the Commission is a five-member
body; it is not simply the Chair. And that body was designed to
be bipartisan.
Hearing from minority viewpoints as well as viewpoints
other than the Commissioner is important for Members of
Congress as well as the public.
Chairwoman Wagner. Mr. Burton, last year the SEC adopted an
onerous cybersecurity risk management rule which, as
Commissioner Peirce explained, ``ignores both the limits to the
SEC disclosure authority and the best interests of investors.''
Just a few months later, the SEC's official X account, formerly
known as Twitter, was hacked.
Mr. Burton, can you elaborate on the quality of information
technology management at the SEC?
Mr. Burton. Yes. I think you have identified a very
important problem with the SEC, and it falls under a couple of
categories. One is data security. The SEC documents, if they
are hacked, can move markets and people can trade on
information that is not yet public and make a great deal of
money.
But there are other problems. For example, the public
disclosure system under the Electronic Data Gathering,
Analysis, and Retrieval (EDGAR) system sort of involves time
travel. You feel like you are going back to the 1990s, because
it is so bad. And most people don't use EDGAR to get the
information. They use private systems that rely on data----
Chairwoman Wagner. Mr. Burton, because my time is about to
expire, what signal does it send when the SEC's own social
media account is hacked just a few months after it imposes
onerous cybersecurity requirements on the companies it
regulates?
Mr. Burton. It shows that the SEC is not doing its job. The
SEC's IT department is 5 times more expensive than the average,
and they have worse results.
Chairwoman Wagner. I thank you. And my time has expired.
I now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee, the
gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I would say, what signal does it send when
Congress comes within days of defunding the SEC or suspending
its funding again and again?
Perhaps the worst slogan I have heard in politics is,
``defund the police.'' The SEC is the police department of our
$100-trillion capital markets, and several different times we
have come within days of not having the cops on the beat.
I join with the Chair in saying that we should have the
entire Commission here, and I look forward to those hearings. I
think the ratings on C-SPAN 3 will go through the roof to the
moon.
There is this argument that we are moving too fast. I think
we are just catching up with mandates that we imposed in 2010.
And with climate disclosure, we have been wanting that since Al
Gore was living in the Naval Observatory. Finally, we have it.
And I think the SEC did a good job on a very difficult thing.
This does not mean that the SEC is perfect. First, we
haven't forced disclosures from giant nonpublic companies that
play such a critical role in our country. But, looking at what
the SEC has jurisdiction of, the definition of, ``accredited
investor,'' relates to whether you have a $200,000 income when
it should relate to the knowledge of your truly independent
investors, and the percentage of your net worth that you are
investing in the company.
The SEC's proposals on swing pricing and the related
liquidity proposals, I think will do more harm than good, but
particularly the swing pricing proposals.
We do need regulations. The crypto industry has come to us
many times saying, please, tell us what the rules are. Of
course, whenever rules are meaningful, they rebel against them.
And it is said that our capital markets are great and they
are the envy of the world, but that doesn't mean we shouldn't
be looking more to cut costs.
One of the bills that the witness pointed out deals with
the PCAOB. We need a PCAOB. I was here when we had WorldCom and
Enron. And I don't think the PCAOB is broken, but I would be
supportive of that bill bringing it inside the SEC if we also
did it with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB),
which is broken in one critical respect, which is that, flying
in the face of any reasonable accounting theory, they have
mandated writing off research and development (R&D) expenses
when they should be capitalized. And if they were, our
companies, particularly the nontech companies, would be doing
far more R&D. So if the PCAOB structure is bad, it is also the
same structure basically as the FASB. And if we want to bring
them in-house, let's bring in-house the one that is broken or
is broken as to one major aspect.
As to insufficient comment periods, I would support
legislation saying 60 days for any complex rule, but those 60
days have to be measured from when the SEC puts it on their web
page.
Ms. Thornton, there are those who say that if you want to
make an investment based on something other than earnings per
share, say, on the basis of whether the company is doing a good
job in reducing its climate footprint, that you should be
deprived of the right to manage your own money, not by
appointing a conservator, which we do for those who are
criminally insane, but rather, just deprive you of the
information that would allow you to make a decision.
Does it make sense in a capitalist society to tell people
with capital that they can't make a decision based on climate?
Ms. Thornton. Not at all. In fact, capitalism is about
information. Information is what makes capitalism work. And
there are many kinds of information that have an impact on the
value of a company and would impact an investor's decision
about whether to invest--things like climate risk, because that
can actually determine whether a company is resilient in the
long run, whether it is prepared for changes in the law around
emissions, for example, but also in the near term, whether it
is ready for disasters that are obviously coming. We have more
and more billion dollar----
Mr. Sherman. If I can interrupt, I think investors are
interested in how the company affects the environment, but also
how the environment is going to affect the profitability of the
company. That information needs to be disclosed, and we also
need more information about workforce, particularly training
and turnover.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Sessions, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Madam Chairwoman, thank you very much for
holding this hearing.
Mr. Gulliver, thank you for being here. I am going to use
my few minutes with you. I am delighted to see that you are
here today.
You have written rather extensively about what happened
back in 2022, when the S&P companies spent over $900 billion to
buy back their own stock, followed up in May of 2023 by the
Securities and Exchange Commission adopting a rule that would
have required public companies to disclose information about
stock repurchases, including certain repurchased data within
one business day, and the rationale for doing that. In other
words, the Federal Government would require you to tell us why
you did what you did, a private business.
This was later vacated by the Fifth Circuit on December 19,
2023. The essence of the argument was that the SEC did not even
follow their own rules, did not include a proper cost-benefit
analysis of what this regulatory overview would mean to the
industry.
But what bothers me is it is based upon a philosophy. In my
opinion, it is a parasite designed to kill the host by the SEC.
It is actually the SEC trying to work against that which they
are expected to nurture and grow as part of not just American
exceptionalism but perhaps, more importantly, capitalism.
Can you talk about this action by the SEC to the entire
marketplace?
Mr. Gulliver. I think the SEC's Share Repurchase Disclosure
Rule is an example of a particularly flawed cost-benefit
analysis and the importance of doing a high-quality analysis.
The SEC asserted that there was a problem where executives
were buying back shares on a particularly advantageous basis
for themselves, but in fact, they didn't provide any evidence
to support that claim. And the court found that the SEC is
obligated to do so in all of their economic analyses. So, one
positive takeaway from this is that in future economic
analyses, if the SEC claims there is a market failure, they
have to substantiate it.
And the second issue was the SEC said there was no data to
really do an in-depth analysis of whether or not this is a
problem, but commenters provided the SEC with that data. And
the court said, we are invalidating the rule for that on that
basis.
Mr. Sessions. So, you have come to this committee, and we
hear about the cops on the beat, and how important it is for
the SEC to do this. Yet, they are the party that wants to
defund the police. They are the ones that don't want police who
follow the law and rules. A police officer on the beat can't
just make up his own reason for doing something, can they? No,
they cannot, but the SEC believes they can.
Time after time, we have seen this with 1071, or any of a
number of examples where the SEC does what they want to do. I
believe, and I think what has been proven by this committee, is
that they are attempting to put into place and to harm the
economic growth of the United States of America, the
marketplace, and the things that would build value not only for
all Americans, but the stock market in America specifically.
What other examples do you have of this overreach and
overregulation?
Mr. Gulliver. I think one of the most concerning examples
is the SEC reaching into private markets. Our private markets
have been successful for a number of reasons, but what we have
been seeing in those markets is a reduction in the fees that
the large private funds charge, increasing performance, very
strong performance, and small companies getting a lot of
funding in these private markets.
The SEC is shifting in a direction of bringing more public
regulations into these private markets. And I think that would
be a big problem, because a big reason that companies are
staying private longer is to avoid the burdens of being a
public company.
Mr. Sessions. And that harms new entrants, doesn't it?
Mr. Gulliver. Yes.
Mr. Sessions. Many times, businesses that are minority- or
women-owned are trying to gain entrance into the marketplace,
and they are making it far more difficult for them not only to
enter the marketplace, but to be successful.
Would you call them activists?
Mr. Gulliver. I think it has been a very aggressive SEC,
unprecedented.
Mr. Sessions. It is against the free enterprise system.
That is what this hearing is about today.
And I want to thank each of you for taking the time to be
here today.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back my time.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the full
Committee on Financial Services, the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Waters, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
I am going to direct this question to Ms. Thornton. When
most Americans think about our capital markets, they think of
the New York Stork Exchange, and stocks sold by large companies
like Apple, Ford, or GE. These are the public markets where new
companies get to ring the bell when they go public and where
U.S. capitalism flourishes.
However, many would be surprised to learn that the private
markets now dwarf the public markets for where securities like
these are normally offered and sold. Today, companies that have
billions in revenue, tens of thousands of employees, thousands
of shareholders, and engage in practices that impact the
communities they operate in, are under no obligation to share
information that their investors, consumers, or stakeholders
may find important.
Could you discuss what gets lost when large companies that
access our capital markets stay opaque and unaccountable? Does
Congress need to set new rules for these types of large
companies that have significant impacts on our society, or do
you think the SEC has sufficient authority to promulgate rules
in this space?
Ms. Thornton. Thank you, Ranking Member Waters.
I think that there is a lot that the SEC can do here. There
may be some things that Congress might need to do, but I think
there is a lot that the SEC can do, because it created many of
the exemptions that are allowing so many in the private markets
to access capital, to grow in the private markets without limit
and not having to go to the public markets.
There is a lot they can do also with respect to holder of
record. I am not 100 percent sure that they can do that on
their own. There is some debate about it. But holder of record
does need to be defined as beneficial owners, and that is
shareholders, not as holders of record, so that institutional
investors who actually hold shares for thousands of clients are
counted as one holder of record.
If you could change that rule, you would have a lot of
these large companies automatically having to register, become
public companies, and do the public reporting that is so
necessary for huge companies that employ so many people and
that sell products and services to millions and millions of
Americans.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
As I am listening to some of our witnesses here today, they
oppose regulation, too much regulation.
Do you think that they would oppose knowing and having
information that you just described about beneficial ownership?
What do you think?
Ms. Thornton. I think all shareholders want information.
Even the most sophisticated, intelligent investor cannot make
good decisions without information. And the power dynamic in
the private markets is unfair and unequal. Information that is
given to one investor or group of investors does not have to be
given to other investors because there is no cop on the beat,
as you say.
And to address that, I think is one of the most important
things and a critical thing that the SEC needs to do
immediately, today, with the growth of the private markets, to
protect investors.
Ms. Waters. For the record, the SEC is our cop on the beat,
protecting investors. This criticism that you have heard here
today about them impeding economic growth, don't you think that
perhaps that is a little misstatement about the SEC, for the
record?
Ms. Thornton. Yes. I think that without information, you
can have inefficiencies. You can have fraud. That is a huge
waste of resources and capital. Capital can't flow to the
highest and best use if there isn't information for investors.
So, yes.
Ms. Waters. Do you believe that our investors today need to
rely and depend on the SEC? And rather than stripping the SEC
of its ability to regulate, they want to make sure that they
are doing the job to protect their investments. What do you
think?
Ms. Thornton. I think that without rules, it is possible
for people who would do that to take advantage of others not
having the information. And that is what the SEC is there to
prevent, and to ensure that everybody has access to information
and that companies disclose important information, basic
information, financials, basic information about operations and
so forth. This is basic information that all investors need,
and without the SEC, you wouldn't have disclosure of that.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. I am so pleased you are here today.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentlewoman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Huizenga, who is also the Chair of our Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And I don't know
about the rest of my colleagues, but I am opposed to too much
regulation only when it defies common sense. And that, frankly,
is what we are seeing here today in some of the defense of the
indefensible.
Materiality is the watch word. And the most recent
disclosure rule that the SEC has issued is not material. Let's
be clear, public companies must--must--report any issue or
circumstance that currently or in the future will materially
affect their business operation and, therefore, affect
investors.
And what the courts are saying is that the Securities and
Exchange Commission is outside not only its traditional but its
legal bounds when it comes to that materiality question with
this most recent disclosure requirement.
Ms. Schulp, it's good to see you again.
Mr. Gulliver, I think you are now my new favorite Harvard
professor after reading your testimony.
Mr. Burton, I want to focus in a little bit, though, on an
issue that I have been working on about the PCAOB. The PCAOB,
the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, was founded in
2002 as an independent expert, a regulatory agency to oversee
audits of public companies. In fact, the word, ``independent,''
appears in statute 10 times.
It is safe to say that when Congress created the Board,
they intended it to operate independently and without regard to
political considerations, notwithstanding the SEC's oversight
authorities, including approval of the Board's rules,
standards, and budget. Those were all created by Congress as
safeguards to ensure the Board's nonpartisan mission was
maintained.
But in testimony before this subcommittee, PCAOB Chair
Williams indicated that she was independent in her opinion and
that her Board acts independently from the Commission. And I
actually have a transcript, and I wanted to go back over and
review that, which absolutely defends and says unequivocally
yes, they are independent.
However, one of Chair Gensler's first acts in June of 2021,
when he took over the SEC, was to actually remove that
independent PCAOB Chair and subsequently remove and replace all
of the remaining Board members of that independent Board.
In fact, Chair Gensler admitted in testimony here that the
PCAOB was, in fact, not independent. So clearly, there is a
disconnect.
Mr. Burton, by ousting former Chair Duhnke, and removing
the full Board and inserting his handpicked replacements onto
that Board, did Chair Gensler politicize the PCAOB and erode
its independence?
Mr. Burton. He certainly exercised the authority that the
SEC has over the PCAOB.
Mr. Huizenga. In spades, yes.
Mr. Burton. I actually think that the independence of a lot
of these organizations--PCAOB, FINRA, MSRB--is sort of
fictitious.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Yes, let me hit on that. I am not one
to hand over authority to the SEC or any other regulator willy-
nilly and without purpose and reason. But since the SEC already
conducts oversight of the PCAOB, including approving the
Board's rules, standards, and budget, it doesn't make a whole
lot of sense to me that the PCAOB operate as a separate entity.
Mr. Burton. But it does have an adverse effect, in that all
of the protections we associate with government--the
requirements with respect to regulatory analysis, due process,
transparency, the Sunset Act, the Freedom of Information Act--
none of that exists.
So, a lot of things that protect the public and enable you
to conduct meaningful oversight over the PCAOB do not exist as
it is currently structured. And your legislation would solve
that problem.
Mr. Huizenga. And that is what I was getting at. I think,
as we look at it, having the SEC's Examiners and its Chief
Accountant absorb all of the PCAOB's responsibilities seems
like a reasonable direction. Does that seem accurate to you?
Mr. Burton. Absolutely.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay.
Chairwoman Wagner, I do want to thank you for attaching our
bill, the Streamlining Public Company Accounting Oversight Act,
to this hearing. That essentially would fold the PCAOB into the
SEC.
And, as I said, I don't take handing over more authority to
the SEC lightly, but we cannot call something independent if it
is not actually independent. And this way, we would have the
ability to hold to account the person who is actually running
it, which is the Chair of the SEC.
And with that, I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
And the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia,
Mr. Scott, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Chairwoman Wagner.
Ms. Thornton, my friend, Chair Gensler, recently condemned
artificial intelligence (AI) washing as the abuse of AI, when
members of the financial sector make false charges about its
use, stating that such activities could violate existing
security laws.
And our regulators themselves have warned that some
investment advisors and broker-dealers are quietly saying that
they use artificial intelligence to generate higher returns on
investments, and that executives at some publicly-traded firms
are attempting to improve their stock prices by using AI.
And the SEC recently took steps to charge a number of
companies which engage in this type of investor abuse with
violating the existing Marketing Rule of the Advisers Act.
So, Ms. Thornton, I want to ask you, is this statute enough
to ensure that the SEC continues to hold bad actors
accountable? If not, what more can we do?
Ms. Thornton. I think that its efforts in enforcing the
marketing rules are very, very important, and can go a long
way, and we have seen that it has brought cases like the one
you mentioned.
But I think when it comes to AI, Chair Gensler has been
very clear that there are possibly unique risks associated with
AI that require us to take a closer look. He is deeply
knowledgeable about AI, and I think that he is very interested
in considering whether there are other rules that should be
made.
Mr. Scott. Yes, but let me ask you this, because this is
important. Artificial intelligence is here. It is here for our
productive use. But how can we ensure that the SEC does not
exhibit hostility towards technological innovation that could
have a positive increase in our access to our markets among
low-income and underserved investors?
Ms. Thornton. I think that Chair Gensler has acknowledged
the value of AI, the many good aspects of AI, and it is just a
question of how you create the guardrails.
But I think it is important to make sure that any
guardrails protect the very people you are talking about, who
may not understand how it is being used.
But I am not a deep expert on AI, so that is probably about
all I can say on that.
Mr. Scott. AI is with us.
Ms. Thornton. It is.
Mr. Scott. And we have to make sure it serves us properly.
And when used responsibly, I do believe that artificial
intelligence has the unique and transformative potential to
improve inclusion, efficiency, and user experience within our
financial system.
We have the best financial system in the world, and the
world depends on the United States' financial system as the
bulwark in making sure this happens.
However, absent a robust regulatory regime addressing the
rise in false and misleading statements regarding the use of
intelligence technology, we risk hurting more investors.
And let me conclude by saying, this is sort of like the
instrument that we created to serve us. We must not become
servants of AI.
I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Arkansas, Mr. Hill, who is also the
Chair of our Subcommittee on Digital Assets, Financial
Technology, and Inclusion, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. I thank the chairman.
And I thank our panel for being with us today.
We have heard directly from the SEC Director-level
officials over the course of the last few months, and we have
certainly enjoyed having Chairman Gensler here to have his
point of view on behalf of the Commission.
So, it is great to have your expertise, and we thank you
for being with us.
Not only has the SEC lost in the court of public opinion,
even on a bipartisan basis here on Capitol Hill, but the agency
is now getting trampled by the Federal courts as well,
especially as it relates to digital assets. In July 2023, a New
York judge determined that Ripple Labs did not violate Federal
securities law by selling its XRP token on public exchanges. In
fact, in that case, they were referred to as being arbitrary
and capricious.
Last August, the court rejected the SEC's reasoning for
blocking Grayscale Bitcoin Trust from converting to an
exchange-traded fund.
And just in the last few days, a Utah judge imposed
sanctions on the SEC for, ``bad-faith conduct and gross abuse
of power,'' that the Commission had demonstrated in a case
against Dropbox.
This is important, because we haven't talked about this in
a long time on this committee. And as a result of that gross
abuse of power, the Commission is required to pay the legal
fees, which means that our constituent tax dollars are now
being used to pay for the SEC's overreach and failure.
So, whether it is refusing to comply with the
Administrative Procedure Act (APA) or providing clear rules of
the road for the digital asset ecosystem, it is clear that the
SEC, under Gary Gensler, blatantly and repeatedly oversteps its
statutory authority.
Our citizens are also very concerned about privacy and
about their private information. We have seen the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) have a records leak. We have seen
the IRS see constituent records leak. We have seen the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) collect transaction data on
consumers and seen it leak. We have seen that the Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) now collects millions of
records for beneficial ownership.
And, finally, the SEC is proposing to collect every
American's brokerage account statement, every trade, every day,
through their Consolidated Audit Trail (CAT). They have tried
to work on this for a decade, but they are now planning to roll
that out as we speak. FINRA President Robert Cook testified
here that even his 80-year-old mother's information will be
stored in the CAT, despite absence of any likelihood that an
investor like his mom would try to manipulate the stock market.
So, Mr. Gulliver, let me start with you. What do you
believe are the biggest cyber vulnerabilities of the CAT? What
do you think are the biggest risks to the Consolidated Audit
Trail from a cyber point of view?
Mr. Gulliver. I think it is completely unnecessary for the
CAT to store Social Security numbers for all U.S. investors,
and there is a real risk there that it could be breached and
this information would be exposed.
Mr. Hill. We have asked both Robert Cook at FINRA, and the
SEC, what their plan is to protect that personally identifiable
information (PII), and they have not really responded
effectively with their plans.
Do you consider that, if they do store it, it is at risk
for breach?
Mr. Gulliver. Yes.
Mr. Hill. Ms. Schulp, as a former enforcement attorney at
FINRA, can you explain why the SEC can still do its job
effectively without collecting this personally identifiable
information of investors through the CAT?
Ms. Schulp. The SEC has been able to do it for years, and
has continued to be able to do so with the transaction data
without the personally identifiable information that has
already been collected in the CAT.
Mr. Hill. Right.
Ms. Schulp. The way it previously worked is that the SEC,
upon noticing some sort of pattern or suspicious activity,
would create a request for the investor's information to the
brokerage firm.
Mr. Hill. Right. This is something that we have done for
years. We have market surveillance of our exchanges, and we
have surveillance of the activities of every brokerage firm,
and we can do a sweep exam and get this information.
I really believe this is a huge expense that is
unnecessary, which is why I support Congressman Barry
Loudermilk's bill to protect that PII.
Let me stick with you. The cost estimate was originally $55
million to implement the Consolidated Audit Trail, and the most
recent estimate is $250 million, increasing at the rate of 30
percent per year.
Who ultimately bears the expense of this item that you say
is unnecessary?
Ms. Schulp. The investors will.
Mr. Hill. I also think the investors will; I think it is a
bad idea.
I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Vargas, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
the opportunity.
Again, I thank all of the witnesses for being here.
At the beginning of the hearing, I heard that we should
talk about real-world impacts, and the SEC should be worried
about real-world impacts and not theoretical stuff. And I agree
with that.
How many of you believe in climate change? If you could
raise your hand.
Okay. Did everyone raise their hand?
Yes. Okay. So, that is a real-world impact, then? I would
say it is--if you all believe in it, I certainly do.
Yesterday, the Republican Chair of the Texas State Board of
Education pulled $8.5 billion in investment from BlackRock. For
years, BlackRock has outperformed the market and provided
positive returns for the Texas Permanent School Fund, a fund
specifically created to support the State's public schools.
However, because of my good friends on the other side's anti-
ESG dogma, cultural politics have been prioritized over the
well-being of constituents.
And, unfortunately, this is not an isolated incident, but a
trend. A recent study by the Texas Association of Business
Chambers of Commerce Foundation found that Republican anti-ESG
laws have cost Texas taxpayers an average of $270 million a
year in debt-related costs since the measure took effect in
2021.
Thankfully, the Securities and Exchange Commission has
decided to put people over politics and to listen to investors.
Earlier this month, as we have been noting, the SEC adopted
rules to enhance and standardize climate-related disclosures by
public companies. These long-awaited rules require companies to
disclose information about climate risks that have materially
impacted their businesses' operations and strategy.
Additionally, companies must disclose costs, expenditures,
and losses incurred because of severe weather events such as
wildfires and flooding, which have drastically impacted my
constituents in San Diego, and which we would have never
thought would happen--a 1,000-year flood in San Diego. But it
happened.
We know that climate risk is a financial risk. I applaud
the SEC for considering feedback from investors, businesses,
academics, industry experts, and Congress.
A recent Morgan Stanley Institute for Sustainable Investing
report reflects that over 75 percent of individual investors
believe that corporations should address environmental impacts
and plan to make sustainable investments based on those
decisions.
Ms. Thornton, I agree with what you said earlier:
Information is what makes capitalism work. This is information
that I think is material, and investors want it.
Am I wrong about that? You were talking about that earlier.
Isn't this what investors want these days?
Ms. Thornton. Oh, absolutely. It has a profound impact,
potentially, on companies.
Mr. Vargas. Why does this have a profound impact?
Ms. Thornton. For two reasons: one, the physical risks of
climate change. We now know that these billion-dollar disasters
are increasing. There is coastal flooding, and more is expected
in the next 5 to 10 years. So, there is that. Companies that
have operations in those areas are at risk and need to make a
plan, and investors need to know that they have a plan.
But there are also transition risks, because there are all
kinds of States changing laws, and creating laws that they hope
to protect----
Mr. Vargas. And there are even States where you can't even
seem to get insurance these days, because the insurance
companies take a look at these risks and say, ``That is not a
good risk for us. We are not going to insure. We can't get the
right price.'' That is what is happening now.
I do want to talk, in my last minute and a half, about
cost-benefit analysis. I do think that it is important to look
at the cost of something. But how do you measure discrimination
against women? What is the cost?
And, especially, let's say, a mother who is discriminated
against because she is a woman, what is the cost to her
daughters who are watching? How do you measure that?
Ms. Thornton. You're absolutely right. It is difficult to
measure many of the benefits of rules that are done that help
people like that and it's difficult to measure many of the
costs.
But the whole point of the cost-benefit analysis is not to
get an absolutely perfect answer, but rather, to weigh things
and get more information.
And the honest truth is that the SEC actually needs more
high-level economists to be able to really do what folks on the
other side want them to do on cost-benefit analysis, so they
need a bigger budget.
Mr. Vargas. And that is why--I am not against taking a look
at the cost of things, but I guess you have to look at it
holistically, because some of these things lead to really awful
conclusions when you take a look at the cost of something.
Discrimination--you can say, ``Well, that is not much of a
cost. We will just get somebody else to do it. It doesn't have
to be a woman.'' Well, you discriminated against her because
she's a woman; that is not right.
But, anyway, with that, I have 7 seconds left, so I will
yield back, and thank you.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Meuser, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you all very, very much for being here with us.
Small businesses, the backbone of America's growth, do face
significant barriers in accessing capital, including from
excessive regulations, inflation, interest rates, new bank
reserve requirements, loss of profits, scope requirements, and
the list goes on and on.
The regulatory processes at the SEC have lacked inclusion,
for lack of a better word, and do not foster trust and
facilitate market participation. So, I have two pieces of
legislation noticed in today's hearing aimed at addressing
these issues, including the ACCESS Act, H.R. 6825, and a
discussion draft of legislation that will increase
accountability and provide transparency into important SEC
staff-level actions.
Ms. Schulp, I would like to start with you, please. As you
know, companies are required to file financial statements that
are reviewed by independent public accounting firms if they
conduct a regulation crowdfunding offering that exceeds
$100,000.
My bill, H.R. 6825, the ACCESS Act of 2023, raises that
threshold from $100,000 to $250,000, as was done without issue
during COVID.
So I would just ask you, do you think this legislation will
have a positive impact on small businesses that are considering
raising money in a crowdfunding offering?
Ms. Schulp. I believe so. And I think the fact that it was
done without issue for more than 18 months during COVID is a
sign that it was well-accepted and is a reasonable change to be
made.
Mr. Meuser. Great. And the fact that it sometimes will cost
as much as $10,000 for all these small businesses to--for their
accountants and other requirements to raise $100,000, that is a
pretty steep percentage, would you agree?
Ms. Schulp. Really, any additional cost that a small
business needs to undertake to deal with its financial
statements on that small of a capital raise is an undue burden.
Mr. Meuser. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Gulliver, a discussion draft of legislation attached to
this hearing could make certain actions by SEC staff, including
Rule 14a-8, no-action letters and denials, review by the
Commission, and require a report to Congress of their actions--
we sent it to you. I am not sure, Mr. Gulliver, how familiar
you are with it.
But, in doing so, the goal is to increase accountability,
period, around such SEC actions that take place outside of the
formal rulemaking process.
If you're familiar with what we have just recently sent
you--and I appreciate it if you are--could you comment on this
action?
Mr. Gulliver. Yes. I think these no-action letters now are
handled by the SEC staff through delegated authority from the
Commission, and there is not a lot of transparency in how these
decisions are made. They are made largely at the staff level.
And I would be supportive of a bill that would enhance
transparency of these decisions, especially when they have a
major impact on the market.
Mr. Meuser. Okay.
Not to be political, but have you found that these concerns
of the process have been or could be politicized by SEC staff,
especially with the ESG-related shareholder proposals?
Mr. Gulliver. Yes, I certainly think these no-action
letters in general can have a--can pertain to issues that are
political. So, as the SEC staff----
Mr. Meuser. Right. It just gets subjective at a certain
point.
Mr. Gulliver. Yes.
Mr. Meuser. Right.
Mr. Burton, a question for you. On a scale of 1 to 10, how
disruptive has the SEC's speed of new regulations and other
actions been to capital markets and capital formation, this
SEC, over the last 3 years and 2 months, on a scale of 1 to 10,
or however you want to express it?
Mr. Burton. I think there are two sides to that. In terms
of the proactive regulatory agenda, it is a 9\1/2\ to 10. The
climate change rules and then all the various things they have
in their pipeline, and so on down.
But on the flip side, it is close to zero. Because you
mentioned concern about entrepreneurs and small businesses
starting to raise capital; there is a need to fix a lot of
things, and the SEC has simply utterly failed to address the
entrepreneurial capital formation issues, finders being an
example, your crowdfunding rules. The SEC made the crowdfunding
regulation much worse than it had to be, and so on down the
line. It is a long, long list of failures of small businesses--
--
Mr. Meuser. Wow.
Mr. Burton. ----by the SEC.
Mr. Meuser. My next question was going to be, on a scale of
1 to 10, how helpful, but I think you have just answered that.
I yield back, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Gonzalez, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you to the panel for joining us today.
Mr. Gulliver, many on this committee have compared the
SEC's recent rulemaking to throwing spaghetti at the wall and
seeing what sticks.
Now, I am a strong supporter of increased regulation to
maintain strong capital markets, but there is a balance to be
struck, where you don't overregulate and stifle the ability of
our markets to operate, and you don't underregulate, leaving
avenues for investors to take excessive risks.
With that being said, how do you propose the SEC address
these issues? And at what point do you believe legislation
should be the answer, rather than rulemaking from experts?
Mr. Gulliver. I think it would be important to take the
economic analysis process more seriously. I think the SEC could
use additional economists to help them with that process. But
it should be sort of a--the economic analysis should be driving
the policy decisions, rather than sort of coming after the fact
and being more limited.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you.
And my next question is for Mr. Burton.
Mr. Burton, you mentioned in your testimony that the SEC
has set a precedent of short comment periods lasting less than
the standard 60 days, especially for complex rulemakings. But I
would be remiss to not mention that the SEC has been receptive
to investor feedback and has reopened the comment period for
some of the more-contentious rulemakings to allow for
additional input.
I am just curious, what do you believe is the magic number
for a comment period, in your eyes? And at what point should a
rulemaking be 90 days versus 45 days? And what qualifications
should we be using to set these deadlines?
Mr. Burton. I think it depends on the nature of the
regulation. If it is, say, just making an inflation adjustment
as required by law, the comment period doesn't matter very
much.
The APA actually has no minimum. But for something like an
inflation adjustment, 30 days. For something that is a simple
rule, easy to grasp, 60 days. And for some of these
extraordinarily-complex ones, with hundreds of pages of text to
absorb, I really think 120 days is appropriate. It simply
depends on the nature of the regulation.
It is important that we get these things right. It is
important that people have the opportunity to give the SEC
meaningful comment, not just boilerplate. And I think, in some
of these cases, they simply haven't given people enough time.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you.
Are the extensions of the comment periods--have they
created a better picture for the SEC of the proposed rules?
Mr. Burton. Yes. They extended them, I think, under
pressure from the public, and particularly industry, that they
need more time to absorb the rules. And, in some cases, the SEC
has been responsive to that by reopening the comment periods.
They haven't been universally bad about this, just too
often.
Mr. Gonzalez. Right.
Thank you. Thank you for your comments.
And I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Steil, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Wagner.
I will start with you, Ms. Schulp, if I can.
One of the first things Chair Gensler did at the Securities
and Exchange Commission was gut the proxy advisor rule that was
put forward previously. And as we look at Commissioner Uyeda,
he calls this type of action, ``regulation by theory and
hypothesis.''
Would you agree that it is an unusual step for the SEC to
take? And did it raise concerns about rule quality and
legality, in your opinion?
Ms. Schulp. It was an unusual step, and it does raise
concerns. When the Commission has set its rule and finalized
it, a new Commission coming in and immediately walking it back
does not usually result in, I would say, good rulemaking.
Mr. Steil. Thank you.
Let me follow up, then, with you, Mr. Gulliver, on the same
topic. Do you think Chairman Gensler prejudged the outcome and
stopped a well-researched and important rule from being
implemented?
Mr. Gulliver. I think the decision came very, very early in
his tenure, and it seemed to be rushed and have immediate
effect and was a major concern.
Mr. Steil. Thank you.
Mr. Burton, kind of on the same broader theme here,
Chairman Gensler and the SEC's unwillingness to reign in proxy
advisors, to me, is a larger effort to force politics into the
boardroom. And what we are looking at as a loosening of the
rules governing proxy advisors, to me, gives them a pass to
push misguided, politically-motivated proposals, with really
limited accountability.
Another factor in driving the politicization of investments
is a new understanding by the left of materiality. So, based on
this new understanding, the SEC has sought to deem more
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) issues as de facto
material.
Can you talk, really briefly, about the importance of
materiality as a threshold, where we continue to see
materiality gutted by those on the left?
Mr. Burton. Both in the United States and already in
Europe, there is an attempt to redefine materiality in a way
much different than traditionally understood. Traditionally, it
is material to financial risk and financial outcomes of
corporations. Now, they are trying to redefine it----
Mr. Steil. And why would somebody want to skip over a
materiality threshold? In your research, why do you see that
being done time and again?
Mr. Burton. Yes. They are trying to redefine material as
something a proxy advisory firm or a registered investment
advisor, BlackRock, would care about, not whether it is
material to the financial outcomes----
Mr. Steil. But why would they care about it? For
politically-motivated purposes?
Mr. Burton. Absolutely, it is for political purposes,
social, ideological----
Mr. Steil. So, it doesn't help investors; it is purely
someone driving a political----
Mr. Burton. Correct.
Mr. Steil. ----agenda. Is that your position?
Mr. Burton. And fiduciaries are increasingly trying to
throw their investors under the bus without their consent to
achieve political objectives rather than investment returns.
Mr. Steil. I agree.
I am going to come to you, Mr. Gulliver, if I can. I think
it is the same theme.
We saw the Securities and Exchange Commission move forward
Staff Legal Bulletin 14L, which makes it harder to exclude
shareholder proposals on significant social policy questions,
as determined by the SEC staff.
What is the impact that this is having? Does it raise
transparency and accountability concerns to you?
Mr. Gulliver. Yes. I think it just increases the burden on
public companies. So, it is just one other reason why companies
would rather stay private than go public.
Mr. Steil. Does it provide a benefit to investors to
analyze the financial or investment thesis of a business? Or is
it simply being utilized to drive forward a political agenda?
Mr. Gulliver. I think it definitely has political
connotations.
Mr. Steil. I think it is really concerning when we see
staff at the SEC, under this legal bulletin, being able to run
roughshod over what are historical and traditional mechanisms
for making sure that we have proper oversight and guidance over
companies. But, instead, leveraging that authority to drive
forward a political agenda, I think is incredibly concerning.
With the 50 seconds I have left, Mr. Gulliver, in your
opening remarks, you noted, I think, an important topic, and I
would just like you to elaborate briefly on how Chair Gensler's
SEC actions differ from those carried out under previous
Chairs, and, in particular, how you think that the Chairman of
the SEC is doing?
Mr. Gulliver. Oh, Chair Gensler's actions--he has
implemented substantially more rules than either of his
predecessors, Chair White or Chair Clayton, and almost as many
as Chair Schapiro, who was there during the financial crisis
and the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act. So, I think what
we are seeing is pretty unprecedented in a time without a
market crisis or new legislation.
Mr. Steil. I thank you all for being here.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Casten, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you to our witnesses for being here.
I am struck that this hearing reminds me of what I have
long felt about this job, that the single-loneliest position in
Washington, D.C., is to be an advocate for competitive markets.
There is not a single business who comes to Washington, who
pays their lobbyists, who pays the budget of The Heritage
Foundation or the Cato Institute to say, ``Can you please make
my market safer for competitors? Can you please lower barriers
to entry, lower barriers to exit, increase transparency of
information?'' Nobody does that.
And let none of us in this room ever trust someone who
claims to be pro-market when all they are really doing is
trying to protect the power of the powerful.
I say that just to say: Let's be honest here, as we get
into this.
Mr. Burton, I am quite certain you and I disagree on
whether the SEC's climate disclosure rule was a good idea. But
hopefully, you do agree that the Commission did, in fact,
receive significant public feedback and made adjustments in
response to that feedback?
Yes? I see you nodding your head.
Mr. Burton. Oh, definitely. They received a lot of
comments.
Mr. Casten. Good. Okay. Because I saw that you said that
the draft rule, in your opinion, would have raised costs by 300
percent. Now, you think it is 20 percent. Setting aside whether
I agree with that--that sounds like a significant change--they
did, in fact, respond to a lot of comments, and make
adjustments, in response to a stakeholder process. Let's not
forget that.
Ms. Schulp, in a podcast you did last week, you said that
companies already provide a ton of voluntarily-disclosed
financial information. I just want to be clear: That is not
consistently described, right? They don't have a standard
format? They are providing this in ways that they choose to
describe, correct?
Ms. Schulp. I was referring to climate-specific financial--
--
Mr. Casten. Yes. But they are not providing that in a
consistent format?
Ms. Schulp. Unless it is information that they are
providing in SEC filings----
Mr. Casten. Which doesn't exist yet, right?
Ms. Schulp. ----where they do define----
Mr. Casten. Because we don't actually mandate consistent
format.
So, Ms. Thornton, can you please educate our economically
moderately literate Members in the room why basic economics,
why competitive markets, why investor protection demands that
we provide consistent, accurate information?
Ms. Thornton. Because if you don't standardize it somehow
and make a format, investors may not be able to find it. If you
don't tag the information, investors may not be able to find it
in the voluminous 10-Ks that are filed.
And that information needs to be in a format where an
investor can compare it one year to the next, so it is
consistently reported from one year to the next, so the
investor can see whether the company is making progress on the
commitment that it made about reducing its emissions or
whatever.
Mr. Casten. And isn't that true for all accounting? There
are probably businesses which could make more money if they
didn't have to comply with Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles (GAAP) accounting.
Ms. Thornton. Correct.
Mr. Casten. Right? It would probably be cheaper for them if
they didn't have to have audited financials, wouldn't it?
Ms. Thornton. Probably, but it wouldn't----
Mr. Casten. Does anyone think we should not have GAAP
accounting?
I mean, my God, we are complaining that there is a cost of
providing information. Free markets are awesome; sing it from
the rafters. I hope that is not partisan someday.
Let me talk about a couple of things here, just for the
record.
In 2020, the Trump Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(CFTC) issued a report, ``Managing Climate Risk in the
Financial Sector,'' that said--and I quote--``Climate change
poses a major risk to the stability of the U.S. financial
system.''
``Regulators and financial institutions need reliable,
consistent, and comparable data and projections for climate
risks, exposure, sensitivity....''
That was the Trump White House.
A 2021 report from the Financial Stability Oversight
Council (FSOC) said that climate change is an emerging threat
to the U.S. financial system.
And I could go on.
Show of hands, raise your hand if you agree that climate
risk can pose a significant risk to the U.S. financial system.
Only the Democrats raised their hands. That is freaking
insane, people.
You're going to deny--let me remind you, insurers are
pulling out of Florida, they are pulling out of Louisiana, they
are pulling out of Texas, and California. Who is left holding
the bag? Those are billions of dollars. And we are going to
somehow deny that this is real?
Look, I get it, you are protecting the interests of the
powerful. Those of us up here have to represent everybody.
Mr. Burton, I understand that you are one of the authors of
Project 2025, which provides a, ``conservative blueprint for
the next Republican President.'' Yes, that is true?
Mr. Burton. I was a co-author of the Treasury chapter and
the----
Mr. Casten. Okay. That is massively irresponsible.
I want to just point out in the time I have left, Richard
Nixon created the EPA. Ronald Reagan's EPA said we need to use
the markets to price environmental externalities. That led to
the Montreal Protocol, a global agreement on pollution control.
George H.W. Bush's White House extended that to the acid rain
reduction program.
Do not be an embarrassment to the party of Nixon----
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Casten. ----the party of Lincoln, the party of Reagan,
the economic----
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Casten. I yield back.
Mr. Burton. I would be happy to talk to you----
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
And let me just say that I would caution all members of
this committee to maintain the decorum that has always been
consistent in the Financial Services Committee. We are a
group----
Ms. Waters. Will the gentlelady yield?
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman----
Ms. Waters. Will the gentlelady yield?
Chairwoman Wagner. I absolutely will not.
I would like all to maintain decorum.
And the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York,
Mr. Garbarino, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you to all the witnesses for being here today.
Mr. Burton, I will start with you. Under Chair Gensler, the
SEC has proposed sweeping new regulatory requirements, often
without a clear, data-driven need. We have seen this, from his
overhaul of the regulations governing equity markets, to his
plan to alter the liquidity risk management requirements for
open-end funds.
Over this time, Commissioner Uyeda has often referred to
this approach as--as we have heard before; it has been brought
up several times--``regulation by theory and hypothesis.''
Mr. Burton, would you explain some of the problems with
Chair Gensler's rulemaking approach?
Mr. Burton. For one, he is extraordinarily aggressive in
terms of his objectives. And most of those objectives, on the
important rulemakings, are not really related to the core
mission of the SEC, the statutory charge of the SEC. They are
to pursue environmental objectives. The human capital
management rule that is in the regulatory pipeline is basically
to pursue objectives that are more appropriate at the
Department of Labor (DOL) or the National Labor Relations Board
(NLRB), and so on down the line.
The corporate board diversity rule presumably will be
something similar to the NASDAQ board diversity rule and impose
racial, ethnic, or sex quotas on boards unless they explain why
they didn't meet the quota. It is a form of racism, racism that
I thought was a relic of the past.
So, you have that.
You also have the fact that the economic analysis at the
SEC--and this predates Chairman Gensler--is becoming
increasingly bad and not serious.
There is a fairly long list, but I don't want to take all
your time.
Mr. Garbarino. Actually, that was my next question, has the
SEC's economic analysis suffered from Chair Gensler's pace of
rulemaking? And you just said, yes, it is getting extremely
bad. So, I appreciate that answer.
And I agree; I think he is treating everything as if it is
a security. And he is putting out rules--there is another one;
I know, Ms. Schulp, you brought it up--about the cybersecurity
rule and his new one----
Mr. Burton. On that, the SEC has operationally adopted the
position that anything you buy for the purpose of making money
is a security, which is, of course, not true. It can be real
estate, it can be a commodity, or so on down the line.
Mr. Garbarino. Absolutely.
And I wanted to bring up about the cybersecurity rule, we
are now seeing what we thought was going to happen: The hackers
are actually using this rule to their benefit and are reporting
people that they are hacking to the SEC just to get them in
trouble.
So, everybody agrees investor information is important, but
not at the cost of national security. And I asked Mr. Gensler
which was more important, and he did not seem to think that
national security would suffer, but we are now seeing that.
But, Ms. Schulp, I wanted to bring back up--Mr. Hill, my
colleague, had some questions before on the CAT. While the CAT
is problematic on several fronts, I would first like to focus
on its implications for American privacy.
The security concerns with collecting personally
identifiable information was touched on, but I would like to
provide you with the opportunity to further explain potential
dangers of this practice.
Ms. Schulp. Absolutely. And thank you for that.
The CAT is collecting all transaction information--buys,
sells, cancellations--for every trade done in the United
States, along with the personal information of the trader.
What that creates is a giant database of information about
how investors are spending their money, which says a lot about
people's beliefs, their desires, their political opinions, and
the way they think that the country's economy is going to grow.
And that information is being required to be provided to
the government, likely in violation of the Fourth and Fifth
Amendments. And it raises First Amendment issues, as well, with
this expressive speech and how people are investing.
That type of information should not be given to the
government to scan at will to determine whether or not someone
is investing in a way that the government feels is appropriate.
That is a major privacy concern.
And that type of surveillance is something that we have
largely rejected and we should continue to reject and not allow
the SEC to go down that path.
Mr. Garbarino. In addition to the PII concerns and privacy
concerns, there are also cost concerns. Do you think we should
move the CAT onto the SEC's budget?
Ms. Schulp. I think that is a better way to start thinking
about how to control the costs if the CAT were to go forward.
Allowing the SEC to essentially dictate this new tax or fee on
investors is contrary to the powers of the SEC. That should be
something Congress is supposed to do, not the SEC. And if this
were to go forward, it should be part of the SEC's----
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Garbarino. Okay. Thank you.
Chairwoman Wagner. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from North Carolina, Mr. Nickel, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you
to our ranking member, and to our witnesses for being here.
While I applaud the great work of the SEC to protect
investors, I have some concerns with the policy and the process
surrounding the SEC's Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 121 (SAB
121).
My questions are more process-related. What we are seeing
makes the digital assets industry less safe for consumers by
preventing well-regulated banks from safeguarding digital
assets owned by their clients.
Last October, the Government Accountability Office (GAO)
concluded that the SEC breached statutory rulemaking
requirements by issuing SAB 121. As it meets the Administrative
Procedure Act's definition of a rule, it must be submitted to
Congress for approval. That is why our committee passed a
bipartisan Congressional Review Act resolution last month to
eliminate SAB 121.
Mr. Gulliver, aren't staff accounting bulletins supposed to
guide market participants in understanding and interpreting
existing rules, rather than making new policies, as SAB 121
does?
Mr. Gulliver. Yes, they should. SAB 121 is extremely
harmful for investors in crypto markets. They benefit from
having custody from well-regulated financial institutions, and
SAB 121 prevents it.
Mr. Nickel. What should the SEC have done differently?
Mr. Gulliver. I think they should rescind SAB 121, and they
should actually promulgate rules that would allow for the
regulation of crypto exchanges so investors in crypto markets
can be better protected.
Mr. Nickel. I certainly agree. I hope they will withdraw
the rule. I haven't heard any news about that happening anytime
soon, but I think that would be a good way to go.
Moving on to the SEC's predictive data analytics (PDA)
rule, I agree with the SEC's rationale for eliminating investor
harm resulting from AI. However, I am worried about the rule's
adverse effects on innovation and retail investors seeking
inclusion in the financial system.
The proposal's scope is extremely broad and could be
applied to virtually any technology used by broker-dealers and
investment advisors. So, as we sit here today, I understand
that the SEC is grappling with whether and how to narrow the
rule's scope to be workable for market participants.
While I respect the work the Commission's staff is doing to
try to get this right, the only recourse to address such an
overly-broad and inherently-flawed rule is to withdraw and
repropose it after adequate stakeholder engagement. I worry
that the rule could be finalized with substantial changes and
no public notice-or-comment period.
Mr. Gulliver, to you again, can changes be made to the rule
without the SEC running afoul of the Administrative Procedure
Act?
Mr. Gulliver. No. I think finalizing that rule in any form
would violate the APA. The final rule needs to be a logical
outgrowth of the rule proposal, according to Federal law, and
the rule proposal was so extreme that it couldn't possibly be
finalized.
Mr. Nickel. And, Mr. Gulliver, how has the SEC engaged with
your members on this rule?
Mr. Gulliver. I am not aware of the extent of communication
between the SEC and our members on that. We have met, our
staff, with the SEC to discuss this rule and shared views
consistent with those that I just expressed.
Mr. Nickel. And in terms of the process, what has been most
concerning to you during this rulemaking process?
Mr. Gulliver. I think one of the biggest issues--and you
can see this for all of the SEC rulemakings--is that they are
issuing these pretty extreme proposals and not consulting with
market participants before doing so. So, that is how you get
into this problem.
And that is not typical for the SEC. Past SECs, under
Democratic or Republican leadership, typically have held public
roundtables and consulted extensively with the market before a
proposal was issued.
Mr. Nickel. With all of the issues we have talked about,
how could we here in Congress improve on the SEC's regulatory
process?
Mr. Gulliver. Well, a number of things: providing more
opportunity for public comment; requiring the SEC to repropose
a rule when a final rule would deviate too much from the
proposal; and the various enhancements to the economic analysis
process.
And I also think that having the Chair and the
Commissioners speak to you all would be helpful.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you so much.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
And I now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Lawler, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you to our witnesses for being here and helping
address our concerns on this important topic.
Like my fellow members of the committee, I am extremely
alarmed by the pace and aggressiveness of the SEC rulemakings,
which will add to the cumulative regulatory burden on companies
in the U.S. economy.
To make matters worse, this constant stream of proposals
has regularly been paired with concerns of regulatory
overreach, theoretical assumptions and hypotheses, solutions in
search of a problem, and the alarming absence of stakeholder
input and meaningful cost-benefit analysis during the
rulemaking process.
Chair Gensler's frenetic, partisan rulemaking agenda has
threatened the health of U.S. capital markets, highlighting the
need for targeted institutional reform.
Ms. Schulp, this hearing has a few bills attached to it
intended to continue Committee Republicans' goal of spurring
capital formation. Under Chair Gensler, the SEC has completely
neglected this aspect of its statutory mission, opting instead
to raise compliance costs and regulatory burdens.
What are the consequences of the SEC neglecting this
important duty?
Ms. Schulp. The consequences are terrible. In fact, when we
have smaller businesses that are unable to raise capital, we
don't have businesses that can continue to grow into bigger
businesses. It creates a drag on the economy and creates a drag
on the ability of investors to have companies to invest in as
well.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you.
And, as I alluded to earlier, a concern that goes with the
flow of burdensome new proposals is the lack of meaningful
consideration of stakeholder input.
Ms. Schulp, as someone who has written plenty of comment
letters in response to SEC rulemakings, can you discuss the
amount of time and work it takes to submit a comment letter
addressing each of the SEC's questions while also evaluating
their data?
Ms. Schulp. I think it is impossible to address each of the
SEC's questions in any given comment letter that they--and any
given rule proposal they put out that often runs in the
hundreds of questions. SEC rule proposals tend to run in the
hundreds of pages, and this is a very burdensome task.
First, a company must determine--or a commenter generally
must determine whether or not they are interested in
commenting, and then prioritize their ability to comment on
multiple letters at the same time.
Personally, as someone who writes comments, it takes 60 to
80 hours, minimum, for me to review and write a comment. The
SEC would put my time as an attorney at about $600 an hour,
which means that a comment letter costs somewhere between
$36,000 and $48,000 to write. And I think that is a low-ball
estimate.
And that is a big burden, particularly on smaller
businesses, which don't have the staff or the resources to be
able to outsource multiple comment letters at the same time. It
really decreases the ability of a company to make a comment on
a rule that might affect them.
Mr. Lawler. In your opinion, why is the SEC acting
inappropriately when it imposes substantial hurdles to prevent
thoughtful public feedback?
Ms. Schulp. The APA is built on thoughtful public feedback,
and thoughtful public feedback is important to creating good
public policy. Not allowing conditions where that can happen is
a major problem.
Mr. Lawler. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Nunn,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Chairwoman Wagner.
And thank you to our witnesses for joining us today.
Like many members on this committee, the consequences of
SEC rulemakings come up almost every day in my meetings with
constituents, business leaders, and fellow Iowans. From Main
Street to Wall Street, insurance firms in Des Moines, the
cascading effects of rulemaking after rulemaking have
negatively impacted their ability to not only do business but
to serve their customers and their clients in my district.
Worse yet, it isn't just the SEC; it is the unelected
bureaucrats from almost every agency that are causing
regulatory havoc on our hometown communities. In fact, I
believe, if this Administration gets its way, Madam Chairwoman,
the SEC will finalize 63 new rules impacting Iowa companies in
just 4 years. And it is just that one agency, the SEC, that has
been blasted for its gross overregulation in this environment.
As was noted today, it is now easier for a company to work
to sue and go to court to get regulatory clarity from these
agencies than it is to deal with the massive costs of trying to
make a compliance that may or may not fall in line with an
ever-changing regulatory and rules system, particularly coming
from the SEC.
And so, whether it is Chair Gensler's intention or not, the
unintended consequences of his actions are very clear within
the industry, making it impossible for small businesses, new
businesses, innovative businesses, and long-time Main Street
businesses just to keep their doors open.
The bottom line in my State is, I can say clearly, Madam
Chairwoman, Iowans are suffering. So, I know my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle are not going to continue to stand by
and allow the regulatory overreach to be what defines it.
I would like to talk about both the insurance and the
custody rules.
Mr. Gulliver, I am concerned about the SEC's expanding
authority and its, often, role in superseding our State and
local officials, who are really leaders in this area.
One example of this is the SEC's attempt to overhaul the
custody rule and possibly include fee-based annuities within
the scope of regulation. This would be unworkable within many
of our State laws and would take authority from State insurance
regulators, who have successfully overseen the insurance
industry in my home State for over 150 years.
As a Member who represents an industry that is a critical
component of our economy--in fact, 12 percent--I want to know
if you can explain why this is a concerning trend, that
Chairman Gensler should continue to push the boundaries of his
authority well beyond their limits and infringe on State
abilities to do this.
Mr. Gulliver. I think the custody rule is another example
of a proposal that really can't be finalized. It is just too
extreme. It sweeps in assets that really can't be custodied in
the way that the SEC would now require.
And the existing process for registered investment advisors
and the custody that they provide their clients isn't broken.
The SEC hasn't really established that there is a problem,
either. So, the custody rule is a major problem.
Mr. Nunn. I would concur with you on that, Mr. Gulliver. I
think you are right when you say it is not a rule that is
broken. In fact, it is a rule that is well in hand for most of
our State regulators.
Ms. Schulp, I would like to talk about AI and innovation,
particularly in this area. I am concerned about the SEC's use
of a blunt, one-size-fits-all approach to its rulemaking,
particularly regarding new technologies coming on the market.
In Chairman Gensler's world, real-world analytics and cost-
benefit analyses cease to exist. Just bad actors and broad-
sweeping rules that do not allow our economy to flourish. In
fact, in his world, everyone is a violator; it is just a matter
of finding the right regulation to hold them accountable.
I guess I would be interested to hear that the Federal
judge sanctioned the SEC's--what they identify in this
regulation as a, ``gross abuse of power,'' but beyond that,
ultimately pay the price to shut down companies that the SEC
has pushed away, shut down other companies here in America and
push them overseas.
Just yesterday, Chairman Gensler said that, ``powerful AI
systems in the financial system make up the potential for an
economic disaster, particularly acute here in the United
States.'' This level of fearmongering is frightening.
Can you explain why the SEC's approach to rulemaking is
chilling innovation or may even hurt technologies for decades
to come?
Ms. Schulp. This approach to regulation is absolutely the
wrong one. And this is, I will say as a side note, an important
reason why it is good to hear from the entire Commission, not
just from the Chair, who gets the most airtime, in order to
take these types of fearmongering statements about innovation.
Statements on AI, statements on crypto--all of these are
making business environments in the United States much more
uncertain, if not downright hostile. Other countries--the
European Union, many in the Middle East, many in the Far East--
are creating regulatory systems for crypto that are much more
friendly and workable and, at the very least, are more
certain----
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you.
Chairwoman Wagner. The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman
from Indiana, Mrs. Houchin, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and Ranking
Member Sherman. And thanks to the witnesses for being here
today.
Under Chair Gensler, we have seen the SEC move at an
unprecedented pace to propose and then finalize politicized
rulemakings that hurt our markets, discourage growth, and do
nothing to help those who are saving for retirement or to
better their lives.
From proposals like those on swing pricing and predictive
data analytics that cut off tools and opportunities for
everyday investors, to the recently-finalized rule on climate
disclosures that goes well beyond the Commission's statutory
authority and pushes a Green New Deal agenda, the SEC under
this Administration has shown time and again that it is
committed to pursuing ideological goals at the expense of
ordinary Americans.
In my view, and that of many who serve on this committee,
that has to change. With the number of wide-ranging effects
that we have seen from the Commission under Chair Gensler, one
of my foremost concerns is the way that the cumulative effect
of this will change the way our U.S. capital markets work.
This issue goes well beyond just the SEC. We have also seen
financial regulators become increasingly interested in
implementing the initiatives of international organizations.
Between Basel III, the new environmental accounting
standards coming out of the U.N., and the EU's Corporate
Sustainability Directive, I am concerned that we don't fully
understand yet the potential consequences that all of these
rules will have on our markets.
Mr. Gulliver, what do you see are the potential
consequences of implementing international policies without
input from our market participants and stakeholders?
Mr. Gulliver. I think there is a real risk that the
policies that would be implemented in the U.S. wouldn't be in
the United States' best interest. Our financial institutions
and market participants have unique perspectives, and those
need to be incorporated in rules here.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you. There is little need for us to
take directives from outside the United States, especially as
other proposals from our Federal regulators are threatening to
change the ways that our markets current operate.
A few weeks ago, the House voted to pass Chairman McHenry's
H.R. 2799, the Expanding Access to Capital Act of 2023. As a
member of the Rules Committee, I was proud to manage the Floor
debate on the rule that provided for its passage. It also
included my legislation, the Regulation A-Plus Improvement Act,
as part of the bill.
Together, these proposals would strengthen our public
markets and expand opportunities for small and mid-sized
businesses to raise capital and create new investment
opportunities for everyday Americans.
This committee understands just how important capital
formation is to creating new jobs and achieving economic
growth. That is why I have been so upset at the SEC's direction
under Chair Gensler, that they have neglected their statutory
obligation and prioritized other items, like ideologically-
driven climate reporting mandates and crackdowns on investment
advisers' use of basic technology over its obligation to
promote capital formation.
Mr. Burton, are there better ways for the SEC to spend its
limited resources rather than this hyper focus on achieving
their partisan objectives?
Mr. Burton. Yes. And I go into quite a bit of detail about
that in my written statement. But the core function of the SEC
is extraordinarily important to our capital markets, to the
success of our economy, and to the standard of living in this
country. And it needs to focus on that instead of pursuing
these ideological and political objectives that are simply not
related to the core mission of the SEC.
And it is about to get worse. If you look at the regulatory
pipeline that they filed with ORIA, it is full of politically-
motivated rules.
But also, the fact that the agency is so badly run. They
waste so much money on things that are--it is not ideological;
it is just incompetent. And they need to work on that as well.
There is one manager for every nonsupervisory employee at
the SEC, for example; it is just bureaucratic and ineffective.
Mrs. Houchin. And inefficient. Instead of prioritizing its
congressionally-directed mission, they seem to be focused on
squashing opportunities for growth, and adding more red tape
for average investors, without any concern for the effects of
all of this cumulative rulemaking and what that will do to the
financial markets.
They also seem to be, as you stated, acting not only
inefficiently but maybe incompetently on some of these fronts,
and looking at things that, if I were a business owner seeking
investments from other individuals, I would want to look at the
bottom line and not necessarily the climate effect of what we
have going on.
I appreciate the witnesses' testimony today, and I yield
back to the chairwoman.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from California,
Mrs. Kim, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Chairwoman Wagner, for allowing me to
waive onto this very important hearing, and for including my
bill, H.R. 7030, the Review the Expansion of Government (REG)
Act.
Since the spring of 2021, the SEC has proposed and
finalized over 60 rules. When we compare the pace and scope of
rulemaking with recent SEC Chairs, only former SEC Chair
Shapiro has issued more rules than Chair Gensler.
My legislation, H.R. 7030, the REG Act, directs the SEC to
review all rules every 5 years. And if the SEC determines that
the rule is no longer appropriate or necessary to uphold its
three-part mission, the SEC could revise or eliminate it.
In addition to the review process, my legislation would
require the SEC to consider the cumulative effects of every
rulemaking, which is something that Chair Gensler has failed to
address.
Mr. Gulliver, your group has commented on the substantial
overlap between many of Chair Gensler's rules. Even the
Department of Justice has indicated that without an assessment
of a rule's overlapping effects, the SEC cannot effectively
assess the impact on investors, registrants, or the markets.
Mr. Gulliver, as you mention in your testimony, our capital
markets are the largest and most efficient in the world. So,
would you explain why the SEC's decision to review rules in
isolation without considering their aggregate impact and
interconnectedness can make our capital markets less efficient?
Mr. Gulliver. I think there would be unnecessary compliance
burdens. And I think, even more importantly, there will be
conflicts between rules. And we are seeing that. We are seeing
that the SEC's Securities Lending Rule and the SEC's Short-
Selling Rule are directly in conflict. One requires disclosure
on a daily basis, and the other would delay the disclosure of
the very same financial activity for a month. Those are in
conflict, and that is in court for that reason now.
Mrs. Kim. And how would market participants benefit from an
understanding of how related proposals interconnect with each
other?
Mr. Gulliver. It would allow them to better understand
their compliance burden, and to comply.
Mrs. Kim. So, would you agree that my legislation can help
market participants, investors in capital formation?
Mr. Gulliver. Yes. I think it is critical to look back and
assess whether or not rulemakings are still serving their
purpose. That is required in the EU now. And that would be an
important way that the U.S. could remain competitive
internationally.
Mrs. Kim. Right. I agree. My hope is that the SEC
understands how each proposed rule can increase costs for
smaller market participants.
Ms. Schulp, in your written testimony, you speak of a
regularized process for revisiting some of the Commission's
rules. And my legislation would establish a 5-year review
process. Hopefully, you agree with the intent of my
legislation. Can you elaborate on how a regular review process
can help improve efficiencies in our capital markets?
Ms. Schulp. A regular review process is important, because
what it does is set a schedule. Rather than the political will
of a particular Chairman, it requires every so many years the
review to take place. And that is important, because you could
very well see a situation where a general idea that we want to
revisit rules just never happens when the political will is not
there.
Taking a look back, particularly where cost-benefit
analyses rely on speculative benefits or costs that are not yet
able to be quantified is very important, because then, actual
costs can be weighed against actual benefits to determine
whether the rules are justified or serving their purposes.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. Under Chair Gensler, the SEC has
proposed sweeping new regulatory requirements, often without a
clear, data-driven need. So this regulation, by theory and
hypothesis approach, is blurring the regulatory lines between
the private and public markets.
Ms. Schulp, as you know, the SEC's mission is to protect
investors, maintain fair and efficient markets, and promote
capital formation. However, the SEC, under Chair Gensler, seems
to have neglected its statutory obligation and prioritized
other factors over its obligation to promote capital formation.
What factors should the SEC be considering in its economic
analysis to properly consider a rule's impact on capital
formation?
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentlelady's time has expired.
And I respectfully ask that the witness respond in writing.
It is a very important question.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Wagner. I thank you all.
With that, the gentlelady yields back.
And we thank our witnesses for their testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
I ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as you
are able.
And this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:11 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

March 20, 2024

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
