- HOW AMERICA AND ITS ALLIES CAN STOP HAMAS, HEZBOLLAH, AND IRAN FROM EVADING SANCTIONS AND FINANCING TERROR

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HOW AMERICA AND ITS ALLIES
CAN STOP HAMAS, HEZBOLLAH,
AND IRAN FROM EVADING.
SANCTIONS AND FINANCING TERROR

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY,
ILLICIT FINANCE, AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 25, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-51

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-316 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
Subcommittee on National Security, Illicit Finance,
and International Financial Institutions

BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri, Chairman

ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio, Ranking Member
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
YOUNG KIM, California, Vice          BILL FOSTER, Illinois
Chairwoman                       JUAN VARGAS, California
ZACH NUNN, Iowa                      JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
October 25, 2023.............................................     1
Appendix:
October 25, 2023.............................................    43

WITNESSES
Wednesday, October 25, 2023

Brodsky, Jason M., Policy Director, United Against Nuclear Iran
(UANI).........................................................     5
Goldberg, Richard, Senior Advisor, Foundation for Defense of
Democracies (FDD)..............................................     6
Levitt, Matthew, Fromer-Wexler Senior Fellow, the Washington
Institute for Near East Policy.................................    12
Noronha, Gabriel, Fellow, Gemunder Center for Defense and
Strategy, the Jewish Institute for National Security of America
(JINSA)........................................................     8
Zarazinski, Adam, Chief Executive Officer, Inca Digital..........    10

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Brodsky, Jason M.............................................    44
Goldberg, Richard............................................    49
Levitt, Matthew..............................................    60
Noronha, Gabriel.............................................    78
Zarazinski, Adam.............................................    94

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Huizenga, Hon. Bill:
Report to Congress on Renewal of Iraq's Sanctions Waiver for
Electricity Payments.......................................   104
Kim, Hon. Young:
Chainalysis insert, ``Correcting the Record: Inaccurate
Methodologies for Estimating Cryptocurrency's Role in
Terrorism Financing,'' dated October 18, 2023..............   108
Elliptic insert, ``Setting the record straight on crypto
crowdfunding by Hamas,'' dated October 25, 2023............   116
TRM Insights insert, ``In Wake of Attack on Israel,
Understanding How Hamas Uses Crypto,'' dated October 10,
2023.......................................................   119
Brodsky, Jason:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   128
Goldberg, Richard:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Gottheimer..................................   130
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   131
Levitt, Matthew:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Gottheimer..................................   132
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   132
Noronha, Gabriel:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   133
Zarazinski, Adam:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   135

HOW AMERICA AND ITS ALLIES
CAN STOP HAMAS, HEZBOLLAH,
AND IRAN FROM EVADING
SANCTIONS AND FINANCING TERROR

----------

Wednesday, October 25, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on National Security,
Illicit Finance, and
International Financial Institutions,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:05 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Blaine
Luetkemeyer [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Luetkemeyer, Barr,
Williams of Texas, Loudermilk, Meuser, Kim, Nunn, De La Cruz;
Beatty, Nickel, Pettersen, Foster, Vargas, and Gottheimer.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Also present: Representatives Huizenga and Casten.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The Subcommittee on National
Security, Illicit Finance, and International Financial
Institutions will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
As I discussed with the witnesses, we are going to be
voting here supposedly between 3:35 and 3:50, so what we would
like to do is perhaps get the testimonies out of the way and
perhaps the first couple of questioners, and then we will
adjourn until we get our vote--I think it is a single vote at
this point--done, and then come back and finish with your
discussions. And we will see what we can do.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``How America and Its Allies
Can Stop Hamas, Hezbollah, and Iran From Evading Sanctions and
Financing Terror.''
Whoa. That is a long title to this hearing. But anyway, we
have to do better than that, guys.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement of 5
minutes.
First, I thank all of the witnesses for taking time out of
your busy schedules to be here with us today.
A little over 2 weeks ago, a terrorist attack was underway
that would claim the lives of more than 1,400 innocent people
and injure another 4,500. Many of these were women, children--
even babies--and the elderly, and at least 32 of those who were
killed were American.
Eyewitness accounts of these heinous acts were gut-
wrenching. And it was no surprise when Hamas quickly released a
video claiming responsibility.
Their behavior on October 7th confirmed that they are not a
military organization, but rather, terrorists of the most-
barbaric kind. To complicate matters, as Israel was trying to
defend itself on the southern border, the Lebanese terror
organization, Hezbollah, sent rockets and infiltrators across
Israel's northern border.
What do Hamas and Hezbollah have in common? Among other
things, they share the same sponsor: Iran. In the attack's
aftermath, highly-credible news reports, notably The Wall
Street Journal, asserted Iranian complicity in the Hamas
attacks. Although the Biden Administration, followed by Iran
and others, sought to discredit these claims, it could not deny
that these two proxy organizations get most of their financial
backing from Tehran.
How does Iran fund these and other terrorist groups, and
what can the United States do to stop it? The United States
began imposing sanctions on Iran shortly after revolutionaries
seized the U.S. Embassy in Tehran in 1979. Over the years, as
Iran continued to support terrorism and international chaos,
the sanctions regime responded and grew into the largest and
most-complex imposed on any country in the world.
But in 2015, the Obama Administration negotiated a deal
that was supposedly intended to stop Iran's nuclear program,
known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The
JCPOA relaxed many of the tough and effective sanctions that
the U.S. took years to implement, freeing up billions of
dollars for the regime and reviving its economy.
In May of 2018, the Trump Administration appropriately
withdrew from the agreement, and initiated a maximum pressure
campaign which reimposed many of the sanctions. This maximum
pressure campaign had crippling effects on the Iranian regime.
Iran's official reserves fell from an average of $70 billion in
2017, to $4 billion in 2020. Its economy was on the brink of
collapse. This naturally reduced their ability to finance not
just missile and nuclear programs, but also, terrorist groups
like Hamas.
Unfortunately, the current Administration reversed course
in hopes of reviving the JCPOA, issuing sanctions, waivers, or
just turning a blind eye to illicit activities that fund the
terrorist Islamic Iranian State, most importantly, oil
shipments.
Also controversially, last August President Biden agreed to
an understanding with Iran to swap five American hostages for
five Iranian criminals. But a one-for-one swap wasn't enough
for Iran, so their president tacked on $6 billion in frozen
funds, moved from South Korea and Qatar, for Iranian use. That
money is supposed to be used for humanitarian goods but because
money is fungible, Iran will, as in the past, probably use
these funds to import food or medicine it would otherwise have
to buy with scarce, hard currency and use the hard currency
they save to fund terrorism.
To address this terrible error in judgment, last week I
introduced the Iran Sanctions Accountability Act. If enacted,
this bill would deploy responsible, due diligence standards
that would close loopholes and require the President to attach
requirements to humanitarian aid to prevent funds from directly
or indirectly supporting illicit acts, including terrorism.
As I said last week, we cannot blindly trust the Iranian
Government or any other adversary regime to act responsibly
with funds which we unfroze or provided for humanitarian aid.
It is both naive and irresponsible to neglect oversight of U.S.
dollars once they have left our accounts.
This hearing is the first of a series of hearings this
subcommittee will have regarding Iran's role in financing this
war against Israel, and really, against human decency. Again,
thank you to the witnesses for being here today to address this
sensitive and complicated topic. We look forward to your
analysis and recommendations.
With that, the Chair now recognizes the ranking member of
the subcommittee, the gentlewoman from Ohio, Mrs. Beatty, for 4
minutes for an opening statement.
Mrs. Beatty. Good afternoon.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing.
And thank to you our witnesses for not only appearing here
today, but indulging us as we may have to recess.
On October 7th, Hamas carried out a devastating surprise
attack that we all witnessed on Israel, inciting a conflict
that has led to the tragic loss of thousands of Israeli and
Palestinian lives, including children and families.
Let me be clear. We unequivocally condemn those vicious
terrorist attacks against innocent civilians, and support
Israel's right to protect and defend itself in the face of
these atrocities. This horrific attack, which undoubtedly took
years to finance and plan, underscores the importance of
identifying and disrupting funding streams for terrorist
organizations such as Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and
Hezbollah. It is quite literally a matter of life and death.
While the largest source of Hamas financing is direct state
sponsorship from Iran and other countries, the terrorist group
also generates vast sums of revenue from its global portfolio
of investments, taxation at border crossings, extortion, and
racketeering, as well as crowdfunding and charitable donations.
For decades, Treasury's Office of Terrorism and Financial
Intelligence (TFI), which includes the Office of Foreign Assets
Control (OFAC), has endeavored to disrupt Hamas' financing
operations, and in the wake of the recent attacks, has taken
immediate steps to further target key Hamas operatives and
financial facilitators.
Treasury has utilized several national security tools, such
as including primary and secondary sanctions, strengthening
Anti-Money Laundering (AML) and Combating the Financing of
Terrorism (CFT) frameworks in vulnerable jurisdictions, and
partnering with regional allies in the private sector for
information-sharing and coalition-building.
At the same time, Treasury is also working hard to bolster
the United States' AML and CFT regimes to prevent bad actors
from using the financial system to launder money and engage in
other illicit activities.
The Biden Administration has employed a multilateral
approach to U.S. national security, overseeing the most-
significant set of comprehensive sanctions against Iran, while
Committee Democrats have led the way to eliminate
vulnerabilities in our financial system with the Anti-Money
Laundering Act and the Corporate Transparency Act.
While some of my colleagues on the other side seek to blame
the Biden Administration for the horrific attack on Israel, the
fact remains that for the first 2\1/2\ weeks of this conflict,
the House of Representatives was without a Speaker due to the
pointless civil war that Republicans were going through,
rendering Congress unable to respond to this crisis.
Now, my colleagues have managed to appoint a Speaker that
we just did on the House Floor, and I look forward to getting
back to the business of the American people, to protect our
national security and to provide much-needed aid to our allies.
Also today, many will want to talk about the $6 billion--
they will want to talk about how those dollars were used to
fund Iran. I can tell you, because I met with our Deputy
Treasurer, that that is not true. Those dollars have not been
requested.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady yields back.
The chairman and the ranking member of the full Financial
Services Committee each have a minute reserved, but neither of
them are here, so we will proceed to our witnesses.
Today, we welcome the testimony of: Mr. Jason Brodsky, the
policy director of United Against Nuclear Iran; Mr. Richard
Goldberg, a senior advisor at the Foundation for Defense of
Democracies; Mr. Gabriel Noronha, a fellow at the Gemunder
Center for Defense and Strategy at the Jewish Institute for
National Security of America--that is about as long as the name
of our committee hearing today; Mr. Adam Zarazinski, the chief
executive officer of Inca Digital; and Dr. Matthew Levitt, the
director of the Reinhardt Program on Counterterrorism and
Intelligence and a Fromer-Wexler senior fellow.
We thank each of you for taking the time to be here today.
Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to give an oral
presentation of your testimony. And without objection, each of
your written statements will be made a part of the record.
Just a little quick housekeeping note, your microphones
will only pick up your voice if you put it very close to you.
Those are the little boxes that you can pull toward you. I
would ask that you pull that box toward you so when you have
the microphone straight in front of you, you can speak into
it--the acoustics in here are very bad--and so we can all hear.
We have our stenographers over here. If they can't hear
what you are saying, they have some problems, and we get a lot
of garbled stuff when they get done. So, please make sure they
hear exactly what you say.
And with that, Mr. Brodsky, you are recognized for 5
minutes for your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF JASON M. BRODSKY, POLICY DIRECTOR, UNITED AGAINST
NUCLEAR IRAN (UANI)

Mr. Brodsky. Chairman Luetkemeyer, Ranking Member Beatty,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to testify today.
As we sit here, our ally, Israel, is reeling from the
deadliest attack against the Jewish community since the
Holocaust. Babies beheaded, elderly women burned alive, and
Holocaust survivors taken hostage are only a small sampling of
the atrocities that Hamas terrorists, armed and funded by the
Islamic Republic of Iran, have inflicted on Israel.
The ties between Hamas and Tehran, and its proxies like
Hezbollah in Lebanon, have deepened over decades, involving
intelligence cooperation, arms proliferation, funding, and
training. Hamas and Iran have also established a deep
structural coordination apparatus. The head of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps' (IRGC's) Quds Force's Palestinian
Office in Lebanon, Mohammad Saeed Izadi, presides over this
enterprise.
At the very least, in my assessment, Iran's regime had
foreknowledge of the October 7th operation, given its
sophistication and the length of time it took to prepare the
attack. Some Hamas leaders suggested it may have taken as long
as 2 years to plan the assault, not to mention the increase in
the Islamic Republic's funding of Hamas over the last year.
An Israeli security source told Reuters recently that Iran
raised its funding for Hamas' military ring over the last year
from $100 million to around $350 million per year. An attack of
this scale and sophistication may explain why.
Hamas and the Islamic Republic of Iran had a shared
interest in the October 7th attack on Israel. The attack
complicated the normalization process that was underway between
Israel and Saudi Arabia. Tehran and its partner, Hamas, also
perceived Israel as weakening from within, a prophecy that
Iranian leaders have long proclaimed, due to the polarized
debate over judicial reform in Israel. This increased the Axis
of Resistance's risk readiness, with the October 7th tragedy
as, ``Exhibit A.''
What to do? First, the United States must fully enforce
U.S. sanctions on Iran. United Against Nuclear Iran estimates
that Iran has generated approximately $80 billion in revenue
from oil sales since the Biden Administration took office in
2021, despite U.S. sanctions remaining on the books. Many of
these purchases have come from China.
UANI has deep expertise in this area. Our tanker tracking
resulted in the U.S. Department of Justice's first-ever
criminal resolution involving a company that violated sanctions
by facilitating the illicit sale and transport of Iranian oil
aboard the Suez Rajan in September 2023.
This laxness is a policy choice by the U.S. Government. The
last such sanctions enforcement announcement by the Treasury
Department was in March 2023. Such an influx in funding to
Tehran may explain the publicly-reported increases in Iranian
funding to Hamas over the last year.
Second, UANI has compiled a list of foreign vessels it
suspects of involvement in the illicit transfer of Iranian
crude oil and/or petroleum products. UANI's list has grown to
353 vessels. This suspected ghost armada, which is distinct
from but complements Iran's own NITC fleet, has skirted U.S.
sanctions, and exploited regulatory loopholes to ship millions
of barrels of Iranian oil. It is time for the U.S. Government
to fully sanction these vessels, their owners, and their
operators.
Third, the U.S. Government should expand and maintain the
current U.S. counterterrorism sanctions architecture on key
Iranian entities and individuals. Sanctions on Iran's Central
Bank and National Iranian Oil Company under Executive Order
13224 should be maintained, irrespective of any diplomacy with
the Islamic Republic on the nuclear file.
The Biden Administration should also lead an international
campaign to recruit as many countries around the world as
possible to sanction the IRGC as a terrorist organization, just
as the United States did in 2019.
Fourth, the United States needs to fundamentally reassess
its relations with Qatar following the October 7th attack on
Israel. In 2022, the U.S. designated Qatar as a major non-NATO
ally. Qatar has subsidized Hamas' rule in Gaza.
The U.S. Treasury Department also recently sanctioned a
Hamas operative based in Qatar who has transferred tens of
millions of dollars to Hamas, including to its military wing.
He also has connections to the Islamic Republic of Iran, not to
mention Qatar harboring, in five-star accommodations, the Hamas
leader, Ismail Haniyeh, and his predecessor, Khaled Mashal, the
highest religious authority of Hamas, who has blessed terrorist
attacks, and others.
In recent years, Qatar has also hosted the commander of the
IRGC's Navy, a U.S. Specially Designated Global Terrorist, at a
defense expo, as well as Mohsen Rezaei, who was wanted by
Argentina for his role in the bombing in 1994 of a Jewish
community center in Buenos Aires.
Fifth, sanctions alone will not effectively counter the
Islamic Republic. Sanctions need to be paired with a credible
military threat. Iran's regime knows the United States has the
ability to cripple its military, but it doubts Washington has
the will to do so. This is what is shaping the IRGC's current
calculus and drive for escalation against Israel.
This is why UANI is supportive of Congress and the Biden
Administration crafting an Authorization for Use of Military
Force (AUMF) against the Islamic Republic and its proxies and
partners.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brodsky can be found on page
44 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Brodsky.
Mr. Goldberg, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD GOLDBERG, SENIOR ADVISOR, FOUNDATION FOR
DEFENSE OF DEMOCRACIES (FDD)

Mr. Goldberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam Ranking
Member as well. It is an honor to be here, but I wish it was
under better circumstances.
As I reflect on what we have all been through in watching
what has happened in Israel and this incredible massacre that
we watched, this horrific, horrific event, as Jason just said,
the largest massacre of Jews since the Holocaust, we think
about all the assumptions that we have carried with us.
And Madam Ranking Member, let me just say I am not here for
a blame game. I have written extensively on these issues. I
have criticized the Administration. I believe strongly in
certain policies. But what I believe today is, this is a moment
to reset assumptions. And those are not my words. A Democratic
Member of Congress who sat on a panel with me last week at FDD
said it is time to reset our assumptions.
I think that is very true, and this is a moment to restore
bipartisanship on issues that used to be completely bipartisan
and can be again. This is the moment. If this is not going to
be the moment, I don't know what will be.
What are those assumptions? That Hamas, if given the
opportunity, will moderate, will suddenly become a governing
force in Gaza? That if we empower other states to sponsor them,
to enable them, to host them in their countries, they will
become a moderating force? That is behind us. That assumption
is gone. Anybody who believed and subscribed to that for years
with good intentions, that is over.
The Qataris and the Turks need to be held accountable. We
can't sit here today and empower countries to host Hamas
leaders, to give them money, to give them ideological support,
and to use their media, their state media to amplify their
propaganda and disinformation. It has to stop. We have to put
these countries to a choice, and we have the economic tools to
do just that.
When we have assumptions as far as whether Hamas continues
to operate in the United States, to raise money here, we
remember 20-some years ago the cases against the Holy Land
Foundation, the Islamic Association for Palestine. We think
these are things of the past, that if we see Students for
Justice in Palestine, or American-Muslims for Palestine,
organizations that are active throughout the country right
now--we see these pro-Hamas demonstrations and we think there
is nothing behind that.
We have done a lot of research for several years at FDD on
these organizations. We have a lot of new information as well,
things that the Justice Department, the Treasury Department,
and Congress needs to examine. Where is the money coming from?
Where are the connections? Where are people traveling to?
We have had assumptions about Hezbollah, that we can just
ignore Hezbollah in our own back yard in Latin America and the
Western Hemisphere. We have our border patrol telling us
Iranians are showing up at the border. Hezbollah is active in
the tri-border area, making money on a whole range of illicit
activities, including cigarette trafficking.
What are we doing about it? We have laws. This Congress has
passed two laws to crack down on Hezbollah. We need enforcement
of those sanctions, alongside any new sanctions we are going to
put on Hamas.
We have had assumptions coming from some in Washington that
if we open up cash availability to the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the chief terror sponsor of Hamas, which was complicit in
this massacre, that somehow Iran will moderate, that it is okay
to open the valve for money to flow to the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps that trains, equips, supplies, and
funds Hamas and other terrorist organizations to carry out this
massacre, because at least they will slow down that expansion
of the nuclear program. We will buy some time before they go to
90-percent weapons-grade uranium production, all while
encouraging this regime, emboldening this regime, and giving it
the resources to pour more money into terrorism.
No blame games here. Action. Bipartisan action. Lock down
the money. Lock down the $6 billion. Don't forget about the $10
billion that was made available over the summer, transferred
out of Iraq to Oman. We have no information on that money
today. What has happened to that money? We talk about $6
billion, because the hostage deal was exciting in the news.
Talk to me about the $10 billion and more money because
every single month, Iraq continues to make electricity payments
to Iran into those accounts. Lock it down. You can do that if
the Administration won't.
Turn the screws on oil sanctions enforcement. I wrote those
laws as a staffer. They are not permissive unless you issue a
national security waiver. They are mandatory. It says,
``shall,'' not, ``may,'' in the law. You need to turn the
screws as Congress on a bipartisan basis and crack down on the
oil shipments from Tehran to China.
And finally, let me say we have to re-evaluate the way we
deliver aid into Gaza. We believed that if we just wrote checks
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), for years, the United
Nations that doesn't recognize Hamas as a terrorist
organization, that that money would make it to the people, and
not to Hamas. We know that is not true.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goldberg can be found on
page 49 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Goldberg. I appreciate
your passion and your information today. That was good.
Mr. Noronha, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GABRIEL NORONHA, FELLOW, THE GEMUNDER CENTER FOR
DEFENSE AND STRATEGY, THE JEWISH INSTITUTE FOR NATIONAL
SECURITY OF AMERICA (JINSA)

Mr. Noronha. Chairman Luetkemeyer, Ranking Member Beatty,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to testify.
Over the past decade, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
spent more than $20 billion to support foreign terror groups in
the Middle East. It has spent tens of billions more of its own
funds for its own terror operations. And when they chant,
``Death to Israel,'' and they chant, ``Death to America,'' we
know from the last 2 weeks that they are deadly serious. And
given the opportunity, they would not distinguish between
Democrat and Republican when they attack us.
Hamas' heinous terror attack on Israel was only possible
because of increased funding from the Iranian regime.
Historically, Iran has provided $100 million to Hamas. In the
past year, however, that support increased to $350 million. The
maximum pressure campaign forced the regime to cut back those
funds as our sanctions deprived Iran of $200 billion, according
to Iran's president.
Today, Iran is providing 93 percent of Hamas' budget. This
extra funding allowed Hamas to lay low in preparation for its
sneak attack. It is ensuring that Hamas can continue their
attacks against Israel today, and we just learned today that
Iran trained 500 terrorists of Hamas in their bases as recently
as September.
The Iranian regime could only afford this largess because
it has been flooded with cash in the past 30 months: $80
billion, as Jason described, in oil sales since the beginning
of 2021; $10 billion and a questionable payment from Iraq that
we just learned is now being laundered by the Chinese
Government--so there are no restrictions on it once that is
done--and then, the additional $6 billion into Qatari accounts.
There are also unconfirmed reports that Iran has recently
gained $6.7 billion in International Monetary Fund (IMF)
Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) which are under this committee's
jurisdiction.
Supreme Leader Khamenei's philosophy is to use all of the
funds the regime can obtain to advance its foreign policy of
terrorism, leaving the bare minimum necessary to sustain the
needs of a functional state, and ignoring entirely the material
needs of the Iranian people. The United States must not aid
this effort.
Over the past 30 months, Iran's economy has rebounded due
to lax sanctions enforcement and a permissive diplomatic and
economic environment. As a direct result, they have been able
to increase their own military and terror budget by double
digits. The United States can and must reverse this trend.
I have a few recommendations. First, Congress should force
the Executive Branch to enforce their existing oil sanctions
against shipping companies, insurance companies, tankers,
ports, refiners, and all of those conducting trade in Iranian
oil.
Those sanctions need to be mandatory, not discretionary, as
Rich mentioned. And the same applies to the United States'
sectoral sanctions against metals and petrochemical industries.
Their exports have soared in the last 30 months as well,
generating precious revenue for the regimes. And our sanctions
on those sectors have barely been enforced, as well.
The countries most responsible for helping Iran rate
sanctions are China, Hong Kong--which is run by the Chinese
Communist Party (CCP)--and the United Arab Emirates (UAE).
Congress should press the Administration to launch a major
diplomatic and economic pressure campaign against the CCP to
pressure their leadership into cutting imports of Iranian oil
as part of broader negotiations, and we have to let the UAE
know that business as usual with Iran is over.
Second, the United States must claw back the $6 billion
provided to Iran last month. The deal we made with Iran became
irrelevant when they funded the attack that killed more than 30
Americans, and took more than a dozen Americans hostage in
Gaza. I can assure this committee, having worked on Iran's
sanctions of Asia for several years, that if given to Iran,
these funds will not be used to alleviate the suffering of
Iranian people, and I am happy to go into detail.
The regime has a long history of pilfering food and
medicine to resell on the black market in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The proceeds will likely be diverted for terror or stolen by
regime elites.
The Treasury Department's temporary freezing of these funds
is not sufficient. The Iranian regime will inevitably pressure
Qatar and the U.S. to turn that spigot back on. Perhaps they
will take more hostages to do so. So, Congress should rescind
the September 11th waivers and ultimately work to transfer
those funds to the victims of Iran and Hamas' terror.
Congress should work to ensure Iran cannot access the $6.7
billion in IMF funds by codifying restrictions that prohibit
them from converting Special Drawing Rights to currencies they
would like to use. And Congress should ensure that all state
sponsors of terror, including Iran, are excluded from future
allocations of Special Drawing Rights.
The status quo must end. Today's policies are enriching,
enabling, and encouraging the regime to carry out their terror
plots.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Noronha can be found on page
78 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you.
The buzzer a minute ago indicated that we do have votes
that are being called. What we will do is continue on with the
testimony, and see once where we are at that point, and where
we are with the vote.
So, Mr. Zarazinski, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ADAM ZARAZINSKI, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, INCA
DIGITAL

Mr. Zarazinski. Thank you, sir.
Honorable members of this subcommittee, thank you very much
for giving me the opportunity to testify here today. It is an
honor and a privilege.
My name is Adam Zarazinski. I am the CEO of Inca Digital, a
data analytics and all-source intelligence company focused on
cryptocurrency. I am also a Major in the U.S. Air Force Reserve
JAG Corps, and I spent 4 years on active duty.
I don't like bad people who try to do bad things, and I
have, in part, dedicated my career to stopping them. By
utilizing the advantages of blockchains and the crypto
ecosystem, when combined with other open-source intelligence,
Inca Digital helps financial institutions and government
agencies identify and root out those who wish to do harm, both
to consumers and to the United States and its allies.
The overall discussion of crypto and how it is used in
illicit finance is oftentimes chaotic, misconstrued, and taken
out of context. As a result, we have multiple competing
narratives, often at opposite sides of the spectrum. On one end
of the spectrum, many paint broad brushstrokes and argue that
all crypto is related to crime and illicit finance, and
therefore, we should do away with crypto outright or restrict
its use here in the United States as much as possible.
On the other end of that spectrum, I am sure you are often
told by lobbyists from large and well-financed crypto companies
that all crypto transactions are trackable and that there isn't
anything to worry about, and that every new case of theft,
fraud, money laundering, or illicit activity is an aberration
to be ignored.
Hamas, Hezbollah, and Iran do receive donations via
cryptocurrency and do use crypto to move money. I have provided
some examples in my written testimony that show this. But they
also use local money changers, Hawalas, shell companies at
banks, trade-based money laundering, and other methods. And,
therefore, I want to put in context their use of crypto.
I am sure you all saw The Wall Street Journal article that
came out about Hamas utilizing crypto to raise funds, and I
suspect that may be the impetus for me being here today. In
that article, two forensics companies estimated that a portion
of $135 million had been received by Hamas and the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad through crypto since 2020. After that article,
there was a series of debates, new statements, and new findings
from different forensics companies.
For argument's sake, if we use the $135 million as the top-
line estimate, it amounts to about $45 million per year of
approximately $700 million per year Hamas uses, or about 6
percent. And that is the biggest number that the industry has.
The same is true of Hezbollah. The industry's top-line
highest estimate for their use of crypto is about $4 million
per year, with close to $1 billion sent to the organization
directly from Iran, from drug trafficking in South America, and
other criminal activity.
My goal of providing the above context is not to minimize
the role crypto plays in financing these organizations, but we
must do so within a different framework, which is that the use
and abuse of crypto is no different than the use and abuse of
other methods of transferring value.
Organizations like these are like planets with a
gravitational pull for illicit funds, and they will try to drag
money in through whatever vector they can. The key is
interdicting the bad guys across all vectors, and integrating
new data analytics to create intelligence as operational
realities on the ground change.
While the extent of terrorist financing through crypto
might sometimes be amplified, it remains an undeniable concern.
And there are plenty of other national security challenges
where crypto is now part of illicit operations, from North
Korean hackers stealing billions, to China building crypto
infrastructure to avoid U.S. financial rails.
Even with these challenges, the United States Government
does not have the capacity to hammer crypto out of existence.
No amount of sanctions, no amount of stringent policies against
crypto here at home will stop Iranian or Russian crypto OTC
providers from laundering money.
The problem is not primarily on shore in the United States.
The problem is offshore crypto financial services providers
that refuse to play ball with U.S. law enforcement because they
don't have to.
We, of course, can't ignore the problem and expect it to go
away either. You are right to be concerned. Hamas and others
will exploit any weak spot in order to bring in funds, crypto
or otherwise. In order to interdict this sort of activity, what
we must do is continue to develop technology to identify and
stop bad actors in crypto, and to build a strong crypto
ecosystem here in the United States.
Bringing crypto onshore is ultimately the best way to
control these activities, because it will exist offshore
whether we like it or not, and the more of the market we get
here to monitor and regulate safely, the better.
I acknowledge that we are not there yet. So part of the
goal of the work of our lawmakers should be to draft bills in
such a way that it can and does get there, and gets here on
shore in a healthy way that balances privacy and law
enforcement.
In other words, one of the best ways to stymie crypto used
in terrorist financing is to do what we always have, what is
fundamental to America: to allow for an open society with bold
thinkers and entrepreneurs pushing the limits of the system
with technological innovation. Our national security depends on
it. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Zarazinski can be found on
page 94 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you.
I misspoke a minute ago. We do not have votes. They called
us, but they are going to have some debate first. I was
misinformed. It will probably be an hour before votes are
called, so we should be able to go a long way through the
hearing here. And I look forward to your continued testimony
and questions here.
Dr. Levitt, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW LEVITT, FROMER-WEXLER SENIOR FELLOW, THE
WASHINGTON INSTITUTE FOR NEAR EAST POLICY

Mr. Levitt. Thank you, sir. I promise to take less than an
hour.
Chairman Luetkemeyer, Ranking Member Beatty, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, it is an honor and a
privilege to be able to be here to testify before you today.
My name is Matt Levitt, and I used to serve as the Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis at the U.S.
Department of the Treasury and, before that, I worked on these
issues at the FBI.
In the weeks leading up to this horrendous attack, which I
think we have to put into context as one of the worst acts of
international terrorism ever, and one of the worst acts of
international terrorism ever to affect the United States--
before this, I was gearing up for a major study on the
financing of Hamas. So if you will allow me, in my written
testimony, I have gone into great detail about it. I will
highlight a little bit about it here because I think there are
some things we need to understand.
First of all, there are constants, and there are also
things that have changed. The constant is Iran. Iran has
financed Hamas since its inception in 1987, with a continual
regular upgrade in funding. Even when Hamas and Iran broke a
little bit over Hamas' refusal to back the Assad regime,
Iranian funding for the military wing in particular continued
apace.
And without that funding, Hamas could not be the capable
organization it is today. And when we look at this, we need to
not only look at the financing, but we need to look at the
resourcing. I am interested not only in the money they get, but
in the weapons they get and in the training they get, and we
need to take a greater look at that.
But there are also things that have changed over time. In
2007, Hamas took over the Gaza Strip by force of arms, turning
its weapons on fellow Palestinians. The Israelis had already
withdrawn. At that point, it governed territory. And as we saw
with the Islamic State, when a terrorist group governs
territory, it can extort, it can tax, it can run customs, it
can run racketeering, and Hamas has done all of that.
Everybody I have spoken to in this country, in Israel,
agrees that as of right now, Iranian funding for Hamas is the
second-most significant source of funding. The most-significant
source of funding for Hamas right now is its ability to fund in
place.
Therefore, everything else aside, the Israeli effort to
dislodge Hamas from governance in the Gaza Strip and from being
able to use that area as a safe haven and as a cash cow is the
single-most important thing to be able to deny them money.
Now when that happens, it will also remove Hamas' greatest
costs. They will need less money because they won't be paying
salaries and all that, but it will be a significant,
significant strike.
They will also have to deal with Iranian financing of
Hamas, which is the constant, and here I think we need to focus
not only on the amounts of money, which have been constant, by
the way, even constant under maximum pressure. I have yet to
see any evidence that maximum pressure--and maybe it would have
if it went longer--but in the amount of time maximum pressure
was in force, it forced Iran to cut back its support for these
militant groups. According to Trump Administration officials
themselves, it increased. That just shows how nefarious Iran
is.
What we need to also do is not just stop them from having
the money to be able to do this, but look at how they transfer
the funds, and in my written testimony, I get into that in some
detail.
There are certain things that were a big deal once upon a
time, and now they are back again. In particular here, abuse of
charity. Just in the 2 weeks since this attack, the Revival of
Islamic Heritage Society based in Kuwait, and designated by the
United States, has been raising funds for Hamas again. A
father-daughter team in the Netherlands raised 5 million Euro
for Hamas. The Union of Good, designated by the U.S. Treasury,
and created by Hamas, for Hamas to oversee charitable giving,
is in the business again.
I am going to skip my comments on crypto, because Adam did
a great job. I get into it in my written testimony.
But I think that the three different U.S. Treasury actions,
including the one this week on Hamas finance and investment
committees are critical. And I direct you to look at the
details in my written testimony about the extent of the
locations across the Middle East and North Africa where this
happens.
There needs to be robust sanctions diplomacy with these
countries. And where that doesn't work, I think Congress has a
role to play, because it is long overdue for there not to be
secondary sanctions targeting all foreign terrorist
organizations.
As of right now, only with the Hizballah International
Financing Prevention Act (HIFPA), are there secondary sanctions
in regard to Hezbollah. Can somebody explain to me why we don't
have secondary sanctions regarding every other Foreign
Terrorist Organization (FTO)? And if we went to Turkey and
said, Hey, the company that Treasury designated last time, that
this week they show is still working, raising funds for Hamas,
if you don't want to do something about it, just know there
will be secondary sanctions. That will have an effect.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today
and I look forward to your questions. There is a lot more we
have to do on Hamas. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Levitt can be found on page
60 of the appendix.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you, gentlemen. Wow. That was
very powerful testimony from each of you. Thank you very much.
Now, we will begin the question portion of our hearing, and
I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Before I get started with my questions, I have another
question with regards to terror cells here in the United
States. We continue to see an open border where there are all
sorts of terrorists pouring through; the number is staggering
so far this year that they have caught, I think, between 150
and 200 terrorists. And how many got in before we caught them?
That is a concern.
Does anybody have any information with regards to terrorist
cells here?
Yes, sir, Mr. Noronha?
Mr. Noronha. In the first 14 days of this fiscal year,
there were 30 individuals from Iran encountered at the southern
border between border crossings, and 68 from Syria. In terms of
terror cells, there are active assassination plots against
around a dozen Americans today, including my former bosses,
Mike Pompeo, Brian Hook, and John Bolton.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. These are existing terrorist
activities that are assassination plots right now on American
citizens?
Mr. Noronha. Active, active plots on U.S. soil. There have
been close calls. And those close calls have continued even
after warnings from the White House against the Iranian regime.
And there are operatives here in the United States, as well.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Are they financed from Iran, or are
they financed from Hamas and Gaza?
Mr. Noronha. They are primarily financed from Iran. There
are bounties of between $300,000 and $1 million on the heads
of--John Bolton's bounty is $300,000 and Iran's----
Chairman Luetkemeyer. How is the money transferred? I am
assuming they are using U.S. banks to transfer the money here
to allow those cells to exist and to fund them?
Mr. Noronha. Those payments have been made in crypto
currency, according to DOJ filings, deposited into the accounts
of would-be assassins.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. And those accounts are overseas?
Mr. Noronha. They are crypto accounts on the chain, on the
blockchain, as----
Chairman Luetkemeyer. So, they transfer the money for the
assassination plots that these cells hope to carry out in
crypto.
Mr. Noronha. That is correct, sir.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Wow. Okay. We have just scratched the
surface, haven't we?
The first question I have is with regards to UN Council
Resolution 2231 (UNSCR 2231), also referred to as the Iran
Nuclear Deal. A core component of it prohibits transferring
missiles, drones, and adjacent weapons technologies to and from
Iran. That resolution expired one week ago, on October 18th. As
a result, the UN no longer prohibits Iran from activities
related to developing nuclear weapon delivery systems,
including intercontinental ballistic missiles, ICBMs.
Moreover, the UN Security Council is no longer monitoring
Iran's imports and exports for items that could contribute to a
nuclear program. While the U.S. and the E.U. decided to
maintain restrictive measures against Iran, those two countries
represent just a small portion of the 193 countries bound by
UNSCR 2231.
Mr. Goldberg, please describe the gaps that are in place as
a result of the expiration of this agreement, that allow Iran
to buy and sell previously-controlled technologies?
Mr. Goldberg. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is a
really important issue.
This Administration has valid multilateralism as something
paramount in their foreign policy, the value and legitimacy of
a Security Council resolution of working with allies, of not
just having America-first policies in our sanctions, but going
to countries and saying, we have sanctions, we are going to
enforce our sanctions, and they are in line with the Security
Council resolution.
One would think that if you had the ability to keep a
Security Council resolution restriction on Iran with respect to
the transfer of missiles and drones and conventional arms, that
you would want to keep that in place, because we have see Iran
transferring armed drones to Russia for months, for use against
the Ukrainian people. We see the ability of Russia now to work
with Iran to advance their missile program for use against us,
the United States of America, Mr. Chairman, as you mentioned,
in their long-term ambition of developing ICBMs.
So the question is: Could we have avoided this gap that we
now have? Last Wednesday, when the President was in Israel,
expressing his solidarity with the Israeli people, it was the
same day he was allowing, with our European allies, that
Security Council resolution restriction to expire. It actually
doesn't have to expire; we can bring it back anytime we want.
The U.S., France, and Germany can send a letter; we can write
it in the back right now, Mr. Chairman. ``Dear Mr. President of
the Security Council, we are triggering the snapback of UN
sanctions.''
And in 30 days, it all comes back, and Russia and China
can't do anything about it. The only reason you wouldn't do
that is either: (A) you are keeping the possibility of
continued nuclear negotiation and a nuclear deal on the table;
or (B) you fear Iran's response. And, therefore, you are
actually signaling at this moment of trying to restore
deterrence that we are afraid militarily of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Any time you allow yourself to be
bullied, you are in for trouble. Just mark my words.
Thank you for your testimony.
With that, we will yield 5 minutes to the ranking member of
the subcommittee, Mrs. Beatty from Ohio.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for bringing up the whole question of funding
with crypto and crowdfunding.
And thank you, Mr. Zarazinski, for explaining that. That
took care of my question.
But I think that is something we need to pay a lot of
attention to, that has also been one of the topics in this
committee, as we look at illicit financing and what can happen
with that.
Dr. Levitt, let me go to you. We have talked a lot about
not only the financing, but the training, and we have talked
about the weapons and the guns.
Let's talk about Treasury, since a lot has been said about
what we could do. Can you put it in perspective for us on how
the Treasury is or can be working to disrupt these funding
streams now, or what more can we do?
Mr. Levitt. Thanks for the question. There is a lot that
Treasury can do. There is a lot that others can do, as well. It
is not just a question of Treasury.
I expect that the designation package that we saw this week
is not the end, but the very beginning of a slew of actions
that the U.S. Government, Treasury in particular, are going to
take, targeting various aspects of Hamas funding and transfer,
not all, but many of which will involve Iran.
I think one of the things, in general, that this conflict
reminds us is that if you don't visit the Middle East, it is
going to visit you, and that Great Power competition and
counterterrorism are not mutually exclusive.
As my colleague just mentioned, when Iran is sending drones
to Russia, which, by the way, it was doing even before the
sunset clause just now; the existence of this UN Security
Council resolution wasn't stopping it. That means that there
are obvious areas of overlap between Great Power competition,
regional power competition, and counterterrorism. And we need
to do a better job there.
So, I think you are going see some rejiggering within the
government of full-time employment slots. Many people were
moved, starting in the Trump Administration and continuing in
the Biden Administration, from Counterterrorism to Great Power.
And I understand that, but I think it is pretty clear we are
going to need to figure out the balance.
Mrs. Beatty. Let me go to something else that we discuss on
both sides of the aisle a lot. There has been a lot of
discussion about this fungibility--and that is with a, ``G''--
that are designated for humanitarian purposes.
The theory is that there is no way to reliably prevent the
use of funds designated for food or medicine from being
diverted towards the financing of terrorism. Any thoughts you
may have on that?
Mr. Levitt. Fungibility is a critical issue. So, thank you
very much for the question.
There are two issues here: one is the humanitarian aid; and
then, there are other types of fungibility.
With respect to my colleagues, I think I have an issue, as
I have concerns about the $6 billion in the first place. But
the $6 billion hasn't moved. It is not fungible. Knowing that
it is there, doesn't help you. That is not part of the concept
of fungibility, nor did Iran need that $6 billion to be able to
finance Hamas; this plot was financed long before.
I don't think there is an issue here of fungibility of
funds, that the $6 billion affected this particular attack.
Iran was already responsible for that in other ways.
Humanitarian aid--I think we need to recognize that there
has to be a balance. It can't be zero sum. It can't be that we
are going to stop all money ever going to terrorism, so, we are
going to do nothing in a humanitarian crisis. And it can't be
that there is a humanitarian crisis. So, we are just not going
to do anything to combat terror financing.
There are all kinds of licenses within U.S. law. The U.S.
and Ireland put forth a process that passed at the UN Security
Council so that there is the ability, even in areas of Syria or
Somalia or the Gaza Strip, where there are terrorists in
charge, where you can still provide some aid.
And we are going have to balance that. You don't provide
all aid. You do it carefully. We can't be comfortable that
there is any way to ensure that it won't benefit Hamas at all,
but we have to do something, because otherwise, people are
going to die.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I only have about 40 seconds left, so I am
going to forego my last question.
But I do want to say to all of the witnesses how much we
appreciate your being here. I know this is emotional for many,
it is personal; and it is horrific. Three weeks ago, I was at
the Iron Dome. I was in Israel. And while it is emotional for
me, I am just thinking, what if it would have been 3 weeks
later?
So, again, thank you for all of your comments, and your
work. We are taking it very seriously, and part of this
committee is for us to figure out bipartisan pathways because
we are talking about human lives. It is more than a President,
and you are very right. It is up to us to listen and bring
forward something.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Nunn. [presiding]. Well said, Ranking Member Beatty,
and we appreciate your service both in country and here.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses for being here today.
Mr. Goldberg, in your testimony you mentioned several
foreign actors that are supporting Hamas, Hezbollah, and other
terrorist organizations. You noted that Hezbollah has been a
longtime ally to the Mexican drug cartel, which further
highlights our country's need to secure the southern border.
And I happen to be from Texas. There are serious issues that
impact our national security, and it is clear that America's
enemies are forming alliances to further their common goal of
waging war against the West.
So, Mr. Goldberg, we have seen disturbing evidence that
organizations like Hamas and Hezbollah are taking advantage of
our wide-open southern border to infiltrate terrorists into the
United States. We all know that is happening.
Could you speak about that, and how specifically we can use
this committee's tools to track and stop these bad actors?
Mr. Goldberg. Thank you, Congressman. That is an excellent
question to raise, as my colleague, Mr. Noronha, was just
discussing the recent statistics in just this fiscal year from
the border of the foreign nationals who are showing up, and as
the chairman, before he departed, had referenced the known-
unknowns and who is in that population, as well.
A country that does not control its border does not have
its national security under control. I think we should all be
able to agree on that. Now maybe, we have differences on
immigration policy and all that, and I don't want to go there.
But I will say that having control of our border and ensuring
that the known foreign terrorist organizations and their
sponsors who are active south of our border with known
partnerships and connections to the Mexican cartels to move
things into the United States, including people, need to be
dealt with in a very serious and sober way.
There has to be a bipartisan way forward to look at the
networks that Iran has set up, and that Hezbollah has set up in
South America, and understand what that threat means to the
United States, and how we are going to interdict it.
I personally think it is impossible to get full control of
this if you don't have full control of the border. But there
are other tools--economic tools, diplomatic tools--that are
going to need to be exercised with countries in South America,
in the Western Hemisphere, and with the Mexican Government, as
well, to get very serious about this.
Increase our intelligence collection. Increase our
financial sanctions picture. Really put pressure on some of
these governments to crack down. Make arrests. Interdict. I
think this is going to be critical.
I know Mr. Levitt has also spent a lot of time looking at
this, as has my colleague at FDD, Emanuele Ottolenghi. I think
Americans are missing the big picture. It is not over there. It
is here. It is in our back yard, sir.
Mr. Williams of Texas. I think Americans get it. I think it
is the Biden Administration that does not.
Thank you for that.
Iran has been continuously evading sanctions for years by
using underground financial networks and smokescreens. The
Trump Administration's maximum pressure campaign dramatically
reduced Iran's foreign exchange earnings, but now sanctions are
clearly not having the intended effect due to the lack of
enforcement in lenient waivers by the Biden Administration.
Currently, the most significant ways this Administration
enables these bad actors to financially profit is by turning a
blind eye to illicit oil sales, authorizing waivers for $10
billion in electricity sales to Iraq, and releasing $6 billion
of assets to Iran. Clearly, the Biden Administration's policies
are allowing the Iranians to evade current sanctions and
increase their ability to bankroll terrorist organizations. It
is a bad situation.
So, Mr. Noronha, how is the Iranian regime exploiting the
gaps that exist within the current sanctions that have been
placed against them? And which types of sanctions have proven
to be the most effective against Iran over the years?
Mr. Noronha. Thank you, sir.
Under the multilateral sanctions in 2011 to 2014, we got
Iran's oil exports down to about 1.1 million barrels of oil per
day. Under the unilateral U.S. sanctions, we were able to get
them down closer to 300,000 barrels per day, at times. It
wasn't always perfect; it fluctuated.
But we can do more. What they are looking for is for us to
ignore shipments to China. They are looking for the tankers,
the insurance companies, all the ports that service those
boats. They all want to be able to do that without penalties,
and so far, they have gotten away with that.
With that, again, Iran's foreign exchange reserves have
gone from $4 billion at the end of 2020, to as much as $49
billion today. That has saved their economy from this crisis
they were facing. They weren't able to conduct basic trade in
many goods because of it.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you.
I have a limited amount of time left, so I yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Williams.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the Full
Committee, the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I am very curious to know what was happening with Saudi
Arabia, and Israel led by Mr. Netanyahu, in an effort to start
some kind of peace initiative in the Middle East. Are you
familiar with that?
If so, would someone, whomever has some information on
that, share it with us? Was that real, and were other countries
involved? Was Jordan involved with that? Who all was involved
in this effort that supposedly was to be about bringing about
peace?
Mr. Noronha. If I may, and I will then turn it over to my
colleagues, Israel and Saudi Arabia have been in talks for the
last year-and-a-half to 2 years over a normalization agreement.
That deal was nearing completion. There were problems with it,
but they were getting to the final end.
I think Hamas and Iran understood that, and what they were
trying to do was weaponize the deaths, and images of death of
Gazans, to make it harder politically for Saudi Arabia to make
that peace deal. And that is what they are hoping that these
attacks and this ongoing war will accomplish.
Mr. Levitt. Yes, there is no question in my mind that while
the attacks of October 7th were planned at least a couple of
years ago, the precipitant event was absolutely a desire by
Hamas, by Hezbollah, and by Iran to undermine Israeli-Saudi
normalization.
If you are Iran, then you know that other countries getting
together to share defense to be able to stop you and your
proxies from attacking them, whether it is drones or rockets or
all of the stuff that Iran's proxies do against Israel, that is
not in your interest.
And if you are Hamas, the fact that the Saudis were going
to ask something of the Netanyahu administration vis-a-vis the
Palestinians wasn't good news. It was bad news, because Hamas
isn't fighting because of occupation. Hamas isn't fighting
because of a lack of a two-state solution. Hamas opposes a two-
state solution. And, therefore, it saw that it would be the
Palestinian entity on the outs. The extremist would be on the
outs. So, I think the reason this happened now is all about
that.
I will give you a little silver lining. I do believe that
when the dust ultimately settles--and it will take some time--
if you are sitting in Riyadh or Abu Dhabi or Jerusalem, at the
end of the day, you look at these events and you see that the
runt of the litter of Iran's proxies, little Hamas, was able to
do this and bring the entire region to the precipice, and
hopefully just the precipice of regional war, and your
conclusion has to be, no, we really do have to normalize and
get together.
At the end of the day, the message has to be clear to all
parties that the moderates need to partner together because
this what is Iran is about. This is Hamas. October 7th is
Hamas.
Ms. Waters. Let me ask you, because I have not had the
opportunity yet to read information about cryptocurrency and
how it could be utilized by Hamas in terms of gathering
resources that they need to continue with the war materials, et
cetera, would that connection be Iran? Is the crypto connection
with Hamas?
Mr. Levitt. Hamas doesn't need Iran for a crypto
connection. The nature of crypto is that it is decentralized
and they can access it themselves.
I think I would like to defer to Adam on the nature of this
because that is his business.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
Mr. Zarazinski. Thank you, ma'am.
I think Dr. Levitt is right. What we see is Hamas utilizing
cryptocurrency to fundraise. That does happen, and that happens
external from Iran. You will see in my written testimony that
they will put up a website, and some websites are not hosted in
Russia. And they solicit for crypto donations. We can track
that, and we can watch as funds flow into their wallet
addresses.
That is the primary connection, but it is not the only one.
They are utilizing cryptocurrency to move funds back and forth,
but the primary method through which Hamas and Hezbollah
utilize cryptocurrency is fundraising campaigns.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
I don't have much time left.
I was of the impression that Lebanon was practically
destroyed, but then I keep hearing about Hezbollah, that it is
headquartered there with all these missiles. How could that be?
If Lebanon doesn't work very well, how could Hezbollah be doing
so well there?
Mr. Levitt. Hezbollah has the best of both worlds. It is
part of the government and also apart from the government. And
it is making decisions of life and death and war and peace
without asking the government or the people about it. That is
the problem with Hezbollah.
And right now, it is bringing Lebanon to the precipice of
real destruction, if, God forbid, there is serious war beyond
the escalation we have already seen along the Lebanese-Israeli
border.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
I yield back, and thank you for the extra time.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Ranking Member Waters.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate
all of our witnesses for being here today.
As everyone here knows, sanctions are among the most
powerful tools we have in our foreign policy toolbox. And when
we use those correctly, we can undermine our enemies' ability
to fight us conventionally. That said, they only work if U.S.
payment channels and financial institutions are prolific
globally.
Mr. Brodsky, I want to ask first about the effectiveness of
secondary sanctions in relation to the $6 billion in oil
revenues that have been discussed in the news lately. In our
conversation prior to this hearing, and in your testimony, you
mentioned the need to levy sanctions on Qatar. If we were to
tighten those sanctions, would that undermine the willingness
of the Qataris to cooperate in a freeze on that $6 billion in
oil revenue?
Mr. Brodsky. Thank you, Congressman, for that question.
I think that we have to separate out the $6 billion. Right
now, the U.S. has oversight on how that is being spent in
Qatar. The issue is the fungibility question, and $6 billion
that is allocated for humanitarian purchases frees up $6
billion more in the Iranian budget to enable it to use for
nefarious purposes around the world.
Now, we are not advocating for sanctions on Qatar right
now. We are demanding that they first turn over Hamas
leadership--Ismail Haniyeh, Khaled Mashal, and others--to U.S.
custody. And if they don't, that is when consequences have to
happen and, in our view, the sanctions should be levied.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you for that.
What about future economic operations targeting Iran
through Qatar? Could sanctions on Qatar discourage future
cooperation with U.S. sanctions?
Mr. Brodsky. I think that it would fire a warning shot to
Qatar, because Qatar has a choice. It could choose the United
States, or it could choose the Islamic Republic of Iran. For
most of us, that is no choice at all. It is the United States.
So, I do think that it is time to give them that choice and
make them choose.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. We are going to call their bluff.
In your opinion, what can Congress do to ensure U.S.
sanctions on Iran remain credible and don't discourage our
current partners from engaging with the United States?
Mr. Brodsky. I think that, first of all, we have to enforce
our sanctions consistently. As I mentioned in my testimony,
this has been an ongoing issue. It is a feature, not a bug, of
current U.S. policy, and that is because, as a part of the
informal diplomatic understandings, as publicly reported, that
the Biden Administration had reached with the Islamic Republic
to de-escalate, the U.S. would turn a blind eye to a lot of
these illicit purchases of Iranian oil, especially from China.
What is happening now is that the Islamic Republic has
violated those understandings. One of the elements of those
understandings was that its militias would refrain from
targeting U.S. forces in Iraq and Syria. We have seen at least
13 attacks over the last few days, which is a clear violation
of some of the terms, as publicly reported, so that is why we
need to crack down on that.
Mr. Loudermilk. What I understand is that there is a side
deal, per se, that was made with Iran that never came through
Congress, and even though that side deal was done, the
Administration is looking away from the violations of what I
would call an illegal side deal.
Mr. Brodsky. Yes. It just happened. Those violations just
happened in recent days, but that should have already triggered
the U.S. to start enforcing sanctions.
But, yes, I think that they are looking the other way, and
there needs to be a fundamental rethink and reset of our Iran
policy, and that is what is needed at the moment.
Mr. Loudermilk. So, sanctions only work when they are
actually enforced.
Mr. Brodsky. Right. And I would just add there is a
difference between quantity of sanctions and quality of
sanctions. With quantity of sanctions, you could levy 400
sanctions on individuals who have no assets or don't travel to
the United States, but that does not impact the Islamic
Republic's decision-making calculus. What does impact the
Islamic Republic's decision-making calculus is enforcement of
the oil sanctions and the energy product sanctions.
Mr. Loudermilk. Mr. Brodsky, I appreciate your testimony
here.
I am quickly running out of time, so I really don't have
time to get into these other questions. I will submit them in
writing for the record.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Loudermilk. Those will be
submitted for the record.
The gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms. Pettersen, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being with us today. And I know that we
have talked extensively about some of the questions that I had.
We all know that we are on the precipice of an extended war
and humanitarian crisis in the Middle East, and the committee's
focus today on Iran and their illicit financing of terrorism is
incredibly important. Iran is Hamas' most significant funder,
providing Hamas upwards of $100 million a year. And while we
still don't know if Iran directly coordinated with Hamas on the
recent attacks, it is clear that they are complicit with these
actions.
And in September of this year, as we have discussed at
length, the Biden Administration negotiated an agreement with
Iran for the release of $6 billion in Iranian funds in exchange
for the release of 5 American citizens. And something that I am
going to touch on is when we look back since 2015, the United
States has negotiated with Iran and walked back numerous deals.
Dr. Levitt, what do you think are the long-term
implications with our relationship with Iran if we walk back
this deal, what would the relationship look like in the future,
and what hings should we contemplate if we move in this way?
Mr. Levitt. Thank you for the question.
There can be no question that Iran is a terribly malign
actor. I think, though, that it is long past time to move past
the siloed approach that looks only at the nuclear file.
Recent events show that Iran, through proxies that are
extremely inexpensive for Iran in terms of its overall budget,
can do a tremendous amount of damage, not only to the region,
and not only to our allies, but to us in terms of targeting our
interests as well.
We need to balance what sanctions we want to consider
revitalizing. We also need to balance the nuclear program. So
while we move out of this silo focus, we need to recognize Iran
is closer today to being able to have a nuclear capability than
it was under the JCPOA, and I don't say that as a partisan
statement.
So, this is a complicated matter. It is not one to be
decided in the emotion of the moment.
I also think that it is not the case that the only way to
deal with things like the sunset clause is to snap back. I
don't have any faith in the United Nations tracking these
things. We were never using the United Nations to track these
things. It was U.S. intelligence and British intelligence and
others, and that is absolutely still happening. In fact, our
European allies, most of them, are saying they are not going to
respect the end of this sunset, and they are not going to allow
this.
So, I think we need to take a holistic view at all of our
authorities. And while I appreciate the comments, as a former
Treasury official, about how effective sanctions are, I am
going to be the skunk in the room and say that sanctions are
not going to solve your problem, never alone, they have to be
part of a larger toolkit.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you. I would love to talk about that
larger toolkit. But also, when you acknowledge that sanctions
are not the only answer, and they have to be used
strategically, and I think something that I am concerned about
is if we overuse them, that we push the move away from the U.S.
dollar and the implications there for our economy.
And when we look at the roles that Qatar and Turkey are
playing in financing terrorist groups like Hamas, what do you
think the long-term consequence is of looking at sanctions,
because we know that they are supposed to be our allies? They
hold key military bases for the United States.
So, how can we think about approaching Qatar and Turkey
around these issues as well?
Mr. Levitt. First, I think there is a lot to be discussed
on concerns about the overuse of sanctions, but we shouldn't be
too concerned about that.
There were sanctions on people related to the international
criminal court that I thought were ridiculous and severely
undermined the credibility of our sanctions regimes, not just
that particular set of authorities. But these sanctions are
here to stay. If we decide that every problem is a nail and
every solution is a hammer, if every problem has a sanctions
answer, not only are we not going to be effective, we could
undermine the ability of sanctions.
But I don't accept the argument that if we consider
sanctioning Hamas or Iran, we are automatically moving towards
the devaluation of the dollar.
Qatar is an extremely complicated situation. The fact that
Hamas leaders--leave aside the luxury they are living in--lived
there while Hamas carried out this attack that targeted so many
Americans is beyond the pale, and every one of them should be
indicted, period, for starters.
We also need to recognize that Al Udeid Air Base is there.
That is not something we can easily replicate elsewhere, so it
is not going to be as easy as just saying, hey, we should just
take Qatar to the wall. There is going to be a process here,
especially in the moment while they are helping to negotiate
some hostage releases.
I don't forgive them for what they have done in the past in
terms of housing Hamas, but in the moment, we have to let that
play out.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you very much.
Mr. Nunn. The time has expired. The gentlewoman from
Colorado yields back the remainder of her time.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate you all being here with us. Your comments and
statements have been pretty interesting, and pretty alarming,
but not surprising. And sort of the sad fact is that we know
how to correct this. There is a solution here. You are nodding
your heads. It is a pretty simple solution here.
Iran funds terrorism, Hamas, Hezbollah. The list goes on,
and here we are. We have an Administration that is busy doing
JCPOA, trying to keep them from expanding their nuclear weapons
against every other country, including Israel and the United
States.
I have been to the atomic energy agency. They told us how
previously, there were about 9 or 10 or 11 violations of
uranium being moved and everything else taking place with Iran.
Iran is not to be trusted. They fund terrorism.
It must be very frustrating, as you are specialists in
this, that the solutions are pretty much right in front of us,
and yet we are dancing around them. We have a Biden
Administration that has this inexplicable affinity, an
affection for this regime. It is absolutely maddening.
What is your estimate of how many weapons--I will start
with you, Mr. Goldberg--Hamas has been provided, whether
through funding, through payment, or through actual weapons to
Hamas from Iran, that wonderful country, Iran?
Mr. Goldberg. As much as $100 million a year can buy, when
you look at weapons, underwriting, and training.
Mr. Meuser. Was it higher recently because they were
getting prepared for war, the terrorist attack on Israel where
they mutilated 1,400 to 1,500 Israelis, took Americans hostage,
and killed Americans?
Mr. Goldberg. We know that since 2021, sir, the IRGC has
been coordinating an intelligence war room in Beirut where they
sit with Hamas, Hezbollah, and the Islamic Jihad, and share
intelligence, train, coordinate, et cetera. The Wall Street
Journal has extensive reporting, including just a few hours
ago, on the role Iran has played.
This is extensive. The idea that we are going to try to
separate Iran from this massacre is outrageous.
Mr. Meuser. With a Department of Defense and a State
Department that say, no, we don't see any direct connection,
and the White House. And yet, the head of Hamas was in Tehran
10 days before the invasion. What were they talking about? The
weather? What do you all think?
Mr. Goldberg. Do you know what I would like to know? I
would like to know why 24 hours after Tony Blinken was in Doha,
the Iranian foreign minister was allowed to show up and meet
with Hamas' leader who lives there, and why we do nothing about
it with the Qataris. Why, when we have all of this, do we have
to balance our act with the Qataris because it is complicated?
It is not complicated.
Mr. Meuser. Exactly.
Mr. Goldberg. It is not complicated.
Mr. Meuser. The so-called fungibility or nonfungibility--
give me a break. It is a ridiculous argument not to think that
$6 billion, that the president of Iran, by the way, stated, We
are going to use the money any way we want, but let's not
believe him. Of course, it is fungible. You don't need that
word.
He can use other funds for military that he would normally
use to maybe feed his people who are starving and were starving
more under the Trump Administration. And their economy was
plummeting because of the oil sanctions. I want to ask about
that, too.
Mr. Goldberg. One hundred percent, sir.
You know what, when people try to make apologies and say,
oh, this $6 billion would never help them, stop talking about
the $6 billion. This has been going on since January 20, 2021,
when we moved from maximum pressure to maximum deference,
starting to not enforce our soil sanctions.
You see the surge in the exports starting there. And over
this summer when we cut the secret nuclear deal, over $50
billion in this package, that's a lot of money.
Here is a basic question to ask everyone: Are we better off
in our national security with the largest state sponsor of
terrorism having more money or less money? Basic question. Or
do we have to balance it with their nuclear--why do we have to
balance? What do we have to balance? Because they might go
nuclear or we might be forced to actually have a credible
military threat?
Well, I will tell you what. If the President of the United
States right now is going around the world saying, I am going
to deter Iran, don't you do it, I'm going to move another
carrier strike group in, who in Tehran believes he is willing
to do that? He is afraid to snap back a UN sanctions
resolution.
Mr. Meuser. Saudi Arabia, Israel, all the countries are not
in favor of our ridiculous appeasement policy with Iran.
I am out of time. Thank you all very much. Keep up the good
work.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Meuser. That was a good line of
questioning there.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Foster, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Beatty.
First, just a quick comment about the JCPOA. I am a
physicist, and I have spent I don't know how many hours getting
classified briefings on the breakout time for Iran under that
deal, and it was my opinion, as a physicist who understands
this technology, that it was an incredible blunder by the
previous Administration to tear up the JCPOA, which resulted in
a lack of inspectors and equipment looking at the real-time
performance of the Iranian nuclear facilities. And it was going
to go down in history as one of the biggest counterproductive
blunders ever.
But Mr. Levitt, can you talk a little bit more about the
entire toolkit? It seems to me that one of the real points of
leverage that we have with Iran is that young people,
especially, kind of hate the autocratic theocracy that is
running the place. And there is a danger that if we provide the
wrong kinds of sanctions, the wrong kinds of financial
pressure, it simply gives the government an excuse for why
things are going so badly.
So, how do we look at that? And more generally, what is the
entire toolkit and the pros and cons of using different parts
of it?
Mr. Levitt. First of all, thank you for the question.
I do think that the majority of Iranians aren't buying what
the theocratic regime in Iran is selling, but it is a
totalitarian regime, and we see how they react violently
against their own, whether it is head scarves or anything else.
I don't think that sanctions can make Iranians suddenly
like the regime. Even when the sanctions make life difficult, I
think people understand, especially the type of sanctions that
we typically employ, that this is targeting a regime and it is
trying to prevent the regime from doing the types of things it
wants to do.
But you are absolutely right; it can't be all sanctions,
all the time. The goal can't be only to maximize sanctions and
then the only metrics be how much sanction has there been and
how much has the economy shrunk. The goal is not shrinking the
economy. The goal is affecting the nuclear program. The goal is
affecting their ability to finance militants.
Those are the metrics we have to look at. How effective is
the economic pain in changing those policies? We need to have a
credible military threat. I do believe that when we put two
aircraft carriers in the region and we say to Hezbollah, in
particular, I think they hear that.
But I understand here and even partially agree with the
argument that over the past several Administrations, things
have happened or not happened, and our allies maybe aren't
always 100 percent sure of how we are going to act. There is
utility in that, too.
I think there is a lot more diplomacy and sanctions
diplomacy that can be done. I think the best type of sanction
is the one you actually, at the end of the day, don't have to
implement, but I think there are other things we can do.
The number of children of senior Iranians--the worst of the
worst--who travel the world, go to school in this country, and
go shopping in Paris is really astounding. And I think that the
State Department and visa sanction authorities could be
employed and should be employed. Global Magnitsky Act authority
should be employed.
Because if I am a senior Iranian involved in bad behavior,
and my wife and children are complaining to me that they can't
go shopping in Paris or go to school in America, that will
likely affect me more than, as you heard earlier, a sanction
against somebody who doesn't come to this country or have
assets in this country.
Mr. Foster. Thank you.
Some of our witnesses seem to think it is simple with
Qatar, and we should just go ahead and threaten them with
sanctions. If I recall properly, I think Qatar is very involved
in the hostage negotiations, in trying to broker a release. Is
this a simple situation, or is it complicated?
Mr. Levitt. Yes and no. It is both simple in that Qatar is
on the wrong side of some things here, and simple that so long
as Qatar can and is playing any kind of role to get any of the
hostages out, we should let that play out.
We have seen this in Israeli domestic politics today where
one senior Israeli official tweeted out, ``We are grateful for
Qatar diplomacy.'' And another senior Israel official blasted
him for it.
I think that once the crisis, please, God, settles, and I
don't pretend that is going to happen quickly, then we will be
able to sit back and say, okay, how do we reassess our
relationship with Qatar? And I think some of that is going to
have to happen.
The idea of allowing the heads of terrorist organizations
that carry out these types of actions, that victimize so many
Americans and so many others is just mind-boggling, and that
can't be allowed to stand.
Mr. Foster. Thank you.
I am out of time, and I yield back.
Mrs. Kim. [presiding]. The gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Nunn,
is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you to this panel for being here to talk about
the Iranian regime and their specific support of terrorism.
As a former counterintelligence officer for nearly 2
decades, I personally witnessed the hostile acts coming out of
Tehran, specifically targeting its partners in the region, and
most recently, those innocent individuals in Israel.
So, let me be very clear at the start of this. With the
Ayatollah terrorist group within the IRGC, and the vile members
of Hamas, the United States is never going to falter in our
support for Israel or the protection of the homeland. Unless
you make an informed decision to stand down, I can guarantee
that members of this committee, both Republican and Democrat,
are prepared to assert a maximum pressure campaign of our own.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here. And as an
Air Force guy, we are going to go A-10 style and really rapid-
fire these questions. I will begin here with Mr. Noronha.
Working with the Chair of the subcommittee, we have written a
bill I am proud to lead, the Revoke Iranian Funding Act. This
works with members on both sides of the committee to be able to
address an effort led also by Senator Tim Scott on the Senate
Banking Committee to permanently freeze the $6 billion in
Iranian assets. It enhances the transparency to bolster global
security interest, and it restricts access to other means of
terrorist financing.
So, Mr. Noronha, let's be very clear here: Is Iran selling
medicine and other humanitarian aid for terrorist financing?
Mr. Noronha. Yes, it is.
Mr. Nunn. Is Iran falsifying official documents to obtain
terrorist financing?
Mr. Noronha. Yes, it has.
Mr. Nunn. Has the Turkey cooperation facilitated the
fraudulent documents to empower Iran proxy forces through
financing?
Mr. Noronha. Yes, it has, and there is U.S. Government
documentation of it.
Mr. Nunn. Is Iran the key provider of weapons and munitions
to Hamas today?
Mr. Noronha. Yes, it is, sir.
Mr. Nunn. Is the IRGC, the Iranian Revolutionary Guards
Corps responsible for training and equipping Hezbollah?
Mr. Noronha. Without a doubt.
Mr. Nunn. In the last week alone, Iran is responsible for
enabling 14 attacks on U.S. forces in the Middle East. Is there
any reason to believe that Iran has not been direct in both
training and equipping these attacks?
Mr. Noronha. They are 100-percent responsible, sir.
Mr. Nunn. Then, you would agree that it would be
insufficient to simply do what the Administration now is doing
as pausing the distribution of funds, but that Congress should
enact legislation to permanently freeze Iran's access to any of
the $6 billion that could go forward if left unchallenged?
Mr. Noronha. I believe it is vital that the Congress work
to freeze those funds. I believe your bill and the bill with
Senator Scott would absolutely be necessary for that. And thank
you for your leadership on it.
Mr. Nunn. I appreciate you saying that.
I am now going to turn to Mr. Goldberg. Does the U.S. have
a sanctions enforcement problem with Iran?
Mr. Goldberg. We have a sanctions non-enforcement problem
with Iran.
Mr. Nunn. In fact, I think you said it very clearly. We
have gone from maximized pressure to maximized deference. So, I
want to be very clear here. The Biden Administration, including
our friends at the State Department, have obviously turned a
blind eye to many of the sanctions violations.
I would like to look beyond. If the State Department is not
going to do their job, what ways can Congress incentivize our
partners or legal institutions to report our Iranian sanctions
violations to hold these bad actors accountable?
Mr. Goldberg. Yes, Congressman. Thank you for the question.
I think there is legislation on this, and you can expand on
it. At this point, the Administration is violating the law
intentionally and knowingly. You should subpoena documents, if
possible. Oversight should work with you on that as well, and
any communications with the Chinese to give them direction to
continue to import at such levels.
You cannot go a million barrels per day increase like this
without it being an intentional, willful policy. So, anything
you can do to force the Administration to show you the targets
that they are sitting on at the Treasury Department, which must
be pretty tall at this point from non-enforcement, and all of
their communications with any other parties involved, including
the Chinese, would be very important.
Mr. Nunn. Let's talk about the real money maker in the
room. Mr. Brodsky, let's talk specifically about illicit
Iranian oil sales. Is this the most lucrative source for Iran's
current funding source to terrorists?
Mr. Brodsky. Yes. It has been $80 billion since 2021.
Mr. Nunn. You talk about a ghost armada or the use of
illicit ships to transport oil and other petro chemicals. How
would we best combat that?
Mr. Brodsky. We need to start sanctioning the vessels in
that 353 group of vessels that are part of the ghost armada.
These vessels can now use ports because they are not
sanctioned, and that is a very big problem.
Mr. Nunn. Who is the biggest provider of Iranian oil to
other countries? Under what flag do they fly?
Mr. Brodsky. Panama.
Mr. Nunn. How many of these ghost ships are directly
charted to Panama? Do we know?
Mr. Brodsky. Panama, actually, in the ghost armada itself,
has flagged 47 percent of that ghost armada.
Mr. Nunn. Going after their insurance provider is probably
the key way to stop that. Is that correct?
Mr. Brodsky. Absolutely.
Mr. Nunn. Very quickly, I want to follow up with Mr.
Zarazinski.
The cryptocurrency that we have talked about today, the
more that we push it out of the United States, the more illicit
actors will use cryptocurrency in nefarious ways, is that
correct?
Mr. Zarazinski. Yes, sir.
Mr. Nunn. This is why we need to be able to address it in
this committee, to bring it back home and regulate it.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Vargas, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman. And I
ask that you thank the chairman for organizing this hearing. I
appreciate it.
I also want to thank all of the witnesses here today.
It is important for our country to show a united front in
unequivocally condemning the atrocities committed by Hamas. We
need to express our outrage, and I was outraged by Hamas'
murder and massacre of innocent people in Israel. It was an
ugly crime against humanity.
We know Hamas has received funding, weapons, and training
from Iran. We heard that today from our witnesses. We know
Hamas has been a designated foreign terrorist organization for
over 20 years. We know the connections between Iran and Hamas
are extensive, longstanding, and well-documented.
We have seen public reporting stating that beginning in
August, Iranian security officials began assisting in Hamas'
surprise attack on Israel on October 7th. According to The Wall
Street Journal reporting, Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps leaders and Iran's foreign minister participated in
precursory meetings with Hamas and Hezbollah to coordinate
these attacks.
Over time, Iran has grown its network of proxies through
which it funds its foreign terrorism regimes against our allies
and partners. According to the Central Intelligence Agency,
Iran activates these proxies to escalate the threat landscape
in the Middle East,
Notably, last week, Iranian-backed Houthi and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad militants fired missiles at Israel. Thankfully,
our U.S. Navy had been positioned to intercept some of these
missiles before they reached Israeli families. This defensive
measure bolsters the great work that the Biden Administration
has done to hold Iranian-backed terrorists accountable.
Just last week, the Treasury Department sanctioned key
Hamas terrorist group members, operatives, and financial
facilitators in Gaza and the surrounding region. In addition to
military aid and targeted sanctions, I would like to applaud
the Biden Administration for coordinating with Israel to ensure
the timely delivery of humanitarian aid to Gaza.
This is not the time for partisan politics. I agree with
that. We must form a bipartisan front to support Israel's right
to defend itself, provide humanitarian aid to innocent
civilians, and hold those responsible for these reprehensive
attacks accountable.
In that same spirit of bipartisanship, I am proud to join
my good friend from Arkansas, Mr. Hill, in introducing the
Holding Iranian Leaders Accountable Act. This bipartisan bill
requires the President to report on the assets of certain
Iranian Government officials and terrorist leaders.
Additionally, this legislation requires the Secretary of the
Treasury to seek the closure of U.S. and foreign financial
accounts connected with these assets.
Again, I would like to thank my friend, French Hill, and
his staff for participating on this much-needed legislation. I
look forward to the day where there is lasting, sustainable
peace in the Middle East.
I have to say that today I heard a few criticisms of
President Biden. I would like to point out the fact that he, in
fact, went to Israel, stood with Israel, and said that we are
with you. And, in fact, the signs that are up around Israel
thank President Biden for his courage to be there. And I think
we should acknowledge that.
Again, I very much agree that we should stand with our
ally. However, I do think that he made a mistake when it came
to the $6 billion. I do think that is a mistake. I do think
that we should freeze that money. I don't think it should go to
Iran.
We have to be able to criticize our own Administration at
points, and this is a criticism that I would give. I don't
think he did it for a mean reason. I think that people
negotiated the release of hostages, that it was to release the
hostages, obviously, but I think it was a mistake.
I hope that we can work in a bipartisan way to try to
figure this out. I think that it is important.
But, again, I would thank the President for standing with
Israel. I think he has made that very, very clear, not only in
his words but in his actions, putting his own body in place.
And so, I thank him.
I do want to ask one quick question before my time is over,
and that is about Hezbollah. Hezbollah really worries me
because the amount of missiles they have in southern Lebanon--I
have been to Lebanon, I have been to Beirut with my good
friend, Darrell Issa, and that really does concern me.
Could you say a word or two on that, Mr. Levitt?
Mr. Levitt. You are absolutely right. Hamas is highly
incapable compared to Hezbollah. Hezbollah has at least 150,000
to 200,000 rockets of different types, and at least 200 to 300
of them are really very dangerous smart rockets with large
payloads that can go the distance and have guided systems.
They have enough rockets that they can overload even
Israel's four-tier antimissile system, and there are pieces of
critical infrastructure, like desalination plants and
electricity facilities that, if the missiles get through, they
could do significant damage to Israel, aside from the obvious
loss of life.
Hezbollah has been able to build up an army, a state within
a state, and an army next to an army in Lebanon, and we have to
figure out how to change that. We have to change the paradigm,
as you heard earlier. The positions we held on the 6th of
October can't be what we have after the 7th of October.
Mr. Vargas. My time is up thank you.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you very much.
I now would like to recognize myself for a few minutes of
questioning.
First of all, I want to thank you all so much for being
here.
Iran has made it very clear that its goal is to wipe Israel
off the map, and its malign influence campaign in support of
terrorist groups like Hamas and Hezbollah in the Middle East
has made it very, very clear that they are actually
contributing to Iran's goal of wiping out Israel, and for far
too long, we have not taken these threats seriously enough.
And now, Iran is dangerously close to developing an atomic
weapon and is more blatantly supporting attacks on the Israeli
people.
The Administration said that the $6 billion in unfrozen
funds were only intended for nonsanctioned goods such as food
and medicine. We know, of course, that money is fungible, and
Iran has ways to launder the proceeds of unfrozen funds.
So, Mr. Noronha, how can the Iranian regime elude the
monitoring by the Treasury Department to use the unfrozen funds
to finance international terrorist groups like Hamas and
Hezbollah?
Mr. Noronha. Thank you for the question.
One of my greatest concerns is there is no monitoring of
end-use goods and medicines after they are bought and
transmitted into Iran. So, Iran could do two things: they could
use those medicines for the IRGC's military; or they could do
what they did in 2019, when 19 trucks full of medicine were
confiscated at the Iraqi border, headed there to be sold on the
black market. And who knows what would have been done with
those funds?
Mrs. Kim. Do you believe we should be thinking about
narrowing down the executive authority to waive sanctions on
Iran? And, if so, how would you narrow that down?
Mr. Noronha. I do think that Congress should put more
sanctions as being mandatory, reduce--change the licenses and
waiver processes to require the affirmative vote of this
committee and other committees in Congress. Something like arms
sales where if you say we have a really good justification,
there is a deal we need to make, we can sell it to Congress,
that's fine. But it should require the affirmative consent, not
saying you have to go now and pass all these laws to rescind
these waivers. I think that puts power back where it belongs,
in this chamber.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you.
According to a Bloomberg report, the Chinese imports of
sanctioned Iranian oil are running at the highest level in at
least a decade. Other reports say that about 80 percent of
Iranian crude exports go to China. So, it seems these so-called
Chinese teapots, which are small refineries taking Iran's oil
at a discount, are part of the problem.
Let me ask you a question, Mr. Brodsky. In your written
testimony, you state that Iran has generated approximately $80
billion in revenue from oil sales since the Biden
Administration took office in 2021. So in your view, what can
we do to reduce Iranian crude exports going to China?
And, obviously, our goal here is to stop the Iranian regime
from funding international terrorist organizations.
Mr. Brodsky. Yes, that is a very good question. First, as I
mentioned before, given that the Islamic Republic has violated
those informal understandings that it reached with the Biden
Administration by attacking U.S. forces in Iraq and Syria, now
is the time to really enforce our existing sanctions,
especially on the teapot refineries, Chinese banks, and Chinese
entities. We have not been doing that.
I think that if you look at the State Department, they have
been saying that we raised the issue of Chinese oil purchases
from Iran in our diplomatic conversations. Well, diplomatic
conversations are not sanctions enforcement. And this is the
same answer that they have been giving for a couple of years
now. So, I think the time has come for a more aggressive
approach.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you.
Let me come back to you, Mr. Noronha, for one more
question.
Iran has over $6 billion in reserves held in IMF Special
Drawing Rights (SDRs). The SDRs represent unconditional
liquidity. Could you describe some of the risk we face if the
government in Tehran were able to convert these holdings into
high currency?
Mr. Noronha. If Iran got access to $6.7 billion today, it
would not go to the Iranian people. It would go to the regime's
most immediate need, which is advancing its terror plots.
Having access to that currency is gold for them because their
terror proxies don't want Iranian rial, and they don't want
Iraqi dinar. They want dollars and euros, and the fastest way
for them to get that is through these Special Drawing Rights.
That is why I think it is imperative that Congress work
with the Treasury Department to make sure that never happens
and that they don't get the next round of Special Drawing
Rights the next time the IMF gives a round.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. I know my time is up.
The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Gottheimer, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you so much, Madam Chairwoman. I
thank you, and I really appreciate you having this timely
hearing.
On October 7th, on Shabbat, and the 50th anniversary of the
Yom Kippur War, as we all know, Iranian-backed Hamas terrorists
invaded Israel, slaughtered Americans, and 1,400 innocent
Israelis, injured thousands, and pulled men, women, young
children, and grandparents from their homes and took them
hostage. We know how gruesome it was.
In 1979, I was 4-years-old when Iranians took 52 American
diplomats and citizens hostage, and nearly 5 decades later, my
young children have now witnessed the brutal and senseless
hostage-taking and killing of Americans and Israelis, and they
remain hostages, as we know. Americans are hostages, as well as
Israelis.
Dr. Levitt, what else can we be doing as policymakers to
ensure that my grandchildren don't experience something
similar? I know that is a very big question, but in the short
run, what do you think we should be doing from a policy
perspective right now?
Mr. Levitt. I think there are two things. The first is, I
really do think that there is no excuse for not having
secondary sanctions on all Foreign Terrorist Organizations. We
have them on Hezbollah, but we don't have them on others. And
it would give tremendous leverage to sanctions diplomacy when
we go to countries like Turkey that are not doing enough on
already U.S.-designated investment companies of Hamas. And that
is just one example.
But I think more broadly, we really need to move beyond a
siloed approach when it comes to an adversary like Iran that is
doing multiple, really bad things at once.I understand, and I
appreciate the need to focus on the Iranian nuclear file. I was
at Treasury when we came up with the original sanctions
program, but it can't only be that.
What we have seen in the past few weeks is the way Iran, at
fairly little cost, and, unfortunately, zero political cost,
can bring the entire region to the brink of regional war. So,
we have to have a smarter policy.
And then, it is not just Iran. We have to be able to have a
more honest conversation with Qatar, with Turkey, and with
other countries in the region so that they understand that this
isn't acceptable.
When a Hamas terrorist involved in a suicide bombing years
ago in Jerusalem that targeted Israelis and Americans is able
to live freely in Jordan, who is a very close ally, that is a
problem.
Mr. Gottheimer. I agree. Thank you.
Part of standing with Israel, obviously, means ensuring
that we isolate and punish terrorist organizations, as you
point out, like Hamas or Hezbollah, by cutting off their
financial resources, which is critical.
I was very proud to lead the bipartisan Hamas International
Financing Prevention Act with Representative Mast of Florida,
and although it only passed out of the House Foreign Affairs
Committee last week, it imposes sanctions on foreign persons,
agencies, and governments that assist Hamas, the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad, or their affiliates.
And I think we need to do everything possible, as the
President pointed out last week, to make sure that we do
everything to crush terrorist organizations like Hamas, as well
as giving Israel room to do everything they can to get the
hostages out alive, especially American hostages.
I was also proud to help introduce the bipartisan
`Operation Swords of Iron' Iron Dome Supplemental
Appropriations Act with Representatives Tenney, Schneider, and
Miller to resupply Israel's missile defense system, which I am
very concerned about in terms of the supply perspective.
As we know, the Iron Dome saves thousands of lives,
intercepting missiles targeting Israeli towns and cities.
Mr. Goldberg, and Mr. Noronha, I was glad that both
agencies supported the bill. While on top of the missiles, I am
concerned about the expiration of UN Security Counsel sanctions
on Tehran's ballistic missile program, to your point as well. I
am especially concerned about the destabilizing effects that
embolden Iran and the regime's ability to transfer dangerous
weapons around the world.
The Administration announced new sanctions and other
measures designed to prevent Iran from selling or acquiring
parts or technology relating to ballistics, missiles, or
drones, saying that Washington would remain focused on the
issue, despite the expiration of human measures.
Mr. Goldberg, and Mr. Noronha, do you think that the
Administration's new sanctions are adequate? In your view, is
there more the Administration should be doing?
Mr. Goldberg. I would come back to a point that Jason made
earlier, and that is quantity is not quality. You can come up
with a list of targets that are absolutely meaningless,
symbolic sanctions. You can have a list and say, we have done
this to the drone program. We've done this to the missile
program. And it is a press release, and the media does run that
story, and it feels like there are a lot of sanctions going on,
and there is something happening.
And by the way, next door, we are releasing $6 billion or
$10 million in Oman, or we are letting massive amounts of oil
go to China. So, the priority here has to be to lock down the
resources, deny the resources to the regime. Sanctions that
help accomplish that are important. Other policies that help
accomplish that are a priority.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you so much.
I yield back. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you.
The gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, who is also the
Chair of our Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and
Monetary Policy, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
In the last several weeks, we have witnessed the horrors of
this unprovoked savage attack by Hamas terrorists on civilians,
with 1,400 Israeli civilians killed, over 32 Americans among
them, decapitated babies, innocent women, elderly women burned
alive. Hostage incentivized by policy.
My question is, how did this happen? How did we allow this
to happen?
And I will note, Mr. Noronha, your testimony that in the
past year, Iran's oil sales have soared. The regime's financial
support to Hamas has increased by $350 million annually.
And then I noted Mr. Brodsky's testimony that Iran has
generated approximately $80 billion in revenue from oil sales
since the Biden Administration took office in 2021, and the
maximum pressure campaign came off.
Mr. Goldberg, in your testimony, you touch on the fact that
over $20 billion in approved, freed-up funds for Iran has
helped finance this barbarism by Hamas. This includes $6.7
billion in available resources at the IMF, $2.76 billion in
funds being held in escrow in Iraq to pay off debts, and $10
billion of Iraqi debts to Iran made available for non-
sanctioned goods.
We have heard a lot about the $6 billion hostage deal that
actually incentivizes all the hostage-taking we see right now,
but I want to touch on the utility of this stream of funding to
the Iranian Government, especially this $10-billion issue.
Can you talk about, in detail, what is going on there?
Mr. Goldberg. Yes, absolutely. And thank you, Congressman,
for the question.
I would say in the $6 billion hostage deal, with everybody
talking about how valuable it is that Qatar is running a
hostage negotiation, the Qataris brokered that deal. Wake up,
people. You are giving Hamas' sponsor the negotiator role so
they can drag Israel out and delay the invasion. This is
outrageous. Yes, pressure on Qatar would work. Let's try it.
But to answer your question, Congressman, on the $10
billion, it is very concerning. The $6 billion was very flashy.
It was tied to a hostage deal. It made no sense to anybody who
actually follows policy that you would say, let's trade five
guys for five guys, oh, and we will throw in $6 billion.
No, it is tied to a much broader sanctions relief package
that had already started earlier in the year. We saw Brett
McGurk, the Middle East coordinator of the White House, go to
Oman and cut the deal through channels, and the Sultan of Oman
went to Tehran at the end of May. The Iranians clearly accepted
whatever offer was sent.
In early June, we started seeing reports in Haaretz, by one
of the most prominent journalists there from Israel, leaking
out the details of the deal. And then suddenly, we saw $2.76
billion out of an escrow account in Iraq making payments for
various Iranians debts.
Well, I guess the Iranians didn't like that arrangement, it
was going too slow or something. We have no details or
briefings from the Administration to know. And suddenly, in
July, a waiver came up to Capitol Hill, a waiver that a lot of
people haven't seen. Where is that waiver? They have classified
it. We need to find out more about this waiver because it
allowed for the first time, according to the State Department,
Iran to pull money out of its escrow accounts and get paid in
third countries, Oman, maybe other countries; we know about
Oman.
And $10 billion was built up there. There were electricity
payments that Iraq was making to Iran. They are now moved out
of Iraq. How much is left in Iraq? How much is in Oman? How
much has been spent? There are so many questions about the $6
billion, but no, not a penny has been spent?
Does anybody in this chamber know how much has been spent
of the $10 billion? You don't. They haven't told you. Has
anything been borrowed against it? What is going on with that
money?
And by the way, this waiver allows ongoing payments. The
electricity payments keep going. It is not one-time money, like
the $6 billion. What is going on with this money?
Mr. Barr. That is very troubling.
Mr. Brodsky, on the oil revenues, since President Biden
lifted all the sanctions on Iranian oil--by the way, this
should be a bipartisan issue. My friends are obsessed about the
climate, so why is Iranian oil so important to not sanction?
How many of these sales, Mr. Brodsky, are operating under a
waiver?
Mr. Brodsky. Because most of it is from lax sanctions
enforcement; that is what a lot of these sales are operating
under. It is because of the informal understanding, the secret
nuclear deal that the Biden Administration has not explained
before Congress.
Mr. Barr. How does Hamas carry out this brutal attack? How
are they funded to do it? Well, I think we know the answer. The
answer is that the Biden Administration allowed this to happen
by pursuing a policy of weakness and appeasement that allowed
Iran to finance this invasion.
I yield back.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Nickel, is now
recognized--oh, I'm sorry. Hold on.
I have been advised that the votes have been called. So, it
is the intention of this Chair to wait until we have 200
remaining votes, and then, we will recess and return
immediately following that vote.
I now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Nickel, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much.
I would like to thank Chairman Luetkemeyer and Ranking
Member Beatty for holding today's hearing. I am glad we can do
this in a bipartisan way and focus on this issue.
And thanks so much to our witnesses for joining us today.
About 2 weeks ago, Hamas terrorists brutally massacred over
1,400 men, women, and children in Israel. This heinous act
underscores the continuous threat that the Hamas terrorist
organization poses not only to Israel but also to peace and
stability in this entire region. Hamas actions sustained, in
part, by foreign illicit financial networks, have brought
untold suffering to countless innocent victims.
In response, we must safeguard our nation's interest,
support our ally, Israel, in the wake of this tragedy, and
dismantle the financial channels that facilitate terrorism. The
bond between the U.S. and Israel is strong and steadfast. Our
focus now should be both on reaffirming this bond and actively
disrupting the funding sources that embolden groups like Hamas.
Dismantling Hamas is essential, not only for the security
of Israel but also for the well-being of Palestinian civilians.
Hamas tactics, which involve weaponizing densely-populated
civilian areas, show a complete disregard for innocent lives in
Gaza. For the safety and prosperity of both Israeli and
Palestinian civilians, our primary objective must be to
neutralize the threat that Hamas poses.
Mr. Zarazinski, can you dive deeper into the challenge of
tracing funds in the era of digital currencies and
decentralized finance? How significant is the threat? And what
tools or legislation should we consider to counteract these new
financial avenues for terror groups?
Mr. Zarazinski. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question.
Generally speaking, as finance moves online, in particular
with cryptocurrency, we have the availability of the
blockchain. It is an additional tool that we can use to track
the flow of funds on the blockchain, and there are a number of
great companies out there that do specifically that, they watch
the flow of funds move from wallet A to wallet B to wallet C,
and then, they flag those wallets. And sometimes, they can flag
those wallets as a particular entity or a particular
organization, and sometimes they can just say, hey, this looks
to be a wallet that was used illegally somehow, or it was
flagged for X, Y, Z reasons. It actually allows us more data
than we would otherwise have for other avenues of terrorist
financing. That is a positive.
I am not saying that there is a full solution to this
problem, but if you compare the data available for us to track
terrorist financing using cryptocurrency versus using hawala,
for example, we have no idea how much is used in hawala. We
have no idea how much is used for trade-based money laundering,
for example.
Actually, earlier today I googled how much Hamas raised
through trade-based financing, and the only articles that were
there were articles on cryptocurrency. And it just goes to show
that at least we have a number. And there is a debate on what
that number is, but there are a lot of tools available, from
digital tools to the forensics companies that the U.S.
Government currently uses to track that financing, and they are
only getting better.
Mr. Nickel. Given that many of the challenges originate
from unregulated foreign entities, how can the U.S. ensure its
regulations are effectively enforced?
Mr. Zarazinski. I am not going to comment on policy,
ultimately. I am a tech CEO, but here is what I will say: What
we need to do is we need to bring crypto markets back onshore.
It is literally a zero sum game. The more liquidity that is
offshore, that is outside of U.S. jurisdiction, that is a bad
thing. We need to bring that liquidity onshore where we can
regulate it, where we can work with law enforcement, and where
those organizations are responsive to law enforcement.
The more that we bring onshore, the less liquidity bad guys
have to launder money globally.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much.
I am running out of time here, but I will follow up in
writing with my remaining questions.
Mrs. Kim. I now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Casten, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. And I am glad to be sneaking in
under the wire here.
I appreciate you all being here.
Last week, on October 17th, Senator Warren, Senator
Marshall, and I led 102 lawmakers in a bipartisan, bicameral
letter to Treasury raising concerns about some of these reports
that we have mentioned about the use of crypto in financing
Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad. Those reports have
indicated more than $130 million of funding.
I think several of you have mentioned that former Secretary
of State Pompeo, who was never one to understate the threat of
Iran, had estimated in 2020 that Iran provided $100 million.
So, we are talking comparable orders of magnitude of funding
coming in from these channels, and I hope we will provide
comfortable levels of attention.
And this isn't just us talking. Among what was seen in
those reports: Israeli Defense Minister Yoav Gallant said the
use of digital currencies is making the job of stopping
terrorist financing ever more complex; and the executive
director of the Israeli National Cyber Directorate said that in
this period of war, cryptocurrency is a major issue for
financing terror, because there are no other options. And it
has also been reported that Hamas is increasingly turning to
mixers to generate crypto addresses that obscure the value.
With respect to the last comment, as long as we have mixers
and anonymous wallets, the blockchain is just a really bad
accounting system. Let's not overstate what it does, if you can
provide those holes in it.
I am proud that the letter was bipartisan. I am sorry that
we did not get any of my colleagues across the aisle in this
committee to join the letter, but we were pleased to see that
the day after Treasury received that letter, on October 18th,
Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) issued
sanctions on Buy Cash, the digital asset exchange located in
Gaza.
And on October 19th, the Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network (FinCEN) announced a proposed rulemaking to
specifically identify these asset mixers as a class of
transactions of primary money laundering concern, and that rule
would require financial firms to report information about
transactions that involve suspected crypto mixers.
Mr. Noronha, in rolling out that proposal, FinCEN said a
lack of transparency surrounding international mixing activity
is an acute money laundering and national security risk. Do you
agree with that statement?
Mr. Noronha. I do, yes.
Mr. Casten. Good. It makes my job easier here.
Also, in April of this year, the Treasury Department
released a report entitled, ``Illicit Finance Risk Assessment
of Decentralized Finance,'' and recommended that we strengthen
our Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of
Terrorism (AML/CFT) by closing identified gaps in the Bank
Secrecy Act (BSA), which currently can allow existing DeFi
services to fall outside of the scope of the BSA's definition.
Again, Mr. Noronha, would you agree that we need to
identify those gaps if we are going to shut down sources of
terrorist finance?
Mr. Noronha. I do. And if I can elaborate very quickly,
Iran has been on the blacklist of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) since February 2020, because they refused to
ratify the Palermo Convention, the counterterror financing
convention. It is an active decision in the regime to not be in
compliance with any of these things so they can----
Mr. Casten. Yes. No, I appreciate that, and that is
probably more than we can get into here.
I think we still have to do a lot of work to figure out if
$130 million came to Hamas, it is fairly easy to say, well,
let's pay the money to somebody else. We will transfer material
over here. I think we are just at the beginning of tracking
those flows.
But I am glad you agree we need to strengthen the BSA. We
will be introducing a bill that Senator Warren has already
introduced on the Senate side. To do that over here, I am
hoping we will get some bipartisan support this time because I
think, as all of you have mentioned, this is a bipartisan
issue. And our goal is not to cripple the people of Iran; our
goal is to cripple Hamas. And if they are getting funding from
any source, let's go through and hit all of that.
I would also just note that we have had long conversations
about the cryptographic industry and lots of bills, and it is a
tragedy that it took October 7th to have this conversation. But
I would truly hope that we can revisit some of the bills that
we have passed on a partisan basis out of this committee that,
among other things, provided a safe harbor for the crypto
industry.
That it doesn't have to comply with AML rules, that was a
bill led by Mr. Emmer. Mr. Davidson's bill, to prohibit
regulation of all self-hosted wallets, this is a real problem,
and either we agree that we don't want to launder money or we--
I don't know even know what the, ``or,'' is there, but let's at
least take this to put a call in.
Mr. Goldberg. Can I respond?
Mr. Casten. I have 24 seconds.
Mr. Goldberg. I agree with you. I agree with you, and I
would recommend to you--we would love to work with you on this
report that I coauthored earlier in the year, the underside of
the coin, where we identified all of the threats you are
talking about, mixers, coin joiners, privacy coins, and also
ensuring that they use technology to identify hops between
mixers before they cash out.
And if we can actually use secondary sanctions to enforce
what we also try to apply in our own domestic regulatory
market, we could do a lot of good for national security, sir.
Mr. Casten. Yes, please reach out, because I think we can
do much better than we have on this topic.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you.
The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, who is also the
Chair of our Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, is
now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And I think now
this really is getting under the wire, so I am going to go
quickly.
Mr. Noronha, you are familiar with the $10 billion Iraq
paid to Iran in exchange for electricity. Correct?
Mr. Noronha. Yes, sir.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay.
Madam Chairwoman, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
enter into the record this unclassified report from the State
Department, produced to this committee, entitled, ``Report to
Congress on Renewal of Iraq Sanctions Waiver for Electricity
Payments'' and its associated waiver determination.
I am assuming that would be okay, Madam Chairwoman?
Mrs. Kim. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Noronha, are you familiar with the waiver
determinations and reports to Congress like this one that I
just mentioned?
Mr. Noronha. Yes, sir. I used to draft them from the State
Department myself.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Can you explain how a waiver
authorizing a funds transfer is different from other 120-day
sanction waivers and why it is required?
Mr. Noronha. Under existing law passed by Congress in 2012,
the Administration is able to allow a country, say, Iraq, to do
bilateral trade with a country like Iran, but they are not
allowed to set up an account in a foreign country or allow
other countries to convert those funds unless those countries
are also given a waiver, but they would have to meet certain
qualifications in order to do so.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. And that was the 2012 National Defense
Authorization Act (NDAA)?
Mr. Noronha. Yes, sir. Section 1245.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay.
The report states at the end that, ``The Secretary also
certifies that France, Germany, and Oman faced exceptional
circumstances preventing them from significantly reducing
purchases of petroleum and petroleum products from Iran.''
Have you seen similar language in waivers citing the
national security exception?
Mr. Noronha. That language to me, sir, seems at odds with
reality. France, Germany, and Oman do not purchase Iranian oil
products or petroleum products. I have never seen language
drafted like that, and that seems to me to be trying to
circumvent something.
It has been done like that with a country like South Korea,
which was attempting to reduce its imports of Iranian oil over
a period of a year and was finding it difficult to do so. But
France, Germany, and Oman are not in that category.
Mr. Huizenga. The one that stood out to me was Oman.
Mr. Noronha. They have their own oil.
Mr. Huizenga. Exactly. That seemed rather confusing to me.
Okay. So if they are choosing to use this unusual language,
why would they insert that? Why would they put that into this
paragraph, into this document?
Mr. Noronha. The Iranians don't want Iraqi rial. They want
euros, because Hamas and Hezbollah want euros, so they made
this legal fiction, from what you are describing, in order to
do so.
I would also note----
Mr. Huizenga. Just so I am clear in understanding this,
they are claiming that Germany and France have this requirement
or exception that they need to satisfy their petroleum needs,
but it is really, potentially, a backdoor to get at their
euros, correct? Is that what you are saying?
Mr. Noronha. That is exactly what it sounds like, sir.
Mr. Huizenga. That seems like it a little bit to me, too.
I kind of cut you off there, so I will give you----
Mr. Noronha. I was going to say there have been reports
over the summer that the Administration was looking to conduct
an informal nuclear arrangement with Iran and try to bypass
Congress, a congressional review of this. In doing so, U.S.
officials have said they looked the other way on Iranian oil
exports.
There was $10 billion transferred in this waiver. Normally,
there is about $500 million. This is way out of normal
proportion.
The other thing that is very concerning is there was a
report from the Iranian Central Bank just last week that they
are working with China to, ``finance this $10 billion, which is
in this fund in Oman.'' That strikes me that they are trying to
launder this money to be able to be used in any way they can.
Mr. Huizenga. Let me take the last couple of seconds here.
Do you believe that all of the provisions of the 2012 NDAA
and the sanctions that were in there are being fully
implemented to maximize pressure?
Mr. Noronha. No, they are not. They are not being enforced.
Mr. Huizenga. Would you be surprised if the Administration
or OFAC or others claimed that it is being utilized that way?
Mr. Noronha. That would be a stretch of reality, sir.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay.
Mr. Brodsky, I was hoping to get to flagged ghost ships and
some other things, but I know I am running out of time, so I
would like to maybe follow up in writing on that.
But I do appreciate all of our witnesses today. This has
been enlightening, and we will continue this conversation
tomorrow with our Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee as
well, and I encourage all of our Members to waive on to that.
With that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Mrs. Kim. Okay. Thank you, everyone.
Seeing that all members of the subcommittee have had their
chance to ask our witnesses questions, and with the remaining
votes getting smaller and smaller, I would like to thank our
witnesses. And instead of coming back after the votes, I think
we can adjourn now.
Without objection, I would like to also submit three
articles for the record from Elliptic, Chainalysis, and TRM
Labs on the volumes of crypto donations.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
And I ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as
you can, because it will be very helpful for us.
With that, the hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:07 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

October 25, 2023

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
