- CONTINUED OVERSIGHT OVER REGIONAL BANK FAILURES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CONTINUED OVERSIGHT OVER
REGIONAL BANK FAILURES

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
AND MONETARY POLICY

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 17, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-23

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

52-935 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Monetary Policy

ANDY BARR, Kentucky, Chairman

BILL POSEY, Florida                  BILL FOSTER, Illinois, Ranking
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri             Member
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia, Vice      BRAD SHERMAN, California
Chairman                         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee,                DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AL GREEN, Texas
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          JUAN VARGAS, California
YOUNG KIM, California                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan, Chairman

PETE SESSIONS, Texas                 AL GREEN, Texas, Ranking Member
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee, Vice Chairman  SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
May 17, 2023.................................................     1
Appendix:
May 17, 2023.................................................    87

WITNESSES
Wednesday, May 17, 2023

Becker, Gregory W., former CEO, Silicon Valley Bank..............     6
Harris, Hon. Adrienne A., Superintendent, New York State
Department of Financial Services (DFS).........................    55
Hewlett, Hon. Clothilde V., Commissioner, California Department
of Financial Protection and Innovation (DFPI)..................    00
Roffler, Michael J., former CEO and President, First Republic
Bank...........................................................     9
Shay, Scott A., Co-Founder and former Chairman of the Board,
Signature Bank.................................................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Becker, Gregory W............................................    88
Harris, Hon. Adrienne A......................................   101
Hewlett, Hon. Clothilde V....................................   116
Roffler, Michael J...........................................   192
Shay, Scott A................................................   195

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Lynch, Hon. Stephen F.:
New York Times, ``Federal Reserve Signals a Shift Away from
Pandemic Support,'' by Jeanna Smialer, Updated November 3,
2021.......................................................   199
Tlaib, Hon. Rashida:
Chart, ``Timeline of Silicon Valley Bank Failure''...........   202
Harris, Hon. Adrienne A.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Casten......................................   203
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Huizenga....................................   205
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Mooney......................................   208
Hewlett, Hon. Clothilde V. :
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Huizenga....................................   216
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Mooney......................................   217
Shay, Scott A.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Huizenga....................................   221
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Mooney......................................   222

CONTINUED OVERSIGHT OVER
REGIONAL BANK FAILURES

----------

Wednesday, May 17, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Monetary Policy,
joint with the
Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations,
Committee on Financial Services
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m.,
in room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy Barr
[chairman of the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and
Monetary Policy] presiding.
Members present from the Subcommittee on Financial
Institutions and Monetary Policy: Representatives Barr, Posey,
Luetkemeyer, Williams of Texas, Loudermilk, Rose, Timmons,
Norman, Fitzgerald, Kim, Donalds, De La Cruz, Ogles; Foster,
Velazquez, Sherman, Meeks, Scott, Green, Beatty, Vargas,
Casten, and Pressley.
Members present from the Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations: Huizenga, Sessions, Wagner, Mooney, Rose,
Meuser, Ogles; Green, Horsford, Tlaib, Garcia, and Williams of
Georgia
Ex officio present: Representatives McHenry and Waters.
Also present: Representatives Lynch and Himes.
Chairman Barr. The subcommittees will come to order.
This joint subcommittee hearing is entitled, ``Continued
Oversight Over Regional Bank Failures.''
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittees at any time.
With that, I now recognize myself for 4 minutes for an
opening statement.
Today's hearing will help the Financial Services Committee
learn more about recent bank failures, including management
missteps, supervisory failures, and rapid-fire bank runs in the
age of social media. I thank our witnesses for testifying
today.
The recent banking crisis was fueled by failed bank
management, lack of hedges against interest rate risks, failed
monetary policy, failed supervision, and overspending by the
Biden Administration and Democrats that led to historic
inflation, prompting increased monetary policy action. Today,
we will hear about what went wrong from the bank management
themselves and State regulators. This is important as the
committee is still waiting to get information from Federal
regulators about what happened.
Information has been provided to the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) but has not found its way from
Federal regulators and Treasury to this committee. Instead, the
Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and State regulators all decided to
do their own self-assessments of the recent bank and
supervisory failures and hastily put out public-facing
narratives before independent assessments could be made.
Today's hearing will help fill in some of the gaps that
remain, given the lack of transparency and accountability from
Federal regulators. To improve matters, I put forward five
bills to increase transparency and accountability of Federal
regulators and their actions, especially when emergency
measures are employed.
We are not here to defend the management at any of the
banks that failed, or to put anyone on trial. In looking at the
recent bank failures and the continued turbulence in our
banking system, it is important to acknowledge that the bank
failures did not occur in a macroeconomic vacuum. We have seen
runaway inflation that was fueled by the reckless, nearly $2-
trillion American Rescue Plan in March of 2021, when personal
saving economy-wide was already at an astounding $5.7 trillion.
Inflation continues to hammer American families and the
Federal Reserve was late to respond. Because the Federal
Reserve failed to tighten monetary policy in a timely manner,
interest rates were boosted at the fastest pace in modern
history. That rapid monetary policy shock injected increased
interest rate risks into the economy in general and banks'
balance sheets in particular.
Federal regulators and supervisors were again late in
responding. They were late to even recognize that rapidly-
growing interest rate risks called for increased supervisory
vigilance and prompt corrective attention to banks that faced
the largest risks. Reading the hasty review of the regulators,
banks that failed had mismanaged risks, were inattentive to
risk management gaps that supervisors and examiners had
identified, and sometimes were not adequately responsive or
timely in making necessary remediations.
According to their narratives, regulators faced staffing
issues and maybe could have been more forceful in working to
get timelier remediations. Yet, some possibly important issues
were brushed aside by the regulators' reviews. Prior to the
bank failures, there were years of working from home and
virtually rather than in-person bank examinations because of
COVID restrictions.
That fact, however, received only a few sentences in the
Fed's report on Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), identifying only
the, ``COVID-19 examination pause.'' A search of the FDIC
review of Signature Bank for the word, ``COVID,'' provides only
one instance. It seems that that factor, and many others, were
glossed over, and the regulators' reviews deserve more
scrutiny.
Hastily-produced reviews by regulators coordinated for
public release at around the same date calls into question the
extent to which narrative setting, rather than establishment of
actual facts, was the motive for the reviews and public
reports. Those reviews were led by individuals for the FDIC and
the Fed and not for the full Boards, so they provide only one
limited side of the story. I welcome the views and information
that we will hear today, especially considering the lack of
transparency and accountability from our Federal regulators.
I now recognize the ranking member of the Subcommittee on
Financial Institutions and Monetary Policy, the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Foster, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for appearing here.
My career in Congress and on this committee began in March
of 2008, which was an interesting time to be a new member of
the Financial Services Committee. We spent my first 3 years on
this committee: first, dealing with the emergency response to
the financial crisis; second, identifying the parts which were
broken and the parts which weren't, and deciding what had to be
repaired; and third, with the regulatory response, the Dodd-
Frank Act that basically, until a couple of months ago, had a
pretty good record of preventing large-scale bank failures and
financial crises.
The financial crisis that we are dealing with here is
orders of magnitude smaller than what we dealt with in 2008,
and we should keep that clearly in mind. But when a machine
breaks, we have to identify whether it broke due to a design
flaw or a manufacturing flaw, did all the parts work as
designed, or was it simply subject to unanticipated conditions
that are outside its design specifications and warranty? So, a
lot of what this hearing today is about, is we have in front of
us some of the key components in trying to keep a bank from
failing, and we want to understand a little bit more about the
details of what happened there.
And we also have to look at the changes that have been made
externally to the banking system, having to do with the
presence of the internet and communication. And if people are
terrified now about the speed at which banking runs can happen,
imagine what will happen in a few years when everyone is using
their ChatGPT money manager, which will be programmed to pull
your money out the moment a banking run is detected in our
system and how much capital and liquidity do you have to hold
against that sort of environment.
So the environment is changing, but our first step here is
we have to understand whether everyone played their roles as
appropriate to the rules that were in place a few months ago
and in the previous couple of years. So, I look forward to this
hearing. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the Chair of the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee, Mr.
Huizenga from Michigan, for 4 minutes.
Chairman Huizenga. Thank you, Chairman Barr, and I am glad
that we were able to proceed with this joint subcommittee
hearing. I think this is important work that we do as we, on
these various subcommittees, dig into the details and find out
what is, I think, some of the most challenging issues that we
have experienced economically here in the last couple of years.
And I do want to say thank you to the witnesses for being here
because this hearing is vital as this committee continues its
investigation into the recent failures of both Silicon Valley
Bank and First Republic Bank.
And in testimony today we are going to hear, I imagine,
some try to pin these bank failures solely on bank
mismanagement, some will try to pin it solely on failed
supervision, and some on unprecedented runs on deposits fueled
by social media. I think the reality, and everybody up here
realizes it, is that it is a combination of all three of those
things, coupled with high interest rates, years of easy money,
as the chairman was highlighting, and stimulus-fueled consumer
spending. This Administration and the Fed overheated our
economy, and then we were late to pump the brakes, or to borrow
that punch bowl analogy from Alan Greenspan, ``no one had the
courage to take the punch bowl away from the party.''
I am sure some of my colleagues are ready to let you off
the hook and maybe try to change the narrative. It should not
be understated that the management of each of your banks is
questionable at best. You are inept at managing both short- and
long-term risks. You courted deposits from risky businesses,
took untenable financial risks, and ultimately failed to
respond to rising interest rates.
And Mr. Becker, your relationship with the San Francisco
Fed should be scrutinized. At the time of its failure, SVB had
31 open supervisory failures or warnings from regulators, and
yet nothing was done. It has not gone unnoticed that your
position on the Fed's Board of Directors potentially created a
relationship that impeded supervisors' judgment and created
some of that leniency. And for their part, the Federal Reserve
missed or ignored all of the signs, and when they did react, it
was too late.
Yesterday, in testimony before our committee, the Vice
Chairman of Supervision at the Federal Reserve, Mr. Barr--the
other Mr. Barr--admitted what we have all known for months: The
failure of your banks was a result of failed supervision under
his watch. He finally admitted that he had the responsibility
for that. However, Federal regulators will attempt to use these
bank failures to exercise more and more authority while outside
the bounds that Congress established for them, and the notion
that these failures were a result of regulatory changes is
unfounded.
As we heard from the GAO, reports about the Fed started in
1991. Nevertheless, regulators will try to shift the blame, but
the facts are clear. And in testimony before our Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee last week, the GAO flagged those
concerns in supervision and enforcement practices, going back
to 1991. The report concludes that all three Federal financial
regulators have, ``wide discretion in choosing from among
enforcement actions of varying severity.''
Lastly, an independent assessment of these events is not
only appropriate, but it is desperately needed. This committee
is committed to providing the American taxpayer with an
unfiltered review of the events that preceded these bank
collapses and ultimately, they bear the cost of your failures.
I look forward to hearing from each of you as we continue to
seek these answers, and, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the ranking member of the Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, holding
this oversight hearing today with the former chief executives
of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank will allow important
questions to be asked and answers to be received from those who
nurtured the root cause of their banks' collapses. At
yesterday's hearing, regulators acknowledged their
shortcomings. Today's preeminent question is, will today's
bankers acknowledge their faults? Will they take responsibility
for the more than 70 percent uninsured deposits that alarmed
depositors? Will they acknowledge that both Silicon Valley Bank
and Signature Bank experienced outsized growth between 2018 and
2022, and that Signature Bank grew from approximately $47
billion in total assets in 2018, to $110 billion in 2022, and
that Silicon Valley Bank increased from $56 billion to $209
billion over that same period of time?
Will they admit that this outsized growth in assets was
fueled by more than 70-percent uninsured deposits at both
banks, far higher than the median of 32 percent for comparable
banks? Will they confess that the executives at both banks knew
or should have known that their risk management practices had
to be strengthened appropriately as they grew in size
exponentially? Will they concede that it was irresponsible for
Silicon Valley Bank to operate without a chief risk officer
from April until December 2022?
Will they agree that those who nurtured the root cause of a
bank's collapse should return any bonuses received as the
collapse came to fruition? Will they allow and avow that upon
Silicon Valley Bank having received 13 of the most-serious
supervisory warnings the Fed can issue, the bank's officers
should have taken corrective action? And will they come clean
about Signature Bank's failure to take corrective action after
having received nine Matters Requiring Board Attention notices
from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, including three
specifically related to liquidity or risk management?
Mr. Chairman, the time for atonement and recompense is at
hand. Today provides us the opportunity to hear from those who
have a hands-on experience with the failure of these banks.
These persons were capable, competent, and qualified. They all
have degrees indicating such, and they have experience noting
such, so they should have taken corrective action. They will be
given the opportunity to answer these questions that I have
called to the attention of not only this committee, but also of
this country. The people of America need to know what happened
at these banks. This is a time for us to find out. I yield back
the balance of my time.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the Chair of the full Financial Services Committee, the
gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. McHenry, for 2 minutes.
Chairman McHenry. I want to thank Chairman Barr and
Chairman Huizenga and the ranking members as well.
At today's hearing, we will hear three different stories
from three different banks. Your business models were not the
same. Your depositors were not the same. The degree of
mismanagement was not the same in the midst of this crisis. The
truth is, each of you bears responsibility as the captain of
your respective ships, and we have heard that from you. There
was a storm brewing and you failed to batten down the hatches,
and while inflation raged, the Fed and the Biden Administration
told us it was transitory, and nothing to worry about.
We will get into the management question shortly, but one
of the mistakes is that these three bankers actually believed
the bureaucrats. We all knew inflation was not transitory, and
after being late to respond, the Fed was forced to raise rates
at the fastest pace in modern history. And again, you failed to
appropriately prepare for this inflationary and high-interest-
rate environment.
Silicon Valley Bank was the projectile that set this
volatility into motion. The Biden Administration used another
word to describe SVB, ``idiosyncratic.'' Well, clearly, as
there are 3 of you here today, 3 of the 30 largest banks in
America today, the problem goes much deeper. The subsequent
failures of Signature and First Republic, coupled with
volatility in regional bank stocks, sent shockwaves through our
financial system. The fear of contagion has rocked an already-
shaky economy, so we will hear from each of you today, and
then, the New York and California bank regulators as well.
I think it is important to take a step back and really
examine the undercurrents that caused this crisis, the economic
mismanagement by the Biden Administration that created the
perfect storm in which each of you failed to captain your ship.
I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back.
We now welcome the testimony of our first panel of
witnesses: Mr. Greg Becker, the former CEO of Silicon Valley
Bank; Mr. Scott Shay, the co-founder and former chairman of
Signature Bank; and Mr. Michael Roffler, the former CEO and
president of First Republic Bank.
We thank each of you for taking the time to be here. You
will each be recognized for 5 minutes to give an oral
presentation of your testimony. And without objection, each of
your written statements will be made a part of the record.
Mr. Becker, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY W. BECKER, FORMER CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
SILICON VALLEY BANK

Mr. Becker. Chairs Barr and Huizenga, Ranking Members
Foster and Green, and members of the subcommittees, thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you today. My name is Greg
Becker. I was the CEO of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB). I am here
today to answer your questions about what happened at SVB, to
the best of my memory.
At the outset, I want to be clear that I never envisioned
myself or SVB being in this situation. I was an employee of SVB
for nearly 30 years and CEO for the last 12 years until it was
taken over by the FDIC. I believed in the bank and its mission
and cared deeply about our more than 8,000 employees and their
families. I was committed to our clients in helping them
succeed, whether they were well-known tech companies or small
business founders in towns across the country.
SVB was designed to meet the needs of the technology and
life science industries where startups at later-stage companies
could keep their deposits, borrow to expand their businesses,
and create jobs. We knew our clients personally, understood
their needs and goals, and partnered with them as they grew. We
took risk management seriously and worked closely with and were
responsive to the various regulators who oversaw SVB. Over
time, we built and expanded a team of subject matter experts,
focused on analyzing risk and protecting the bank, and
continually sought to add operational expertise and experience
to enhance our risk management as the bank and its clients
evolved.
Much has been said about the takeover of SVB by the FDIC
and why that happened. Ultimately, I believe that SVB's failure
was brought about by a series of unprecedented events. Between
2015 and 2019, SVB grew from about $45 billion in assets to $71
billion in assets at an annual rate of about 10 percent. This
changed in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the government
stimulus measures. With near-zero interest rates and the
largest government-sponsored economic stimulus in history, more
than $5 trillion flooded into commercial banks in the United
States.
By the end of 2020, SVB had grown 63 percent over the prior
year, and in 2021, SVB's assets grew another 83 percent to $212
billion. To support this growth, SVB raised more than $8
billion of new capital in 2021. Importantly, throughout 2020
until late 2021, the messaging from the Federal Reserve was
that interest rates would remain low and that the inflation
that was starting to bubble up would only be transitory.
During this time, SVB invested in low-risk, highly-rated
government-backed securities. These securities were safe
assets, and they were backed by the U.S. Government and could
easily be used as collateral for borrowing for liquidity, if we
needed it. These fixed-income securities complemented our
short-duration loan portfolio, approximately 90 percent of
which had variable interest rates. In fact, other U.S. banks
collectively invested nearly $2.3 trillion of their securities
portfolios in this low-yield environment created by the Federal
Reserve.
To account for changing market conditions, namely higher
interest rates anticipated over a longer period of time, on
March 8th, we sold SVB's available-for-sale securities
portfolio in a planned capital raise. Unexpectedly, on the same
day, Silvergate Bank announced its intent to voluntarily wind
down and liquidate, and depositors triggered a run on that
bank. Despite stark differences in our business models, news
reports and investors wrongly lumped SVB and Silvergate
together.
Rumors and misconceptions quickly spread online,
culminating on March 9th with the first-ever social media-
driven bank run, leading to $42 billion in deposits being
withdrawn from SVB in 10 hours or roughly $1 million every
second. Over 2 days, approximately 80 percent of total deposits
were requested to be removed from SVB. To put the unprecedented
velocity of this bank run in context, the previous largest bank
run in U.S. history was $19 billion over 16 days.
In the face of these unprecedented events, the leadership
team and I made the best decisions we could with the facts and
forecasts available to us at the time, and in the best
interests of SVB, its employees, and its clients. I worked at a
place I truly loved, alongside our dedicated employees to
support our clients who are innovating in astonishing ways. I
believe that SVB had a positive impact on roughly 100,000
clients.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Becker can be found on page
88 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr. Shay,
you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT A. SHAY, CO-FOUNDER AND FORMER CHAIRMAN OF
THE BOARD, SIGNATURE BANK

Mr. Shay. Chairman Barr, Chairman Huizenga, Ranking Member
Foster, Ranking Member Green, and members of the subcommittees,
thank you for the opportunity to be here today to discuss
Signature Bank in my role as chairman of the board.
In 2000, I co-founded Signature Bank. At the time, the
banking industry was experiencing many mergers, and many big
banks were not serving the needs of middle-market customers. I
felt that a mid-sized bank would provide an important
commercial service to businesses that preferred a smaller, more
personal experience. Signature Bank followed a single-point-of-
contact approach in which the bank's client teams personally
served the needs of small and medium-sized businesses.
Our bank had a diverse group of clients, including
industrial companies, commercial real estate firms, healthcare
providers, professional service firms, nonprofits, and many
others. We placed a priority on providing financing to
affordable housing providers in low- and moderate-income areas,
and did so for many years. Through the hard work and dedication
of our employees, we went from a small bank with $40 million of
start-up funds, to a successful middle-market bank with more
than $100 billion in deposits. We were a solid and thriving
bank that played an enormous and important role in our clients'
businesses, and I was very proud of our success.
In 2018, we began accepting deposits from businesses in the
digital assets sector. I supported this effort because I
believe that digital asset payment systems can make financial
transactions faster, easier, and cheaper, with funds moving
from place to place in minutes rather than hours or days, and
in a much lower cost than traditional payment systems. I was
not alone in my enthusiasm for digital assets. Over the years,
many other banks, many financial institutions, and others have
entered the market for digital assets. And both State and
Federal Governments have expressed support as well.
As with other parts of Signature Bank's business, digital
deposits grew over time. Nonetheless, because this was a
relatively new sector, Signature Bank carefully monitored the
business in an effort to ensure that clients met our internal
standards, including for compliance with anti-money laundering
(AML) laws. We also limited the kinds of businesses that we
would do. Signature Bank's digital assets business was focused
on accepting U.S. dollar deposits from businesses in this
sector. Additionally, I publicly supported increased government
regulation of the digital assets sector in order to ensure that
businesses operating within the sector had regulatory
oversight.
In the latter part of 2022, the digital assets sector
experienced increased volatility, and regulators expressed
concern. Signature Bank took these developments seriously, and
in just a few months, significantly reduced its digital asset
deposits. Unfortunately, a series of truly extraordinary,
unprecedented events unfolded quickly. On March 7th, the bank
with strong ties to the digital assets sector announced it was
going out of business, and 3 days later, on March 2nd, the
second bank was closed by the regulators, and then within just
a few hours, our depositors withdrew $16 billion from the bank.
Nonetheless, I was confident that Signature Bank could
withstand the economic earthquake which occurred that day. The
bank was well-capitalized. The bank was solvent. Indeed, it was
always solvent, with assets well in excess of liabilities even
at the very end, and the bank had a well-defined and solid plan
to continue in operation and withstand additional withdrawals.
Although I believe that the bank was in a strong position to
weather the storm, regulators evidently saw things differently.
On Sunday, March 12th, regulators seized Signature Bank.
Although I disagree with this decision, I recognize the
important role the bank regulators play in our financial
system. My first priority in helping to build Signature Bank
was providing excellent service to our customers. I was
therefore pleased that the government guaranteed the full
amount of customers' deposits. Helping build a bank for 22
years which played an important role in the middle-market
sector of our economy was the pinnacle of my professional life.
For that reason, March 12, 2023, was a devastating day for me.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shay can be found on page
195 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Roffler, you
are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. ROFFLER, FORMER CEO AND PRESIDENT,
FIRST REPUBLIC BANK

Mr. Roffler. Thank you. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Waters, Chairman Barr, Chairman Huizenga, Ranking Member
Foster, Ranking Member Green, and members of the subcommittees.
Good morning, and thank you for allowing me to speak with you
today. Since 2009, I have had the privilege of serving First
Republic Bank and its employees, clients, and communities. I
look forward to sharing with you a little about First Republic,
our reputation for risk management and integrity, as well as
our understanding of the unprecedented banking crisis that
affected us beginning on March 10th.
I would like to start by thanking my incredible colleagues,
who have worked tirelessly since March 10th, continuing to
serve our clients and delivering outstanding service in the
face of unprecedented challenges.
For the past 37 years, First Republic has built a
reputation for its commitment to extraordinary client service,
careful risk management, robust internal controls, and
transparency with our regulators and the public. First
Republic's financial position strategy was regularly reviewed
by our regulators, the California Department of Financial
Protection and Innovation (DFPI) and the FDIC. First Republic's
management and board of directors took regulatory feedback
extremely seriously and addressed any matters in a timely
matter. Neither regulator expressed concern regarding First
Republic's strategy, liquidity, or management performance, in
fact, just the opposite.
Up until the cataclysmic events of March 10th and the
following days, which were triggered by the collapses of
Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank, First Republic was in a
strong financial position with strong investment grade ratings
aligned with the nation's largest banks. In fact, thanks to our
employees' extraordinary efforts, First Republic had its most
profitable year ever in 2022.
Starting in the fall of 2022, First Republic believed that
the Federal Reserve's campaign to fight inflation by repeatedly
and significantly raising interest rates would make 2023 a more
challenging year from an earnings perspective. First Republic
was transparent about the challenges posed by this higher-
interest-rate environment. No one at First Republic could have
predicted the collapse of Silicon Valley and Signature Banks,
the speed at which it happened, or the impact it had on the
banking industry. Instead of dealing with temporary decreased
earnings due to interest rate pressures, First Republic was
contaminated overnight by the contagion that spread from the
unprecedented failures of those banks.
Before March 10th, First Republic was conducting business
as usual. Indeed, during the day on March 9th, as uncertainty
surrounding Silicon Valley grew, we experienced a significant
inflow of deposits at First Republic from clients who had
withdrawn their money from Silicon Valley. Everything changed
overnight. On the morning of March 10th, when Silicon Valley
collapsed, a run on First Republic began. In response to an
industry-wide panic about the soundness of regional banks,
which was exacerbated by both traditional media and social
media, over the course of the ensuing weeks, over $100 billion
in deposits were withdrawn from the bank.
Despite Herculean efforts by my incredible colleagues at
First Republic to continue providing exceptional client
service, management's tireless efforts to save the bank, and
the support of 11 of the nation's largest banks, investor and
depositor confidence never recovered. Throughout this period, I
encouraged colleagues to be there for and to serve the needs of
our clients, but clients continued to withdraw their funds. And
to protect our clients and depositors, the FDIC reached a
purchase and assumption agreement with JPMorgan Chase to assume
all of the deposits and substantially all of the assets of
First Republic. We continued to work hard every day to ensure
our clients received the service they deserved.
I look forward to working with the committee to restore
confidence in the banking industry, and I would be pleased to
answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Roffler can be found on page
192 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. I thank the witnesses for their testimony.
We will now turn to Member questions, and I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Let me start by following up on a line of questioning that
I asked Fed Vice Chairman Barr yesterday. I asked Mr. Barr if
the delay in monetary policy normalization, in light of
persistent and high inflation, if gradually tightening monetary
policy versus precipitously raising rates would have made it
easier for the Fed to supervise and banks to manage interest
rate risks. He declined to acknowledge that monetary policy
failures by the Fed were the underlying cause of the current
instability in the system.
While I do agree that it is the responsibility of bank
management to manage interest rate risks, I believe we should
also acknowledge that the Fed's unprecedented and protracted
easy money policies, quantitative easing, and keeping interest
rates too low, for too long, necessitated a historically rapid
and precipitous increase in interest rates, 500 basis points in
just 13 months, leading to a blunt and difficult interest rate
environment for institutions to adjust to.
Mr. Becker, did bank supervisors at the Federal Reserve of
San Francisco show any extra attention to interest rate risk
issues, and if they did, when did they begin to show that
attention?
Mr. Becker. Chairman Barr, to my memory, the rapid rise in
interest rates going back to 2021, I don't remember that topic
coming up, to the best of my recollection.
Chairman Barr. So you are telling me that as the San
Francisco Fed had 20 bank examiners in your bank every day, not
once in the last year do you remember any of those bank
examiners discussing interest rate sensitivity with you?
Mr. Becker. With me, again, my memory is no. It could have
happened with our Treasury Team or CFO, but I don't remember
having a direct conversation about that.
Chairman Barr. Mr. Becker, Silicon Valley Bank did not have
a chief risk officer in the 8 months leading up to its failure.
Clearly, there were major interest rate risks that obviously
were not being discussed by the bank regulators with you, but
it is safe to say that a chief risk officer would have been a
useful addition to the management team. What were your
conversations with the Fed on this issue, and did they voice
any concerns with the vacancy or request that you take action
to fill the position? And if so, how did you respond?
Mr. Becker. As I outlined in my written testimony, towards
the end of 2021 and the beginning of 2022, our board of
directors and the regulators of the Federal Reserve were giving
us comments about the need to enhance our chief risk officer
position, especially as we started to approach $250 billion of
assets. We took that feedback very strongly and we decided to
make a change. So we did two things knowing that it takes,
quite honestly, a while to find the best candidate for a role.
In my assessment, it takes 6 to 9 months to find an executive
of the caliber that you would want.
We did two things to make sure we didn't have gaps during
that period of time, both of which were noticed, and before we
made the change, communicated to the Federal Reserve. First, we
created an Office of the Chief Risk Officer. It was a
leadership team with a risk team, along with new hires with
large financial institution (LFI) experience. Those individuals
reported to me and they also reported to the Chair of our Risk
Committee.
The second thing we did was we kept our existing chief risk
officer on board as a consultant from April until October 1st.
Our new chief risk officer was hired in October, and she
started in December.
Chairman Barr. Did the Fed express any concern that despite
staffing at the office, there was not a position filled?
Mr. Becker. They did not.
Chairman Barr. Okay. Mr. Roffler, it is our understanding
that prior to entering receivership, you had viewed all options
on the table, including the sale of your bank. Can you describe
the difficulties you faced in finding a potential acquirer?
Mr. Roffler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes. Following the
events of March 10th and shortly thereafter, we worked with our
legal counsel and our independent advisors to look at all
options on the table, including potential merger, and potential
sales of assets.
Chairman Barr. Did the FDIC begin to gather and distribute
data about your bank to potential acquirers prior to the week
of April 24th?
Mr. Roffler. Not to my knowledge.
Chairman Barr. Mr. Becker, FDIC Vice Chairman Travis Hill
recently stated that the FDIC could have moved more quickly in
finding a buyer for Silicon Valley Bank if they had shown some
more urgency in setting up data rooms. Can you explain your
perspective on how this process worked and whether the FDIC
could have done better?
Mr. Becker. Again, this happened very fast. And on March
9th, which is really the first day that the bank run started,
the FDIC got involved, and they took over on the 10th. We
immediately worked with them and worked as fast as we could to
build a data room with the list of information they were
looking for.
Chairman Barr. My time has expired. Obviously, it was not
fast enough. I now recognize the ranking member of the
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Monetary Policy, Mr.
Foster, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Becker, I accept
what you said, that you never envisaged the situation that
Silicon Valley Bank had come into, but my focus here is what
rules could have been in place that would have changed your
behavior. I imagine you spent a lot of the last few weeks
thinking about what you should have done if you had perfect
knowledge ahead of time. And high on my list are simply hedging
your interest rate risk instead of apparently removing some
interest rate hedges, and also raising capital last summer when
it was still good. Are there other major things that you wish
you had the foresight to have done?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, maybe just to comment on your one
point about raising capital, our capital ratios even up until
March 10th were actually----
Mr. Foster. I understand. But one of the rules changes we
can contemplate is to make you immediately recognize some
fraction of your mark-to-market losses on securities, right?
So, one of my follow-on questions here, which you can try
answering now, is let's say that you immediately had to
recognize 100 percent of your actual mark-to-market losses.
Would that have affected your behavior materially?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, the mark-to-market is in two
categories. One is you are available-for-sale-portfolio and
then you are held-to-maturity----
Mr. Foster. Right. Just say all of it, just to take an
extreme case, all of it?
Mr. Becker. Yes. If everything, both available-for-sale and
held-to-maturity, was mark-to-market, yes, we would have had to
raise more capital.
Mr. Foster. And then, what happened early last summer,
probably when interest rates started going up, and that would
have----
Mr. Becker. Yes. When the mark-to-market occurred, correct.
Mr. Foster. Yes, and in all probability, you would be
solvent today if that had been the rule. I am not saying that
should be the rule, but there is a knob that we can adjust,
which is what fraction of the mark-to-market losses should be
immediately reflected.
Mr. Becker. Congressman, as I mentioned in my testimony, I
believe those were unprecedented events. At the end, it was
fueled by the fastest bank run in history, and I don't believe,
in my opinion, even with additional capital, if that were to
occur, I don't think we could or possibly any bank could have
lived with that amount of deposit outflow in that short period
of time.
Mr. Foster. There are many, many issues there. Now, there
were also governance issues, so if some fraction of the
regulatory findings would automatically have been made public,
particularly the governance ones--one of the things that makes
this hard for us in Congress to deal with is that a lot of
regulatory actions have to take place in secret. But if there
was some fraction of things, for example, governance that would
automatically become public, would that have sort of lit a fire
under you to maybe act more quickly on the risk, gaps, and so
on?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, the first discussion that I recall
having with the regulators on questions of governance was in
January of 2022, and as soon as those conversations were had,
we immediately reacted to that feedback. We didn't wait until
the May 22nd letter. We immediately reacted to it and put
together a whole series of programs and processes to make the
improvements that were requested. So, I don't believe that even
if----
Mr. Foster. You don't believe the threat of making them
public would have accelerated that at all? Okay. So, if during
the period of your rapid growth, you had been forced to issue a
contingent convertible (CoCo) as Asian banks and European banks
are forced to, this would have forced the conversation with the
bond market as to the risk position of your bank. And that also
would have provided a capital buffer that you would have access
to when you got in serious trouble. Would this have materially
changed your behavior or the result?
It is a complicated question, so if you want to answer that
in writing for the record, I would appreciate it, because that
is one of the things that I think both Chairman McHenry and I
think may be part of the solution here to make a more stable
banking system. And I would be interested in your thoughtful
opinion on that.
Mr. Becker. Yes. As mentioned in my written testimony, I
don't have access to my information from the bank, so I would
do my best with the information that I have to be able to
answer your question----
Mr. Foster. Fair enough. This will not be an exact
calculation of what would have happened, but I would be
interested in your opinion.
Mr. Foster. Mr. Shay, it seems like the most significant
factor in Signature Bank was not so much a concentration in
crypto assets or deposits, but a lack of pledgeable assets
immediately available for liquidity support. Are there changes
in procedures or rules to make that more agile, for which you
would advocate?
Mr. Shay. I don't know the answer to that question. I do
know that when we opened at the beginning of March 10th, we had
$29 billion of pledgeable assets that were at the Federal Home
Bank and the Federal Reserve. And in terms of the ease of
moving those assets, that was something that could be looked at
in terms of making that----
Chairman Barr. Okay. We are going to have to move on. The
gentleman's time has expired. I now recognize the Chair of the
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Mr. Huizenga, for
5 minutes.
Chairman Huizenga. Thank you, Chairman Barr. I appreciate
the witnesses being here, and your candor. I am going to ask
you what I think are kind of two of the most important
questions, frankly, and go down the line asking you this. The
first is whether you take responsibility for the failure of
your bank. Mr. Becker?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, as CEO, I think you have to take
responsibility for the ultimate outcome of your institution.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. I appreciate that. Mr. Shay?
Mr. Shay. As the chairman of the board, I think I did a
responsible role throughout to fulfill my duties.
Mr. Roffler. Mr. Chairman, just----
Chairman Huizenga. Just a second. Do you accept the
responsibility for the failure or do you believe it was----
Mr. Shay. I am very sorry. I am sorry that the bank was
seized by the regulators. I thought we had a responsible----
Chairman Huizenga. I bet your depositors are, too.
Mr. Shay. ----the next morning.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. I will take that as a, no. Mr.
Roffler?
Mr. Roffler. Mr. Chairman, this was an event that is
unforeseeable when it happens, and the contagion spread very
quickly and panic is very hard to control. What I feel
responsible for is for our colleagues each and every day and
our clients each and every day to make sure they are taken care
of and supported during this time.
Chairman Huizenga. That also sounds like a, no. So
congratulations, Mr. Becker, you are the only one to man up and
actually take responsibility for that, so I will start with
you. And since I can't get the other two to actually admit to
their own failings, I would like to hear from you. What would
you have done differently in hindsight?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, that is a question to the point
made earlier by Congressman Foster. I have thought about that a
lot over the last several months. And when you look back with
hindsight at what could have been done differently, I think it
is very challenging because when you go back and make
decisions, you have to go back and look at the facts that you
had. And what I tried to describe in my written testimony is
that the facts that we had, that I had when I made my
decisions, and I believe my team had when they made their
decisions, and I truly do believe they made the best decisions
as did I with the information that we have.
Chairman Huizenga. We are going to explore that a little
more because yesterday, you testified that SVB's capital and
liquidity were validated by regulators in 2022. Your written
statement points to an August 2022 letter sent by the
regulators that conveyed the second-highest possible CAMELS
ratings of a 2, meaning satisfactory on liquidity, capital, and
market risks. Despite a downgrade of the liquidity rating in
August when you received the supervisory letter, were these
ratings cause for alarm, or did they seem to confirm that you
were on track?
And then, I also want to address something that you had
said to Chairman Barr. You said that the Fed did not talk to
you about the interest rate risk. They had 31 Matters Requiring
Attention, but none of them were about interest rate risk? Talk
to me about that.
Mr. Becker. Yes, Congressman, again, I am going based on
the best of my recollection.
Chairman Huizenga. Yes. I understand.
Mr. Becker. I don't recall a direct conversation about
that. I know that and I believe towards the end of 2022, there
was a matter requiring attention on interest rate risk that was
issued. I was not in that meeting----
Chairman Huizenga. In late 2022?
Mr. Becker. I believe that was in late 2022.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. So until that time, just as you
had confirmed, I am confirming what you were saying to Chairman
Barr, this was not an issue for the regulators?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, again, to the best of my
recollection, I don't recall.
Chairman Huizenga. Yes. I understand. Well, you had a
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to target Matters Requiring
Immediate Attention. What were the major issues of that MOU, to
your knowledge, your recollection?
Mr. Becker. Yes. Congressman, if I could clarify one point?
Chairman Huizenga. Yes.
Mr. Becker. The Memorandum of Understanding was never
issued. It was verbalized to us, and it was verbalized to us in
early 2022.
Chairman Huizenga. It doesn't really sound like a
memorandum. It sounds like a conversation of understanding.
Okay. So, did regulators follow up with you on the status of
this MOU conversation or ask for your timeline or give you a
timeline?
Mr. Becker. As I mentioned earlier, we were incredibly
responsive to the feedback that we received at----
Chairman Huizenga. Quickly, we only have 30 seconds. You
testified yesterday that you offered several times to the FDIC
to, ``engage potential acquirers,'' and run through a list of
the names whom you believe would be the most likely acquirers.
And every single banker I have ever talked to, big, small, or
medium, has always had some conversations with the competitors
who might become allies. You stated that you offered your
assistance, but the FDIC never consulted you in this. Can you
confirm that, and why do you think they didn't? And did they
give you any indication why they had no interest in your
opinion on this?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I can confirm that they did not
engage me in reviewing the list or talking about any potential
acquirers.
Chairman Huizenga. That's sad. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize the ranking member of the Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chief Executive Officer
Becker of Silicon Valley Bank, were you a board member of the
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco?
Mr. Becker. I was.
Mr. Green. Were you well educated in banking?
Mr. Becker. I have been in banking my entire career.
Mr. Green. Yes. The Republicans, my colleagues, whom I love
dearly, seem to believe that failure to sufficiently punish you
is a cause of the bank's failure. They have been alluding to
this for days now, perhaps even weeks or more. Are you
contending that because the regulators didn't punish you
properly, your bank failed? That would be a yes or no, sir.
Mr. Becker. Congressman, we were very----
Mr. Green. Sir, that would be a yes or no. Are you
contending that the failure of regulators to punish you
properly is the cause of the failure of your bank?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, we were----
Mr. Green. That would be a yes or no, sir. Would you
contend that the failure, sir, of regulators to punish you was
a cause of your bank's failure?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, we were responsive to the
regulators----
Mr. Green. The question is not whether you were responsive,
sir. Please. Are you blaming the regulators for not punishing
you? So if they had punished you, is what you are saying now,
you would have done better? Is that what we are to understand?
A man who sat on the Federal Reserve Board, highly-educated, is
that what we have to understand?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, as I articulated in my written
testimony, there was a series of unprecedented events that all
came together.
Mr. Green. But that is not the question. You see, you are
issuing the answer and the question, I might add. The question
is about you, your experience, and whether you are now going to
blame a lack of punishment. You don't want to defer with them.
They coddle you. I understand it, but this is a time for truth.
You ought to speak the truth, sir. Do you know that the failure
of regulators to punish you is not the reason your bank failed?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I believe the regulators, as did
the SVB Management Team, did the best they could with the
information they had.
Mr. Green. Thank you. That is sufficient. I appreciate you
are saying that because for too long now, my colleagues have
contended that it is the regulators who are at fault here. The
regulators are not at fault. They have some things that they
could have done, perhaps, and should have done. But at the end
of the day, according to the Government Accountability Office
and according to the regulators who were here yesterday, the
bank's failure lies with the banks, at the end of the day.
Now, let me ask you another question. And this will apply
to all three of you. Just raise your hand, because I can't ask
you individually. I don't have enough time. Did any of you
confer with the President about risk management and banking? If
so, raise your hand. Any of you? President Biden. There is a
reason for the question.
[No response.]
Mr. Green. Let the record reflect that no one has raised a
hand.
The contention from my colleagues is that this is all
President Biden's fault. Because of President Biden, you
somehow made mistakes in your risk management practices. You
didn't talk to President Biden. You don't base your decisions
on news reports about interest rates that you can't validate,
or at least have your risk management people give you some
confirmation of. Do any of you think President Biden caused you
to make the decisions you made? If so, raise your hand.
[No response.]
Mr. Green. Let the record reflect that none of the
witnesses has raised a hand.
Finally this: Do you think that the bonuses received, Mr.
Becker, chief executive officer, should be returned? The
bonuses received at or near the time of the collapse of the
bank should be returned?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I----
Mr. Green. That would be yes or no.
Mr. Becker. ----expect to cooperate with the----
Mr. Green. The Chair is ready to sound the hammer.
Mr. Becker. ----process that is going to be given.
Mr. Green. Yes, but do you think they should be returned?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I will cooperate with the process
that I know will be----
Mr. Green. We are going to have some claw-back legislation
for you to cooperate with. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Chairman Barr. We heard an
exchange a while ago from a Member on the other side who said
when he got here in 2008--he was reminiscing about some of the
circumstances, and they weren't very pretty. But one thing that
was resolved by the party in charge at that time to make sure
that we never had another bank failure or an economic crisis,
was they established the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(CFPB). And among its charges was to make sure we never had any
more bank failures, and I am just wondering, did you have any
contact with the CFPB, Mr. Becker?
Mr. Becker. The CFPB was one of our regulators, but given
that we were predominantly a commercial bank, the interaction
with the CFPB wasn't as significant as the other regulators.
Mr. Posey. It was less significant than with the other
regulators. Did I hear that correctly?
Mr. Becker. Than the Federal Reserve and the State and the
FDIC.
Mr. Posey. Okay. Mr. Shay, same question.
Mr. Shay. In my role as chairman, I don't recall ever
meeting anyone from the CFPB.
Mr. Posey. Okay. Mr. Roffler, same question.
Mr. Roffler. I don't believe I met with anyone from the
CFPB, but they did periodic exams and visits to First Republic.
Mr. Posey. Okay. Mr. Roffler, do you think the CFPB could
have been more helpful in helping you avoid what happened?
Mr. Roffler. I think that we ensured that we had a very
professional and open relationship with the CFPB, along with
our other regulators we interacted with, and we shared with
them what the bank was up to and what the strategy was and what
our results were. And they did thorough examinations, and we
responded to any feedback.
Mr. Posey. Okay. Mr. Becker, did you sell, convert, or
otherwise affect any of your stock in the 12 months preceding?
Mr. Becker. I didn't sell any stock in 2022. And in 2023,
after our earnings release, after it was reviewed by our Legal
Team and myself that I didn't have inside information, we put a
Rule 10b5-1 plan in place in January, and that was sold with
expiring stock options from 2016.
Mr. Posey. What was the approximate value at the time?
Mr. Becker. The gross amount was $3.6 million.
Mr. Posey. Okay. Mr. Shay, same question.
Mr. Shay. I sold no shares in 2022, with the exception of
reversing 3 shares that were accidentally bought in my account,
which were then sold back. And indeed, I purchased shares
throughout that period.
Mr. Posey. In 2023?
Mr. Shay. I purchased shares on March 10, 2023.
Mr. Posey. Okay. Mr. Roffler?
Mr. Roffler. I transacted twice, once in 2022 and once in
early 2023. Both of those transactions were made with the
approval of our policy and procedure and our general counsel.
And they were also made following disclosure of financial
information to the market: number one, through our investor
day; and number two, through our earnings release. And the last
thing I would say is that it represented a portion of my
shares, and I retained the vast majority of them.
Mr. Posey. Yes. What were the dates and amounts of those
transactions?
Mr. Roffler. One of the dates was about November 15th or
16th, and it was just over a million dollars, and the other
date was around January 19 or 20th, roughly the same amount.
Mr. Posey. Okay. I see my time is about to expire, Mr.
Chairman, so I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from California, Mr. Sherman, is now recognized.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. One thing I have commented on is
the idea that the Federal Reserve Regional Boards are not
selected through democracy and the voters of this country, but
governmental power is given to those who are elected by banks,
and they elected Greg Becker. I am not so sure it is a good
system. We ought to have all governmental power in this country
in the hands of the Executive, Judicial, or Legislative
Branches of government. One bank/one vote is not democracy.
After hearing the near-tearful presentations by the CEOs of
their dedication to their customers and employees, I guess they
want us to say, thank you for your service. I can't say that.
My Republican colleagues are in this desperate effort to
defend corporate malfeasance with their old strategy of blame
Biden. In fact, what they have suggested is that we shouldn't
have fought inflation, and Americans should be paying higher
prices. We should have managed all monetary policy so that the
three worst-run banks in America would survive. Talk about the
tail wagging the dog. This was not a 100-year flood.
We saw 16-percent interest rates under the Reagan
Administration--I didn't say the Harding Administration, the
Reagan Administration. This was a modest rainstorm, and 3 of
you went down, but 99.5 percent of the banks survived this
modest storm. The reason your banks went down is because of
recklessness and greed. The bigger the risk, the bigger the
bonus, and I will illustrate that in a bit.
We shouldn't be blaming the depositors. The depositors
didn't take their money out of profitable banks. They didn't
take their money out of solvent banks. This is not just a
liquidity problem. The strongest bankers in this country looked
at Silicon Valley Bank and determined that it was worth
negative $20 billion. If anyone has their money in a bank where
the net worth is negative $20 billion, it is time to get your
money out of that bank.
So, Silicon Valley Bank virtually doubled the duration and,
therefore, increased the yield of the securities that it held.
That is bigger risk, higher profits, and more money in Mr.
Becker's bonus for the 2022 fiscal year. Then, Silicon Valley
Bank, at the end of 2021, had 56 percent of its available-for-
sale portfolio hedged through credit default swaps. In other
words, they had insurance on this 56 percent. They saved money,
cut the insurance down to insuring only 2 percent of the
portfolio, with lower costs, higher profits, and bigger
bonuses. So, it is not surprising that these are the banks that
went down.
Mr. Becker, you have said you take responsibility for the
collapse of your bank. Are you willing to return the bonus that
you got the day before the bank failed and that you then took
on your Hawaiian vacation?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, as I said earlier, I plan to
cooperate with the process----
Mr. Sherman. Will you do it voluntarily or only if the
government forces you to?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I will cooperate with the process.
Mr. Sherman. Cooperate. That means only if the government
forces you to. Will you voluntarily return that portion of the
bonus directly attributable to the bank's higher income for
2022 because you went to longer-term, higher-yield securities,
and there was only a forced----
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I will cooperate----
Mr. Sherman. And will you return that portion of the bonus
attributable to the money you saved by throwing away your flood
insurance as it began to rain, or cashing it in and not having
hedges and credit default swaps on your portfolio? Will you
return that part of the bonus? Not voluntarily.
Mr. Becker. I will cooperate with the process.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Becker, you testified before Congress in
2015 that having tough regulation would divert significant
resources of the bank to complying with enhanced prudential
standards and other requirements, so we have less regulation of
your bank. How would that work out for you?
Chairman Barr. The witness can submit his answer in
writing. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is also
the Chair of our National Security Subcommittee, is now
recognized.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to
the guests this morning. Gentlemen, as tragic as the situation
is, I think it is also a learning moment for all of us, an
instructive moment, I think, for us in Congress and for the
regulators and for bankers around the country, quite frankly,
the standpoint that I think we are in a new world now with
regard to social media and the actions that can be taken, the
actions that can have adverse effect on our financial system,
our culture, and our economy, and I am very concerned about it.
Each of you in your testimony mentioned that: Mr. Becker,
$42 billion went out of your bank in 10 hours; Mr. Shay, $16
billion went out in just a few hours; and, Mr. Roffler, I
missed the number on yours, but again, you had the same
situation where social media excited people to the point where
they ran out and changed their banking situation, and as a
result, a lot of the uninsured deposits in the bank ran out. I
would like for you to give me your analysis on this. Was the
FDIC tracking this with you as this was happening, so that they
were aware of this, or were you notifying them at all as this
money was running out the door? Mr. Becker?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, we notified the regulators that we
were doing the capital raise, so they were aware of that. And
when the bank runs started on March 9th, I was not directly
involved, so I can't say the exact discussions that were
happening. But to my memory, to my knowledge, our Risk Team and
our Regulatory Affairs Team were engaged in conversations with
the regulators.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Shay?
Mr. Shay. As chairman, I don't know the conversations that
were taking place between Treasury----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Was there a contact, I guess is the
question?
Mr. Shay. Excuse me?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Was there a contact between your bank and
the regulators with regards to the amount of money that was
flowing out?
Mr. Shay. I would defer to management. I don't know the----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Mr. Roffler?
Mr. Roffler. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. As I
mentioned in my testimony, we always had an open working
relationship with the regulators, including as the contagion
spread. On March 10th, we had multiple meetings from the
morning all the way through the evening that day, reviewing our
funding and our liquidity and what was happening at the bank.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. All of you having gone through this, what
do you think is a realistic situation that we need to be
considering here? I sit on the China Select Committee, and this
scares the dickens out of me, quite frankly, because I am sure
the Chinese are watching us play funny business with our own
banks and our own economy. Do you think having gone through
this, this is a very real concern, or am I overreacting to
this? The short selling is going on right now, not to the
extent it was, but can social media have the kind of effect on
us that could actually directly impact or could crash our
system? What do you think, Mr. Becker?
Mr. Becker. I think we are evidence of that, and I think it
is something that needs to be looked into to determine how best
to protect against it.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Shay?
Mr. Shay. Thinking back to that Friday, those few hours,
and I remember talking to depositors who were so panicked--I
started my career, I was on Wall Street during 1987, and the
panic that was flooding through social media, people were
saying they didn't want to hear about solvency, that the bank
was solvent. They didn't want to hear about $29 billion of
liquidity. They didn't want to hear about rating agencies or
ratings. They didn't want to hear about anything. They just
wanted to hear if they had to get their money to a too-big-to-
fail bank, and they needed to do it immediately.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Roffler?
Mr. Roffler. Yes, Mr. Congressman, it is very challenging,
and the panic was very real. And as I spoke with clients, too,
at the end of every conversation, if they decided they wanted
to do something different, we facilitated that and helped them,
but it definitely was started with a contagion that spread to
us.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Listen, this really concerns me, because I
think back in 2020,when we had a run on toilet paper of all
things, and I think people will prioritize their money over
toilet paper, so we already have three examples here. And I
think the regulators took some actions to minimize this
contagion effect across the system. Whether it was enough or
not in time, I am not sure, but I think it is something we need
to certainly look at and study.
Vice Chairman Barr was here yesterday, and he made the
comment that the core responsibility of examiners is to look at
interest rate risk and liquidity risk. Mr. Becker, were the
examiners looking at interest rate risk and liquidity risk at
your bank?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, liquidity risk, I know for a
certainty that was discussed, and, again, as I mentioned
earlier to answer your question, I don't have direct experience
in hearing about interest rate risk, but I am confident it
happened.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, is recognized.
Mr. Scott. Mr. Becker, what percentage of your deposits at
Silicon Valley Bank exceeded the FDIC insurance cap just before
the bank collapsed on March 10th of this year?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, as I mentioned in my testimony, I
have been at SVB for 30 years, and to my recollection, we have
always had a high level of uninsured deposits. It was not that
different at the end versus what it was----
Mr. Scott. Mr. Becker, I am sure that the whole nation, the
whole world knows you had a high percentage. But in fact,
according to the S&P Global Market Intelligence data from
December 2022, we now know that Silicon Valley Bank ranked
first among banks with more than $50 billion in assets, with 95
percent of its total deposits being uninsured. That is the
truth. And for you not to know that, for you not to answer
that, is absolutely unbelievable. While the average for U.S.
banks was 30 percent, you had 95 percent, almost all of your
accounts uninsured according to the S&P's Global Market
Intelligence, not only exceeding the FDIC's insurance cap, but
doing so with this 95 percent and high concentrations in the
technology sector, making your bank highly susceptible to
panic.
I think you are going to go down in history as absolutely
being the most irresponsible leader of a bank in the history of
this country, to have 95 percent, almost all of your accounts
uninsured. So not only were you exceeding the FDIC's insurance
cap, but with this technology sector, making your bank highly
susceptible to panic. So, let me ask you this, Mr. Becker, at
any point leading up to March 10th, were you made aware of
regulators' concerns regarding your bank's overreliance on 95
percent of your bank account being uninsured deposits?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, to my earlier point, given we are
a commercial bank, we have always had a high level of uninsured
deposits, and to my memory----
Mr. Scott. You keep saying, ``a high level,'' all of them.
I can't even imagine you are thinking that, and you are
thinking the American people are not highly disappointed in
your total disregard of their money in your hands, and you are
not having it insured--less than 5 percent insured. Now, let me
ask you this, who made the decision to maintain this reliance
on uninsured deposits, given the warnings by our Federal
regulators? Who made this decision, Mr. Becker, this foolish,
irresponsible, and deceitful decision? Who made it?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, as I said, that has been our
business model for----
Mr. Scott. Who made the decision, my friend?
Mr. Becker. And that information----
Mr. Scott. Was it you?
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. He can
submit an answer in writing for the record.
The gentlewoman from Missouri, Mrs. Wagner, who is also the
Chair of our Subcommittee on Capital Markets, is now
recognized.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
witnesses for appearing before the committee today. The
reckless actions by you and your management put the paychecks
of millions of Americans and thousands of businesses, some of
which were in my district, Missouri's 2nd Congressional
District, at great risk. The week SVB's failed, I had
businesses that provide good jobs in my district left wondering
if they would be able to even make payroll the following week.
Yesterday, we discussed the supervisory failures, abject
failures of the prudential regulators. It is now abundantly
clear that they should have taken stronger enforcement actions
after many, many citations, Matters Requiring Attention (MRAs),
and Matters Requiring Immediate Attention (MRIAs), to prevent
these collapses from happening. Today I want to hear from you
all as to why your banks were insufficient in addressing a
rising interest rate environment that started over 12 months
ago.
Mr. Becker, as interest rates increased at the most rapid
pace in modern history because monetary policy had to battle
runaway inflation, did supervisors at the Fed show extra
attention to interest rate risk issues, and if they did, when
did they begin to show that attention?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, as I mentioned earlier, when I
look at the supervisory findings, we had one MRA regarding
interest rate risk, and it was mainly related to modeling.
Again, to my memory, I don't recall that coming up as a major
topic, what was the discussion that had been had the main one
was around liquidity. And we, to my knowledge, addressed all or
the majority of those findings during 2022.
Mrs. Wagner. Mr. Becker, by March 8, 2023, when SVB
announced that it was selling the available-for-sale portion of
its securities portfolio, the Fed had already implemented 9
interest rate hikes. Why didn't SVB attempt to sell the
securities sooner?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, the decisions around when to
sell the securities and what to do is monitored and managed by
our Asset Liability Committee and our Treasury Team and
overseen by our Finance Committee of the Board. The first time
that I recall coming up about the possibility of selling our
available-for-sale portfolio was in the fall or towards the end
of 2022. And it was decided that, at that point, it didn't make
the most sense.
There was a belief that the rapid rise in interest rates
could create and likely would create a recessionary
environment, and rates would actually start to go the other
way. In the beginning of 2022 or 2023, we realized that was
unlikely to happen, and we decided to then sell the portfolio.
Mrs. Wagner. Mr. Becker, the Fed report notes that prior to
2022, Silicon Valley Bank had interest rate risk hedges on some
or all of its longer-dated maturities. The Fed report further
notes that over the course of 2022, the bank pursued a strategy
of dropping those hedges. Can you explain why you made the
decision to drop these hedges?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, two points, and I will then get
to the answer to your question. The hedges that were in place,
again set up by our Asset Liability Committee and our Treasury
Team, were only on a portion of our available-for-sale
portfolio, which was a much, much smaller portion of the
securities portfolio. I don't recall the specific percentage,
but it was actually a small percentage of the overall
portfolio. As far as the decision to sell the hedges, that
decision was made by our Treasury Team and our Asset Liability
Committee.
Mrs. Wagner. Would it have been more beneficial to your
balance sheet to have kept those hedges as long as additional
interest rate hikes were on the horizon, if the Fed was clearly
going to keep raising interest rates?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, I don't know the exact rationale
behind it. I don't have that information.
Mrs. Wagner. Such poor mismanagement, so reckless, so many
paychecks, 2 million that were on the line, many of which were
in my own district. I am just disgusted. Following up to Mr.
Huizenga, and I would like you to answer this in writing, we
were talking about your engagement with the FDIC on potential
acquirers. You said that they did not engage you. I want to
know if you were surprised that the FDIC did not take you up on
that offer and if you knew how many acquirers, but you can send
that to me in writing. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady yields back. The gentleman
from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch is now recognized.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to follow up on
the gentlelady's line of questioning. Mr. Chairman, I would
like unanimous consent to enter into the record an article from
The New York Times dated December 15, 2021.
Chairman Barr. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Lynch. This article basically says that the Fed had
made clear--this was in December of 2021, Mr. Becker--that a
fresh set of economic projections released on Wednesday showed
that Fed officials expected to raise interest rates, which were
then set near zero, 3 times in the following year. Again, this
was in December of 2021. The Fed went ahead and raised rates 7
times in the following year, but said they were going to raise
them 3 times. And you were still loaded up with long-term, low-
interest securities that were uninsured. So basically, you
failed to anticipate the impact that a rising rate environment
would have on those deposits, correct?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, as I mentioned in my written
testimony, and I think this is very important, our balance
sheet is constructed, our asset side, with securities, and also
loans----
Mr. Lynch. Yes, I get that.
Mr. Becker. Those loans are variable rate, meaning, as
rates rise, we make more money, so my view is you have to look
at the entire balance sheet.
Mr. Lynch. Well, 97 percent of your deposits were
uninsured--97 percent. Those are the first deposits to run.
These are the canyons of bank deposits. They run the fastest
and they run first, and you failed to appreciate what would
happen when rates went up. The Fed made public their intent in
December 2021 that they were going to raise rates. And this was
a period where you didn't have a chief risk officer, correct?
Mr. Becker. No, it is not.
Mr. Lynch. It is not. So, what did your risk officer advise
you at that point?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I don't recall specifically what
the discussion was around that. I know that, again, my memory,
is that----
Mr. Lynch. Look, it shouldn't take a risk officer to figure
this out. You had $91 billion of assets that were locked into
long-term, low-interest securities--$91 billion. And as rates
went up in 2022, the value of those assets plummeted, went from
$91 billion to $21 billion, and everybody headed for the door.
How could you not anticipate that? How could you not understand
the impact of a rising rate environment on your deposit base? I
don't get this, and I find it hard to believe that no one at
the bank anticipated this. What is your response?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, what is the specific question?
Mr. Lynch. The question is, what was your alternative
reality if you are not facing the facts? And if you are not
acknowledging what is going on in front of you, what was the
alternative scenario, the alternative reality that led you to
keep these? This $91 billion in assets were held-to-maturity,
so that really frightened people when you had to start selling
those at a considerable loss and actually realizing the losses
of this strategy. And I am just asking for an explanation of
why you did what you did in this phase of what was going on?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, it is a complicated answer. In the
sense of looking at the balance sheet, you have to understand
the assets. And again, our loans were variable rates, and they
benefited from higher rates, so that is part of the equation.
The other part----
Mr. Lynch. Here is what gets me. Earlier in your testimony,
you were blaming the Fed for not telling you what to do, not
raising the interest rate issue with you. A high school student
in economics or finance would have been able to figure out the
danger that you were in. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Williams, is now recognized.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and in full
disclosure, I am a car dealer from Texas. And, Mr. Shay, in the
recent New York State Department of Financial Services internal
review regarding the supervision of Signature Bank, it showed
that your bank did not develop a control framework in line with
this growth and did not have a liquidity management plan that
matched this risk profile. In the past, and leading up to
Signature Bank's collapse, regulators had identified weaknesses
in the bank's liquidity risk management, yet Signature's
management failed to act on or remedy these warnings. You are
in the position you are in right now because you failed to
adequately manage your liquidity risk and positions.
So my question is, when were you made aware of these
liquidity risks and why were they ignored, and did you express
any disagreement with the Federal regulators' findings when
they were laid out to you?
Mr. Shay. Yes, as chairman of the board, I was aware of
these, and the bank was taking substantial steps to address
them, including improving stress test modeling, improving other
modeling, diversifying further deposit portfolio mix, limiting
the amount of deposits, seeking additional resources of
liquidity in terms, including issuing brokered CDs, which the
bank had not previously done that were insured, entering into
repurchase agreements or arranging to get into repurchase
agreements, negotiating repurchase agreements with primary
dealers, curtailing lending to lower the amount of need for
deposits, and maintaining a high-quality lending portfolio as
well as a shorter-term securities portfolio consisting of
readily-marketable government agency and other securities.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. In 2022, we saw the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) raise interest rates at a speed
that we had not experienced since the 1980s--and I remember the
1980s--and a belated attempt to address the runaway inflation
sparked by the partisan American Rescue Plan, which injected
$1.9 trillion into the economy. This rise in rates caused the
assets that the Silicon Valley Bank had invested in to decline
in value. We know this, and when withdrawals at SVB began to
rise at a rapid rate, these assets were sold at a loss.
So, Mr. Becker, when the bank invested $80 billion in long-
term, mortgage-backed securities, was there a plan in place to
adapt to rising interest rates and a decrease in value of these
bonds? And Mrs. Wagner touched a little bit on that.
Mr. Becker. Congressman, a couple of points. The first is
that investments that were made in 2021 were invested in
government securities, and those are very pledgeable. If you
need liquidity, you can borrow against them. And by the end of
2022, we had $69 billion of availability for liquidity at the
end of the year.
The second point is that those securities actually pay
down, so roughly $12 billion per year of those securities would
amortize down, and that was from the held-to-maturity
portfolio. We also had availability with our available-for-
sale-portfolio and then our cash. So when we looked at it, we
believed we had adequate liquidity to support several different
scenarios.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. And, Mr. Becker, finally, the
bank did not have a chief risk officer--I think you have talked
about that--for 8 months between April 2022 and January 2023.
This seems as if your team did not care about risk. And even
though there were several warning signs that had been brought
to light, you and your team did not think to address the risk
and put someone in place to manage and mitigate those risks.
You did, however, bring on a chief risk officer in January but
that proved to be too little, too late.
So, Mr. Becker quickly, during the time that Silicon Valley
Bank did not have a chief risk officer who was overseeing the
risk management framework, what efforts did you make to find
and hire a qualified candidate?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I respectfully disagree with the
characterization that we didn't take risk management seriously.
Mr. Williams of Texas. You didn't have anybody in charge,
but that is fine.
Mr. Becker. We had a team of people, of senior executives
in risk leadership positions. We created the Office of the
Chief Risk Officer (CRO), that reported to me and reported to
the Chair of our Risk Committee. And we were actively engaged
in risk management broadly across the organization and being
responsive to the regulatory feedback.
Mr. Williams of Texas. It is kind of like, if in my car
business selling cars, we don't have a sales manager. I yield
back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentlewoman
from Ohio, Mrs. Beatty, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
ranking member. I am not sure where to start, so let me start
with making this statement. I want to take a moment, Mr.
Chairman, to acknowledge the hardworking Americans who were
harmed by this glaring mismanagement at your banks. Public
pension funds nationwide lost millions of dollars that were
invested in Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank. In my
hometown, my 3rd Congressional District, the home of the Ohio
State Teachers Retirement System, took the biggest hit, with
over $27 million invested in your bank. Meanwhile, with the
reports that have come to light since the collapses in March,
we know that executives at your bank earned millions of dollars
in bonuses, stock sales, and increased executive compensation,
while you ran the banks into the ground.
And I don't need to go through it. We have heard it on both
sides of the aisle, from failing to address Supervisory
Recommendations, to taking on significant interest rate and
liquidity risks, and inadequately matching the bank. Meanwhile,
teachers, like my sisters, firefighters, and other public
servants lost millions that were invested through your public
pension funds.
Let me do two things quickly. Mr. Scott ran out of time, so
any one of you can answer his questions. Who made the decision
to continue with these uninsured deposits? We will just go down
the line. Just give me an answer. Who made the decisions? Mr.
Becker?
Mr. Becker. The decision around our uninsured deposits
relates to our strategy, which has been our strategy----
Mrs. Beatty. So, who implemented the strategy? Who did it?
Who made the final decision?
Mr. Becker. The strategy direction of SVB----
Mrs. Beatty. Is your signature on it? Do you take
responsibility for it?
Mr. Becker. The board and myself.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Thank you again, and thank you for
earlier acknowledging and taking responsibility. Mr. Shay, your
answer?
Mr. Shay. Yes, the strategy of the Signature Bank was to
serve mid-sized bank----
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. But do you take responsibility for that
strategy? ``Strategy,'' is the word. Who implemented it? Who
was ultimately responsible? Is that you?
Mr. Shay. That was the founding principle of Signature
Bank.
Mrs. Beatty. Mr. Roffler, same question.
Mr. Roffler. The board of directors and executive
management implemented a successful business strategy that
lasted for 37 years.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Because the clock is running, let me go
into the next question, please. I have heard you have been
there for 30 years, 12 years as the CEO, which is a lot of
time, and a founder since 2000, co-founder of Signature Bank,
CEO from 2009 to present. How much money did you make? What was
your salary for 2022 and 2023 and bonuses? Salary and how much
in bonuses, dollars and cents?
Mr. Becker. For 2022?
Mrs. Beatty. Yes.
Mr. Becker. My salary was just over $1 million, and my
incentive compensation was $1.5 million.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Next?
Mr. Shay. My last salary was $900,000, and a $1.7 million
bonus.
Mr. Roffler. My last salary was $990,000, and my bonus was
$1.5 million.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Let me start with you, Mr. Becker. You
know what, ``MRA,'' stands for in, ``MRIA,'' right?
Mr. Becker. I do.
Mrs. Beatty. Everybody understands what that is, right? So,
Mr. Becker, in the recent report on the failure of Silicon
Valley Bank, the Federal Reserve stated that it issued multiple
supervisory issues on MRAs and on MRIAs, 31 supervisory issues
pertaining to capital planning and positions, liquidity and
risk management, governance and control, all of these
strategies you all talked about, including the Bank Secrecy Act
(BSA) and Anti-Money Laundering (AML). And 12 of the 31 open
issues on the MRIA, and for those watching who don't know, when
you put the, ``I,'' in it, it means, ``immediate.'' That means
it needed immediate attention. Can you explain to me, after 3
years, why we still ended up with the collapse? You had not
answered those 31, only 12.
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, as I said earlier, we were
extremely responsive to the regulatory feedback, and all the
matters you are describing----
Mrs. Beatty. Do you know what those 12 were, because my
time is running out. Do you know what they were?
Mr. Becker. I can't speak to every single one, but I know
that----
Mrs. Beatty. I'm sorry. My time has expired.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk, who is also the Vice
Chair of the Financial Institutions Subcommittee, is now
recognized.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate
you all being here today. This is a very important issue, as
you are all aware.
Mr. Becker, Chairman Andy Barr asked you about the
departure of the chief risk officer (CRO) for Silicon Valley
Bank. And in yesterday's hearing before the Senate Banking
Committee, you said that this was spurred, at least in part, by
recommendations from regulators who were concerned about her
experience. Can you tell us a little bit more about the
specific concerns that Fed regulators had about your CRO's
experience?
Mr. Becker. Yes, Congressman. As I described yesterday, the
feedback was observations from the board of directors, from the
regulators, from myself, and from an internal audit. And as we
started to approach the $250-billion level, looking at
individuals, especially in the risk area who had that
experience of even larger institutions, was the feedback that
we were getting. And that is what we acted on.
Mr. Loudermilk. According to her public LinkedIn profile,
she had over a decade of experience in enterprise risk
management prior to her 6 years of SVB. In her 6 years of
employment with you, what role did she play in developing the
bond portfolio that contributed to SVB's collapse?
Mr. Becker. Our chief risk officer would have sat on our
Asset Liability Committee, and she would have been a voting
member on that committee. Given that I wasn't on that committee
and wasn't part of it, I don't know the discussions that she
would have had in overseeing the overall portfolio and the
strategy around it.
Mr. Loudermilk. And I understand it takes time to find good
executives, but why did you decide to dismiss her without
having a successor already in place?
Mr. Becker. As I mentioned earlier, based on the feedback,
we thought it was best, and we consulted with the regulators,
and clearly the board was driving this as the chief risk
officer reports into the Risk Committee. And it was decided
that having our chief risk officer on board as a consultant who
is available made the most sense as we built out our Office of
the Chief Risk Officer and had those senior leaders in risk
management reporting to me and reporting to the Chair of our
Risk Committee.
Mr. Loudermilk. So, you felt that was better than just
keeping her in an interim position?
Mr. Becker. We did.
Mr. Loudermilk. It has been reported that SVB's Risk
Committee met 18 times in 2022, more than double the number of
meetings in 2021. At any point during these meetings was the
interest rate risk on SVB's balance sheet discussed?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, the 18 meetings were on a variety
of different topics. It was around governance and controls and
looking at the metrics around what is called a risk appetite
statement, which is, what level of risk are you willing to
accept as an institution. So, the liquidity risk would have
been the main area where that would have been stressed and that
was definitely discussed.
Mr. Loudermilk. Do you remember when the first time was
that the interest rate risk was brought up?
Mr. Becker. Again, my recollection was that liquidity risk
was one of the metrics that was reviewed, so that would have
been discussed across many of the Risk Committees going back
for a long period of time.
Mr. Loudermilk. Would you say that was one of the
compelling reasons why you had double the number of meetings in
2022 than you had in 2021?
Mr. Becker. I wouldn't say that was the main reason or
really the compelling reason. It was really overall enhancing
our risk management across the entire platform, including
governance. And we had changed the Risk Committee structure
about a year earlier, so I was making sure that we had the
right risk governance across the entire platform.
Mr. Loudermilk. Also, I want to clear up some confusion
regarding the Office of the Chief Risk Officer and the Risk
Committee. Were these two entities the same, and if not, were
they substantially similar in composition and function?
Mr. Becker. The Office of the Chief Risk Officer was
actually management level, so it did not include any board
members. The Risk Committee was a board-level committee.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. I see I am quickly running out of
time and won't have time for additional questions, so I will
submit those for the record.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Barr. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from California, Mr. Vargas, is now recognized.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you again and the ranking member for putting this
together. I appreciate it. I actually don't like being in the
position that we are in today: failure. I am a religious
liberal. I believe in God's mercy and redemption. And when
someone is poor and does something wrong, I believe in
redemption for them, and when someone is rich and fails, I
believe in redemption for them, so I am not going to stand here
and beat you up. I am not going to do that. I am obviously
disappointed, as I think as all of us are, and I hope that you
will cooperate with the government so we can fix some of the
problems.
And one of the problems that I see is that it seems like
all of your banks were reactive and not proactive in this
situation. I think you are calling it unprecedented
circumstances and events, and I agree with that. When you move
so much money, a run on the bank that is so quick and
digitalized, it is unforeseeable--not unforeseeable, but again,
it is unprecedented.
What can we do? To begin, I know those on the other side of
the aisle usually think of deregulating in a situation like
this. Probably most of us on this side of the aisle, certainly
me, think about regulations, not deregulation, what can we do
in this situation, the situations you find yourselves in for
banks not to have this problem. I see that this could affect
virtually any bank, except for the really big ones. Any time
that social media or short sellers decide to manipulate the
stock, they can do that quite quickly through social media, and
all of a sudden, money can be moved.
What can we do? What can the government do to prevent this
so people don't lose their money? Who would like to take that?
Mr. Roffler, why don't you take a shot at it first?
Mr. Roffler. Sure. Congressman, it is a very good question.
And obviously, reflecting on the last 60 days, one that I have
thought about frequently. And sitting here today, it is very
hard for me to give any good advice for that because as we
learned through March 9th, we were in a strong position. Yes,
2023 was going to be a bit more challenging than 2022 from an
earnings standpoint, but when contagion hit after the failures
of the two other banks, panic set in. And I think my
recommendation to others would be----
Mr. Vargas. But is there any trigger? For example, yes,
that panic hits at Wall Street, too, so we have put in
triggers. We have put in things that slow the system down. Is
there anything we could do for that to slow the system down,
because I think that the banking system is sound. It is
resilient, it is sound, but there is always the opportunity for
panic. And there is always the opportunity to make money in a
panic. Not everyone lost money in this deal. Short sellers made
money. I think we need to investigate them to find out what
happened. Is there something that we can do, some triggers,
something that the government can put in place so we don't have
these runs on the bank?
Mr. Roffler. I would share that on March 12th, I think they
adopted one of the lending programs which banks could utilize,
and I think banks did utilize that successfully, so I think
that was a good step. But at the end of the day, when the panic
sets in, it is really hard to regain confidence. And absent
some evaluation of the insurance on deposits, which I think the
FDIC is requesting comments or offering a proposal on, I think
that is one thing that would be worth looking at because that
can at least calm the waters.
Mr. Vargas. Mr. Shay, same question. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Shay. I can't give you a solution, but I can tell you
that I believe it is a problem that needs to be fixed, and I
certainly saw it and felt it that Friday afternoon. It was
literally nothing. The customers didn't want to hear anything
that I spoke to. They just wanted to get to, I remember, I need
to get my money to JPMorgan Chase because the government won't
let them go. I need to get my money to Citibank because the
government saved them once, so they will save them again. It
was panicked calls. I need to get my money to a too-big-to-fail
bank because they might let you go. I am not a bank analyst. I
don't know banking. I am just running a plumbing supply area. I
am running a school bus, operating business. I am running a
healthcare provider service----
Mr. Vargas. Okay. My time----
Mr. Shay. Most of them have deposits well in excess of the
insured, and they didn't want to miss payroll, and so that was
really very----
Mr. Vargas. My time is up, but I appreciate your answers.
But I do think we need to take a look at that, because I do
think when the panic sets in, there is no way to stop it unless
it is insured. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Tennessee, Mr. Rose, is now recognized.
Mr. Rose. Thank you to our chairmen and ranking members,
and thank you to our witnesses for being here. I know it is not
an easy environment, so I appreciate you being here to share
your insights with us.
I want to back up, and if all three of you will hang with
me for a second, go back 3 years or so and think about where
you were and what decisions you were making in your banks. And
then, let's imagine that you could have seen forward, that your
crystal balls were working particularly well.
I will start with you, Mr. Becker. If you had known that in
2022, inflation would reach a 40-year high, would you have
managed the bank differently going into that period?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I think about your question a lot
in hindsight, and I think that is very hard because I go back
and think about the decisions that were made. We didn't have
access to that information. We only had the information that
was available to us at the time.
Mr. Rose. But let's imagine if you had known that and you
could have anticipated the attendant reactions to that. My
guess is you would have made different choices. Is that true?
Mr. Becker. I think if we knew and our team that was making
investment decisions would have known that there was going to
be the fastest rate rise in 40 years, yes.
Mr. Rose. And you have anticipated my next question. If you
could have foreseen the fastest rate rise in history, you
definitely would have managed your balance sheet differently?
Mr. Becker. I think it is likely we would have managed our
balance sheet differently.
Mr. Rose. And, Mr. Shay, same two questions. If you could
have foreseen the inflation rate and then the attendant rise in
interest rates, you would have made different decisions, right?
Mr. Shay. I can't say what we would have done
hypothetically, but what I can say is that the plan that
Signature Bank presented to open on Monday, March 12th, assumed
that we were selling the entire available-for-sale-portfolio,
taking any losses that were there, and still were well-
capitalized after that and met all regulatory definitions. So,
the Signature Bank portfolio of available-for-sale was of a
controlled interest rate risk and it was an issue but not the
one that would have caused the bank to even be not well-
capitalized under regulatory standards.
Mr. Rose. Mr. Roffler?
Mr. Roffler. Thank you for your question, Congressman. I
have thought about it a lot, and the reality is for the last 3
years, and, frankly, the 37 years of our bank's history, our
goal each and every day when we woke up was to serve clients,
and that is what we did. We help people buy homes, we help
nonprofits, we help small businesses, and we will continue to
do that. And I think the events that unfolded on March 10th
were entirely unforeseeable. When contagion and panic spread,
it is very hard to control, so I think that our business
model--we were profitable, we were strong, we were well-
capitalized, and everything changed on the morning of March
10th.
Mr. Rose. If the Fed had opened the discount window,
allowing you to borrow against your bond portfolio at par
before this all happened, and I will direct this to you, Mr.
Becker, would that have changed things? Do you think you would
be sitting in a different place if that facility had existed
in, say, February and after?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I actually don't know the answer
to that question. I think it would have been hard because of
the fact that on Thursday, there was $42 billion, and on
Friday, there was $100 billion requested to be exited from SVB.
I don't know if that would have helped or not, or would have
helped. I don't know if it would have protected against the
bank run.
Mr. Rose. And I am wondering, Mr. Becker, your bank had an
extremely concentrated level of risk or deposits in certain
areas. What caused you and your management to believe that
those deposits would be sticky if the waters got choppy?
Mr. Becker. Yes. As previously mentioned, that has been our
model since I can recall, working with technology and
innovation companies. And our goal at the end of the day was to
serve them in a way where that loyalty would be created by
being in the best place for them to operate, which I believe is
exactly what we delivered on, and that is what we believe had
to happen. That is what history had taught us, and so we
believe that to be the case.
Mr. Rose. And in my remaining few seconds, I am wondering
if your bank ever turned down deposits, as you grew at an
extremely fast pace? Was there ever a time when you said, we
better not take any more deposits from this customer? Please,
if you will answer that in writing for the record.
My time has expired. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. You can give a really quick answer.
Mr. Becker. Yes. The majority of the cash that came in that
I talked about with the growth came from existing clients, and
so coming from existing clients, we felt that the right thing
to do was to take those deposits.
Chairman Barr. You can answer the rest in writing for the
record. Thank you.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Casten, is now recognized.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
what I know is a long, difficult day here.
Mr. Becker, lots of my colleagues have talked about the
fact that your chief risk officer was terminated in April 2022.
I think your written testimony mentioned that that was under
some constructive pressure from regulators. You didn't disclose
that you were operating without a risk officer until your proxy
statement at the beginning of 2023. Were regulators aware of
that decision to delay the announcement to your shareholders
that you were operating without a chief risk officer?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, the decisions around disclosures--
we have a process that we would go through. The Legal Team
would drive that.
Mr. Casten. I am just asking--we have an oversight response
with regulators. Were regulators aware of that decision to go
11 months without notification to your shareholders?
Mr. Becker. I know the regulators were aware of the
decisions around the chief risk officer. I don't know if they
were aware of any disclosures.
Mr. Casten. Okay. But presumably, it was your opinion that
that was not a materially significant fact to disclose for 11
months?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, the decision around disclosures is
made by, it is a process----
Mr. Casten. Okay. But you are the CEO. During that 8- to 9-
month period, you doubled your number of risk meetings. Did
regulators participate in those Risk Committee meetings?
Mr. Becker. Congressman----
Mr. Casten. Yes or no?
Mr. Becker. ----in the risk meetings that I was in, I don't
recall them participating.
Mr. Casten. Did you participate in all of those meetings?
Mr. Becker. I did.
Mr. Casten. Okay. You mentioned in your opening remarks
that March 8th, which was the day that shall live in infamy,
you announced the sale of equity to Goldman. You mentioned the
Signature Bank collapse. That was also the day that you
announced the booked, I think, $1.8 billion loss on the sale of
bonds also to Goldman. When did you initiate the process of
selling equity and debt to Goldman that commenced on March 8th?
Mr. Becker. To clarify, Congressman, the sale of the
securities was to Goldman. The issuing of new shares and
securities to raise equity was not to Goldman. They were our
investment----
Mr. Casten. But when did you initiate the process with
Goldman on both the equity and the debt transactions that
culminated on March 8th?
Mr. Becker. We started those discussions on the last day or
two of February.
Mr. Casten. Okay. And you had mentioned concerns about
liquidity risk and interest rate risk. Was that in response to
those concerns? And when were those concerns raised that would
have caused you to initiate the process to raise equity and
sell debt?
Mr. Becker. Again, my recollection is that towards the end
of February, our CFO and I were having a conversation about, if
you look at the last roughly 2 weeks to 3 weeks, the 10-year
Treasury had jumped significantly----
Mr. Casten. I am not looking for the why, I am just trying
to understand the calendar of who knew what, when, because on
March 8th--you are saying you started the process at the end of
February. When were there concerns raised that you needed to
start this process? Was that the day before? Was it in January?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, there were concerns raised that
forced us to do that.
Mr. Casten. Okay.
Mr. Becker. We decided to do it and we talked about it at
the end of February, and we engaged our board, we engaged our
regulators, and we talked to them about the process.
Mr. Casten. Okay. And I am sorry to cut you off, but I want
to get to something else. You sold $3.6 million of stock
personally on February 27th, which would have been right about
that time. I understand that process was initiated on January
26th. Given all that was going on, did your Risk Committee sign
off on that sale?
Mr. Becker. And this has been the process for as long as I
have been at the bank, that when you want to sell stock, you
put together a 10b5-1 plan.
Mr. Casten. I am just----
Mr. Becker. It is reviewed by our Legal Team.
Mr. Casten. Okay. But given the timing, you understand my
question. Did the Risk Committee sign off or was this just that
they were notified?
Mr. Becker. I don't think the Risk Committee would have
been notified. It was the Legal Team that would have concurred
with my belief they would have material information.
Mr. Casten. Okay. You have mentioned several times that you
don't recall any discussion around interest rate risk prior to
2023. Do you recall concerns that you are over-insured against
interest rate volatility?
Mr. Becker. Can you clarify the question, Congressman?
Mr. Casten. You have said you don't recall concerns that
you had an exposure to interest rate risk, and yet you sold
down 97 percent of your interest rate hedges on your available-
for-sale portfolio during 2022. So, was there a concern raised
that you were over-insured against that risk, because there was
a decision made to essentially take on long-term risk in
exchange for short-term transferred equity.
Mr. Becker. As previously mentioned, as far as the
decisions around the hedges, two points, one is, it was against
the available-for-sale portfolio, which is the smallest----
Mr. Casten. Yes, but it was 97 percent. You started with
$15.3 billion insured, and you ended 2022 with $563 million
insured.
Chairman Barr. The witness can answer the rest of the
questions in writing for the record.
And we will take a brief 5-minute recess to allow our
witnesses to take a quick break. I would ask that they return
promptly, and we will return just a little after the top of the
hour.
The committee stands in recess.
[recess]
Chairman Barr. The committee will come to order. Thank you
for everyone's indulgence on the break.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Meuser for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to start
with a question for each of you. Mr. Becker, how many Matters
Requiring Attention (MRAs) did your bank receive?
Mr. Becker. We had 31 at the end.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you. Mr. Shay, how many did you receive?
Mr. Shay. I don't recall.
Mr. Meuser. Was it more than zero?
Mr. Shay. I don't recall.
Mr. Meuser. You don't recall?
Mr. Shay. It was more than zero, but I don't recall.
Mr. Meuser. Mr. Roffler, how many?
Mr. Roffler. We had zero.
Mr. Meuser. Zero. How is it zero if you eventually
collapsed?
Mr. Roffler. As I mentioned earlier, I think as part of my
testimony, the bank maintained very strong communicative
relationships with our regulators. We addressed feedback as it
was received. They provided Supervisory Recommendations, and we
addressed them. If you think back to March 9th, it was a very
strong day for the bank, and the bank was in a strong financial
position. And we were actually benefiting from some of the
uncertainty relative to other banks, and on March 10th,
everything changed.
Mr. Meuser. Fine, but why you? Why were you perceived as
next?
Mr. Roffler. It is a very good question, and this one I am
not sure I can answer. I think on March 9th, late in the day,
similar to what we were discussing earlier, there were some
social media posts linking First Republican and Silicon Valley
Banks. I am not sure if it was geographic-based, or if it was a
small client overlap base.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you. Mr. Becker, when your bank was
reviewed by the Fed in 2021 and 2022, they alerted your bank
that the risk management programs were not effective and that
the liquidity risk management practices were below supervisory
expectations. What was your reaction to these communications
from the regulator?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, maybe two points around that. One
is, we certainly take all the regulatory feedback into
consideration and respond as quickly as we can. The second
clarifying point is really how we were rated. The LFI rating
for liquidity was the second-highest rating that could have
been given. Under the CAMELS rating, we were the second-highest
rating under liquidity as well.
Mr. Meuser. Did your Senior Leadership Team give you a
rating that high? They actually see a hurricane. Nobody
perceived any sort of hurricane winds coming in and, hey, we
need a bigger boat. We might be running into trouble. No one
felt that you had any concerns in your investment portfolio or
your type of deposits. You needed a regulator to tell you that?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, we looked at several things. One
is our capital----
Mr. Meuser. Regulators missed it, and your management team
missed it?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, the capital ratios that we had
were exceptionally strong. And our liquidity at the end of the
year, we had $69 billion worth of borrowing access plus cash.
Mr. Meuser. I know some of the numbers but----
Mr. Becker. We certainly believe we had----
Mr. Meuser. But you didn't have any conversations with the
regulators during this time--Hey, guys, we have 57 percent
Treasuries, Jerome Powell is saying interest rates are going
up, we are losing billions of dollars, most of our deposits are
beyond the FDIC insurance. Didn't those conversations take
place?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, we were talking about risk
management on a regular basis. And we looked at our risk
appetite statement in the metrics, and if there were any
concerns, we addressed them as quickly as we could.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. In November 2022, interest rate risk
simulations were not reliable. You received that notification
from the Fed. No alarms went off?
Mr. Becker. Can you repeat that question?
Mr. Meuser. In November of 2022, the Fed issued you a
supervisory statement, ``Interest rate risk simulations are not
reliable.'' Your bank, no?
Mr. Becker. The answer to the question----
Mr. Meuser. You reviewed it in November of 2022.
Mr. Becker. Yes.
Mr. Meuser. And you received the high-risk rating, yet
nothing was really done. That was in November of 2022.
Mr. Becker. The response that we provided to interest rate
risk management and liquidity risk management was throughout
2022 and in 2023. And we were working on managing the higher
interest rates, making sure we had enough liquidity to support
our clients, and making sure that we were taking care of
interest rate risk----
Mr. Meuser. I don't know in what business world that sounds
reasonable, but it doesn't to me.
Mr. Shay, I am going to move on. Signature Bank's collapse,
according to the FDIC, was due to poor management and that you
did not heed FDIC examiners' concerns and were not responsive
to addressing FDIC Supervisory Recommendations. What do you say
to that?
Mr. Shay. As chairman of the board, I believe that
Signature Bank was actively addressing regulatory----
Mr. Meuser. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentlewoman
from Massachusetts, Ms. Pressley, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. Some of my colleagues have
characterized your time spent here today as possibly being
uncomfortable. I am really okay with that. Personally, I am
good with you being uncomfortable because my constituents in
the Massachusetts 7th District were very uncomfortable when SVB
collapsed. They were afraid in the face of uncertainty about
the status of their mortgages. Tech companies couldn't make
payroll. Small businesses were unable to receive payments, so
they were very uncomfortable. So, I am quite fine with you are
being uncomfortable today. True enough, the FDIC acted quickly
to make depositors whole. Today's hearing was still necessary
because this tragic, avoidable sequence of events demands
accountability.
Mr. Becker, your opening statement today and your responses
to questions mirror your testimony before the Senate yesterday.
Lots of finger pointing, blaming, passing the buck, blaming
social media, contagions, a 2018 Republican bill, which you
lobbied to help pass, and even your own employees. Now, this
question might feel a bit like Groundhog's Day, but here it is,
and I want a yes-or-no answer because I don't have the patience
for filibustering, and the American people deserve more than
the niceties of a committee hearing.
So yes or no, do you accept responsibility for the harm and
damage caused by your actions across the financial system and
to my constituents in the Massachusetts 7th? Mr. Becker, yes or
no?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, I accept responsibility for the
decisions that were made----
Ms. Pressley. Yes or no?
Mr. Becker. ----at the time.
Ms. Pressley. Yes or no? Do you accept responsibility?
Mr. Becker. I accept responsibility for the decisions that
were made. With the information that we had at the time, we
made those decisions.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. The bank failed on your watch. Between
2018 and 2023, the Federal Reserve issued 68 Matters Requiring
Attention (MRAs) and Matters Requiring Immediate Attention
(MRIAs), which highlighted the liquidity and risk management
deficiencies of SVB. Building upon the questions of my
colleague across the aisle, were you aware of these supervisory
notices? Yes or no?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, I disagree----
Ms. Pressley. Yes or no?
Mr. Becker. ----with the numbers that you were using----
Ms. Pressley. Yes or no? You are a very smart man. Yes or
no?
Mr. Becker. I was aware of the 31 regulatory findings.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. So, SVB was definitely aware of these
notices, yet you and your executives repeatedly ignored them.
You failed to address the obvious risks that were repeatedly
pointed out to you year after year after year. You blame social
media, you say similar banks experienced the same thing, so it
is not your fault for what happened, ultimately.
Failure to address risks after 68 supervisory notices is
absolutely unacceptable. Yet throughout the last 5 years, your
pay skyrocketed, and you continued to reap the benefits of
mismanaging your risk. Maybe that is why you are not as
uncomfortable as I think you should be today, because you are
sitting on a $1.5 million bonus. You received over $9.9 million
last year in compensation, as well as a $1.5 million bonus,
despite your tremendous failure to manage obvious risks. Do you
think that you truly earned your salary and your bonus? Yes or
no?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, to clarify the numbers that you
are talking about, the incentives that were set up by the
board----
Ms. Pressley. Please don't tell me that you trust the
board. That is a cop-out. Yes or no? Again, way to fail up.
That is just consistent for so many reasons, but the answer is,
no, you have not truly earned your salary or your bonus, and
that is why we need accountability. The American people deserve
accountability. That includes clawing back bonuses, and
investigating you for gross negligence, malpractice, and greed.
Congress must reverse the dangerous deregulation that you
lobbied for and send a strong message to bank CEOs that risky
behavior that jeopardizes our financial system will have severe
consequences. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady yields back. The gentleman
from South Carolina, Mr. Timmons, is recognized.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We currently have $32
trillion in debt. Our debt-to-GDP ratio is 120 percent, the
highest it has ever been, and, yes, we have a debt ceiling
fight running right up to the deadline. But Congress spent $7
trillion, of which $5 trillion was done mostly on party-line
votes. The Democrat Majority has not only spent money we don't
have, but their fiscal policy has caused out-of-control
inflation, from which we can draw a direct line to the failure
of your banks, give or take some gross mismanagement on your
part.
The Democrats' $7 trillion in unnecessary spending over the
last 4 years has caused inflation. My colleagues across the
aisle disagree with that causal relationship, but I think they
are the only ones still trying to defend their opportunistic
government handouts. I think your failed banks are the first
casualties of the Democrats' spending spree, and I think your
banks are just the beginning. I think all of your employees who
no longer have jobs will soon be joined by more hardworking
Americans, but I guess let's turn back to the gross
mismanagement issue.
Mr. Becker, do you feel that recent reports written by the
Federal Reserve and the California Department of Financial
Protection and Innovation are fair assessments of what happened
before and up to when your bank was placed in receivership?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, the feedback that I think was in
the GAO report was accurate in the sense that we were
responsive to the regulatory feedback and we are actively
remediating any concerns that were brought up. So, I believe we
were very, very attentive to the feedback we were receiving.
Mr. Timmons. The Fed's report on your bank's failure lays
blame with you and your Senior Management Team. Can you please
describe the organizational structure of your risk management
team, starting with you, then the CRO, and on down from May
2022 to January 2023?
Mr. Becker. Yes, and I will start Congressman, at the
highest level. We have the board of directors, which is
responsible for the overall governance of the institution. We
have a Risk Committee that is responsible for the oversight of
the risk of the institution. That Risk Committee has oversight,
again, over the risk of all of SVB. You had oversight. We had
several management risk committees, one of which reported
directly up to the Risk Committee. We had what would be called
three lines of defense. We had internal audit, which reported
to our Audit Committee. We had a risk structure that reported
to the Risk Committee.
Mr. Timmons. But as you previously testified, you didn't
have a chief risk officer during that time. Is that correct?
Mr. Becker. We had an Office of the Chief Risk Officer for
the majority of 2022.
Mr. Timmons. But not in the last 8 months prior to the
bank's failure?
Mr. Becker. We had an Office of the Chief Risk Officer that
was overseeing risk management for the institution.
Mr. Timmons. Okay. Can you also just explain to me the
concept of, ``safe space catch ups?'' What was that in SVB,
``safe space catch ups?'' It has been widely reported that your
bank spent enormous amounts of time with your executives
promoting, ``safe space catch ups,'' basically, a diversity,
equity, and inclusion endeavor to make people feel welcome in
the bank.
Mr. Becker. Congressman, that does not ring a bell with me.
I don't know what that would relate to.
Mr. Timmons. Can you estimate how many of your senior risk
officers were also leaders in your company-wide diversity,
equity, and inclusion program?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I don't know the answer to that
question.
Mr. Timmons. Your website, prior to it being shut down, had
enormous amounts of emphasis on that. And it seems that there
was a lot of time spent on things that do not cause banks to
succeed and things that make people feel good, and I think that
was part of the problem.
Moving on, some are proposing increased capital
requirements going forward, and I am going to ask each of you
this question. Would increased capital requirements have
avoided your bank from failing? Mr. Becker?
Mr. Becker. I can't comment on that because I don't know
what the requirements would be in this structure.
Mr. Timmons. If they were 50 percent higher, if they were
100 percent higher than the previous capital requirements. They
are proposing 10 percent, but----
Mr. Becker. I don't know the answer to that question,
Congressman.
Mr. Timmons. Mr. Shay, would increased capital requirements
have caused your bank to not fail?
Mr. Shay. I don't think so. There is one depositor I spoke
to on Friday afternoon who said, unless you have a dollar of
cash in your vault for every dollar, I have to move to a too-
big-to-fail bank.
Mr. Timmons. And Mr. Roffler?
Mr. Roffler. I would say that the capital requirements we
have now are very strong, and I think any change that might be
considered should consider the impact on regional banks and
community banks and be careful to not have a one-size-fits-all
approach. Because I grew up in a small town in Wisconsin, I
know the importance of community banks, and you want to make
sure they can continue to provide the service and support the
communities because they are so integral.
Mr. Timmons. I think we agree on that. Thank you. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Nevada, Mr. Horsford, is now recognized.
Mr. Horsford. I thank the chairmen and the ranking members
for the hearing. I have some very specific questions, so,
again, if you could respond with brevity. Mr. Becker, do you
take any accountability for Silicon Valley Bank's failure? Yes
or no?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I was the CEO of the institution,
so I am responsible for Silicon Valley Bank.
Mr. Horsford. Mr. Roffler, do you take any responsibility
for First Republic Bank's failure?
Mr. Roffler. As I said earlier, regardless of what caused
this, I take responsibility for our clients and for our
employees every day, and making sure they are taken care of and
supported.
Mr. Horsford. Mr. Shay, do you take any responsibility for
Signature Bank's failure?
Mr. Shay. Mr. Chairman, I believe that I fulfilled my
responsibilities responsibly.
Mr. Horsford. What is very troubling about each of your
responses is the idea that your lack of governance and
oversight and mismanagement has disrupted the entire regional
bank echo system in our country. And as a result, our committee
and other committees of jurisdiction are now having to step in
to figure out what we can do to help protect small businesses
and other depositors to make sure that their lives are not
further impacted. So, it is mind-boggling to me that you can't
take full responsibility for your actions. Do you agree with
GAO's statement that your banks' failures had to do with poor
governance and unsatisfactory risk management practices? Yes or
no, Mr. Becker?
Mr. Becker. Congressman----
Mr. Horsford. Yes or no?
Mr. Becker. I take ownership for the decisions that were
made.
Mr. Horsford. Yes or no, do you agree with GAO's statement
that it was poor governance and unsatisfactory risk management
practices?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I take responsibility for the
decisions that I made.
Mr. Horsford. That is a non-answer. Mr. Shay, do you
disagree with GAO's statement that your bank's failure had to
do with the poor governance and unsatisfactory risk management
practices?
Mr. Becker. I can't speak for the regulators. I believe the
reason for Signature's closure was due to the extraordinary
events that happened on that day.
Mr. Horsford. Mr. Roffler, same question.
Mr. Roffler. Congressman, I don't believe the GAO report
spoke to First Republic.
Mr. Horsford. To be clear, GAO's assessment clearly
indicated that it was due to mismanagement of the two banks in
particular. And I believe that if a bank fails due to
misconduct and mismanagement, then executives should be held
financially accountable. That is what the average person, the
average worker, the average consumer has to deal with when they
make decisions. Out of curiosity, Mr. Becker, did you receive a
compensation package after your departure from Silicon Valley
Bank upon its failure, and if so, do you mind disclosing how
much?
Mr. Becker. After I was terminated in March, I did not
receive a compensation package.
Mr. Horsford. Mr. Roffler, did you receive a compensation
package after your departure from First Republic Bank upon its
failure, and if so, do you mind disclosing how much?
Mr. Roffler. I have not received a compensation package
following the closure of First Republic.
Mr. Horsford. Mr. Shay, same question.
Mr. Shay. No.
Mr. Horsford. So, let me ask a different question. Should
bad behavior or poor judgment or terrible management be
financially rewarded? I think, absolutely not. And while we
continue to hear very concerning reports that executives are
taking huge payouts as banks fail, I am left to wonder, as many
of my constituents are, if your compensation packages
incentivized this crisis in the first place? And what is so
frustrating to me and a lot of my colleagues about all of this
is that somehow you feel as if you shouldn't be held
accountable.
Meanwhile, hardworking Nevadans and Americans across the
country are held to higher standards of accountability in the
work that they do each and every day. If an ordinary American
took more money out of their account than what was actually
available, they would be charged an overdraft fee. If an
ordinary American was one day late paying a credit card bill,
they would be charged a late fee. Yet when a bank executive
poorly manages their bank, which eventually fails, they are
paid multi-millions. This is what is wrong. This is what is
broken and it must be fixed.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Norman, is recognized.
Mr. Norman. Mr. Becker, I think earlier you mentioned you
had been in banking for 30 years, 12 of those as CEO?
Mr. Becker. Yes.
Mr. Norman. Mr. Shay, how long have you been in banking?
How long have you been in the banking arena? I know you were a
director, but how long have you been in the banking sector? How
many years?
Mr. Shay. About 30 years.
Mr. Norman. Thirty years.
Mr. Shay. Thirty or more years.
Mr. Norman. Mr. Roffler, how long have you been involved in
the banking arena? How long have you been employed as a banker?
Mr. Roffler. I have been a First Republic employee for 13
years, and before that, I was with KPMG.
Mr. Norman. For how long?
Mr. Roffler. Sixteen years.
Mr. Norman. Okay. All of you have seen ups and downs in the
market. I am in the real estate world in a development role. It
has ups and downs. Mr. Becker, I find it hard to believe that
your company grew from, I think $40 billion, up to $210
billion. I find it hard to believe that, particularly with the
CAMEL ratings that you all had received and warnings, whether
it is an MOU in writing, or as you described it, in words--it
really was an MOU, is more of a conversation----that to not
hedge your bets on the deposits, 94 percent on insured. How did
you come to that conclusion? I know you paid higher returns,
but was that with 94 percent of your deposits being above the
$250,000? How did you rationalize that?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, that was our business model that,
again, in my entire history, we had commercial clients and
technology and life science clients, and they tend to have
higher levels of deposits. That was our strategy.
Mr. Norman. Well, you took their money and you put it in an
asset with $21 billion in securities, that you sold at an $1.8-
billion loss. Is that correct?
Mr. Becker. On March 8th, we contemplated raising
additional capital and selling our available-for-sale
securities portfolio, as I articulated in my written testimony.
Mr. Norman. Okay. And you mentioned that you all were
without a risk officer for 8 months. You have roughly a little
over 2,000 employees. Did you happen to have a credit analyst
or a financial analyst or fund manager in that 2,000-employee
number?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, to clarify, we had over 8,000
employees, and we had roughly 1,000 employees who had the
majority or all of their responsibilities in risk management.
Mr. Norman. Nobody questioned what you were doing with the
funds?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, the investments that were made in
2021 by our Treasury Team and overseen by our Asset Liability
Committee were invested in government securities.
Mr. Norman. Okay. It wasn't a good decision, was it?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, the decision that was made, I
believe was in the best interest with the facts that they had
at that time.
Mr. Norman. Okay. Let me ask the question a little bit
differently. I know my friend on the other side mentioned
compensation. Were bonuses paid out in the last month, or close
to the time that the Fed took over?
Mr. Becker. The 2022 incentive compensation payments as
determined----
Mr. Norman. Were bonuses paid out?
Mr. Becker. Bonuses, incentive compensation payments, were
determined at the beginning of the year and paid out, I
believe, on March 9th. That date was determined by our HR
Department and our Finance Team earlier in the year. That date
was not changed.
Mr. Norman. But were the bonuses paid out after you had
gotten notice of the problems that you had at Silicon?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, the findings that we had, the
regulatory findings we were responsive to, and----
Mr. Norman. Were the bonuses paid out after you gotten
notice the bank had some serious problems?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, the feedback is----
Mr. Norman. Yes or no? You know the dates. It is yes or no.
We all are aware that you are in serious trouble, and were the
bonuses paid out, and what amounts were paid out?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I respectfully disagree with the
comment that--at that point, the feedback was that we were in
healthy shape. It was the social media-led run.
Mr. Norman. I'm sorry, but okay. Date-wise, and I have 10
seconds, were the bonuses paid after you you were put on notice
that you had a problem with the bank? Yes or no?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I don't know the definition of----
Mr. Norman. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The witness can answer in writing for the
record.
The gentlewoman from Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, is now
recognized.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, and I really appreciate my
colleague from North Carolina, because I think this is going to
help answer the question that you refused to answer, Mr.
Becker. If you look at the screen, if you look at the slide
there, it is pretty clear.
[Chart]
Ms. Tlaib. Just so we are clear, because I know you are
blaming social media, you are a bank. You are not looking at
me, Mr. Becker. I am right here. You are blaming social media
for your mismanagement and so forth, which, to me, clearly
looks like greed because you are not stupid. You are just being
greedy because you wanted to get a payout.
Just so we are clear for the record, were you aware of any
material or non-public information, such as the potential
capital raise, before the January 6th trading plan change that
allowed you to sell over $3 million in Silicon Valley Bank
stock?
Mr. Becker. When the plan was set up, I wasn't aware.
Ms. Tlaib. But on January 26th, you changed a corporate
trading plan, allowing the future sale of your shares in the
company, correct?
Mr. Becker. On that date.
Ms. Tlaib. January 26th.
Mr. Becker. I filed a Rule 10b5-1 plan that was signed off
on by our Legal Team.
Ms. Tlaib. Okay. So, it is yes, and yes. Getting to the
question, were you aware of any material non-public
information, such as the potential capital raise, before the
January 6th trading plan change that allowed you to sell over
$3 million of your Silicon Valley Bank stock?
Mr. Becker. When that plan was set up, I was not aware of
the plan to raise capital.
Ms. Tlaib. So, Mr. Becker, given that the Federal Funds
Rate increased by more than 3 percentage points during 2022,
why did your company unwind these swaps, exposing your firm to
further rate increases, because everybody wants to know the
answer to that?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, as mentioned earlier, the
decision around our interest rate hedges was overseen by our
Asset Liability Committee and executed by the Treasury Team.
Ms. Tlaib. Okay. So, not your fault? Given that interest
rates continued to rise under your leadership until the
collapse, did you feel that terminating these swaps was a safe
and sound practice?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, as mentioned, I was not involved
in those disciplines.
Ms. Tlaib. You didn't, and you still got paid? They paid
you to not know any of this? What did you do? As the lead
person, you are just saying, I didn't know. I don't know. You
got millions of dollars to not know anything about your own
bank. The Financial Times reported that the interest rate swap
sales resulted in a gain of $500 million for Silicon Valley
Bank in the first 2 quarters of 2022 alone. Given your
incentive compensation plan and other forms of pay, did you
benefit from terminating its hedges against interest rates?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, could I clarify two points?
Ms. Tlaib. Did you get money for it? Did you benefit from
that decision?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, can I clarify the point that you
are making?
Ms. Tlaib. Sure.
Mr. Becker. First, when hedges are changed, sold, the
benefit, if there is a benefit, is actually amortized over
several years. That was not taken into income in that period of
time. And second, our Compensation Committee would actually
review anything that they believed was an anomaly outside of
our standard practices and back that out, typically from
incentive compensation.
Ms. Tlaib. But, Mr. Becker, do you think selling the hedges
to interest rate risk is ultimately good for your depositors,
shareholders, and our own financial system in the country as a
whole? Was it just good for you or was it good for the
executives at Silicon Valley who benefit from the sales through
your incentive-based compensation, because according to this
timeline, it looked like you set it up so you could all benefit
and walk away, while every other bank in our financial system
was literally in jeopardy.
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, our compensation was set up for
long-term incentives.
Ms. Tlaib. You knew. You knew for a couple of years. Even
if we increase regulation, they sent you notices. They met with
you. What do you want them to do, come and arrest you? And you
can respond to the fact that they saw that you all were making
really, really terrible decisions. I love that GAO calls it
poor governance and mismanagement. You were awful at your job
obviously, right? But at the end, you benefited, while the
small business community and the country was hurt. You know
what that looks like when I go back to my community, and they
are, like, wondering why we can't claw back, the fact that you
benefited, while everybody else suffered. Did you even care
that you would collapse the financial system in our country
with your greed?
Chairman Barr. The gentlewoman's time has expired. Next, we
will go to the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Ogles. He is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ogles. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for being
here. I am sure you are aware, or if you are not, we had the
FDIC and the Federal Reserve, amongst others, in here
yesterday. And although they acknowledged that they probably
could or should have done more, they point the finger at you,
and your failings, and your management.
So, Mr. Becker, how forceful was the Fed in emphasizing the
heightened interest rate risk that resulted from the shift from
the COVID-era's quantitative easing to an environment with
rapidly-increasing interest rates?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, we covered a lot of different
areas. We were responsive to the feedback that we received,
including areas around liquidity, governance, controls, and the
MRIAs or MRAs that we received with interest rate risk
modeling.
Mr. Ogles. The reason why I bring that up is because from
the start of the pandemic when SVB collapsed, the Fed didn't
mention interest rate risks in any of its reports to Congress.
Were you aware that the Federal Reserve had to suspend its
remittances to the Treasury last October because it took
similar losses to you or to your bank?
Mr. Becker. I was not aware of that, Congressman.
Mr. Ogles. I find it curious that the Federal Reserve,
having experienced its own losses, did not recognize or realize
the five-alarm fire it had created.
Mr. Shay, Mr. Roffler, how forceful was the FDIC in
emphasizing interest rate risks as the priority in the
supervision of your banks? Mr. Shay?
Mr. Shay. I met with the regulators as chairman of the
board, so I can't speak for all of their communications with
the bank.
Mr. Ogles. Mr. Roffler?
Mr. Roffler. Maybe just a couple of points. First of all, I
think, in Chairman Gruenberg's written testimony yesterday, he
commented that the failure of First Republic was largely
contagion effect-driven, and he did not speak to management. I
would add that I know that several comments have been made
about CAMELS ratings and things of that nature. That is kind of
confidential supervisory information that has not been made
public. I do think that the committee might be interested in
that information, and could make that request, I believe, of
the FDIC in the State of California, which would shine out a
different picture as it pertains to First Republic.
And lastly, I would say that, as I mentioned earlier, we
had constant examinations. The FDIC in the State of California
were on-premise regulators for 6 or 7 years. They looked at a
variety of topics: credit risk, interest rate risk, liquidity
risk. And when they provided Supervisory Recommendations to the
extent they did, management worked to address them in an
extremely timely manner.
Mr. Ogles. Yes, sir. And, Mr. Becker, in your comments
earlier, you talked about your business model, which was, I
guess, compared to maybe community banks had a riskier
portfolio, if you will. But understanding that there was a
shifting interest rate environment, why wasn't there more
priority put on hedging against interest rates in the event,
however unlikely, that it might occur? Again, if you have a
401(k), you are going to decide how much exposure you are going
to want to market volatility versus against your fiduciary
responsibility. And of course, part of this is perspective, but
when I look at some of the, ``wokeism,'' that had kind of swept
into SVB, it seems like--and, again, this is perception; I am
not saying it is fact--there was more focus on being, ``woke,''
than there was on your fiduciary responsibility.
And when I look at your exposure, when I look at the fact
that, and you know Econ 101, when the government puts more
money into the economy, there is going to be inflation risk on
the backside; you don't have to be an economist to understand
that. Anyone who is experienced in the markets is going to know
there is going to be an upside risk there of inflation, and yet
your bank and, again, the Fed and the Federal Reserve are
pointing the finger at you. They are saying that you should
have done more. Why wasn't it a main focus and priority as you
moved forward?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, two points. One is, I think it is
important to note that the structure of our balance sheet,
especially on the asset side, the loan portfolio was 90 percent
variable rate, meaning as rates went up, we would have
benefited from higher rates.
Mr. Ogles. I am out of time. I want to thank you all for
being here, and if you wouldn't mind submitting your answers in
writing, I would appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman, I am out of time, so I yield back. Thank you.
And thank you, gentlemen.
Ms. Waters. Mr. Chairman, I have a parliamentary inquiry.
Mr. Fitzgerald. [presiding]. The ranking member is
recognized for your inquiry.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. My understanding is that
joint subcommittee hearings are not contemplated anywhere in
the House or Committee rules, and, therefore, can only happen
with unanimous consent. Can you confirm that this is your
understanding?
Mr. Fitzgerald. It is.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. I wish to share with you that I have
made clear my concerns about this hearing happening at the
subcommittee level to Chair McHenry, because it is very
important for all of the members of this committee to have the
opportunity to participate in a hearing like this. And I want
to be clear that although I have withheld my objections at this
time, going forward, we will not hesitate to object if this
kind of coordination does not occur in advance. Thank you. With
that, I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Responding to the ranking member, I would
say that the chairman and the ranking member both called for
this hearing on March 29th, the first time the Federal Reserve
and the FDIC testified before the committee. In your opening
remarks, the ranking member stated we also need answers from
the CEOs, who not only ran these banks into the ground, but
enriched themselves.
Ms. Waters. Mr. Chairman? That is not correct.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Can I just----
Ms. Waters. I asked for a hearing of the Full Committee.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Okay.
Ms. Waters. Not at the subcommittee level. I want to make
that clear.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. I would just remind the ranking
member that on May 3rd, you wrote to the chairman asking him to
immediately schedule and invite the CEOs of Silicon Valley,
Signature, and First Republic Banks to testify. This hearing is
in response to those requests, which was noticed last week
pursuant to committee rules.
Ms. Waters. At the Full Committee level, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fitzgerald. And I would also just add that if there is
concern that the Full Committee is not holding this hearing,
there shouldn't be, because the Chair of the Full Committee
empowered the two subcommittees with the most experience in
banking issues and conducting oversight, such that the
Financial Institutions and Monetary Policy Subcommittee and the
Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee were allowed to hold
this hearing.
In fact, the Chair told the Subcommittee Chair at the
beginning of this Congress that he wanted the bulk of this
committee's work to be done at the subcommittee level. To that
point, since March 10th, both Mr. Huizenga and I, the chairman,
have sent eight letters to State and Federal regulators as well
as the Inspector General.
Ms. Waters. Mr. Chairman, in a continuation of my
parliamentary inquiry, you must admit, and I think the Chair
will admit that my request for holding this hearing was at the
Full Committee level. And, of course, you are not implying that
the expertise does not exist at the Full Committee level, when
you identify that it has been held at the subcommittee level
because of the expertise. Mr. Chairman, I am finished with it,
and I said to you that despite the fact that I did not object
at this time, I will not allow it to happen again without
objection. I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thanks for yielding back. I think a
conversation with Chairman McHenry would be valuable. And now,
we are going to recognize the gentlelady from Texas, Ms.
Garcia. Am I correct?
Ms. Garcia. Okay.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Okay. You are yielding?
Ms. Waters. No, she does not have to yield. As a matter of
fact, it is my time, I am next to be recognized, and the
inquiry was just a preliminary to my time in order to raise the
question.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Okay. The ranking member of the Full
Committee is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am
interested in learning about all the factors, including bank
mismanagement, lobbying, efforts to deregulate, and other
decisions these executives made. They put their customers and
our nation's banking system in harm's way. The leadership of
these banks must be held accountable for running their banks
into the ground.
Mr. Becker, it is a fact that your bank experienced rapid
growth, doubling in size from 2018 to 2020, and doubling in
size again, in 2021 alone. Earlier today in questioning, you
suggested that the regulators never discussed the issue of
interest rates with you. However, you later acknowledged that
the bank was subject to investigations regarding its handling
of interest rate risk, and it was cited by the regulators as a
problem. In fact, as early as 2018, the Fed had begun citing
your bank for poor risk management, including interest rate
risk. Four months before your bank bailed in November 2022, the
Fed further issued an MRA on interest rate risk. This MRA would
have been issued to the bank's board. Is that correct? It would
have been issued to the bank's board.
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, the regulatory findings are
typically issued to management.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. Can you confirm you were
on the bank's board in November 2022?
Mr. Becker. Yes, I was.
Ms. Waters. Okay. Then you did have access to all of that
information. Thank you. So, you would have personally received
this MRA and all other MRAs, and would have had an
understanding of interest rate risk, and to say otherwise seems
highly misleading. To me, it looks like you did know what was
wrong. I am also concerned that after the earnings call with
investors on January 19th of this year, you amended a 10b5-1
plan to sell approximately 12,451 shares of SVB. These shares
were sold 2 weeks before you drove the bank into the ground and
you received $3.6 million, while other shareholders in SVB
received nothing when the bank failed.
Mr. Becker, how is this not a golden parachute you secured
for yourself as the bank was failing?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, that sale was part of a 10b5-1
plan that was issued right after earnings release, and reviewed
by our Legal Team. It was my concurrence that I didn't have
material non-public information. When SVB was taken over by the
FDIC on March 10th, I lost 5 times the minimum shares that I
was required to hold.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. We have a different
opinion about that.
I am going to go to Mr. Shay. You ran one of the well-known
crypto banks after Silicon Valley Bank suddenly failed. The
market viewed your bank as the weakest link, and depositors
quickly began to pull out their money. Two days later, your
bank closed. Now, according to the bank failure reports we have
received, it seems like your bank didn't even know what
collateral it had available that would be eligible to pledge to
the Fed in order to obtain emergency loans. Was this the case?
Why didn't you know what collateral you had?
Mr. Shay. In my role as chairman, I thought we had
collateral available. I thought we had collateral available
that was pledged after----
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
Mr. Shay. ----bank and Federal----
Ms. Waters. Why did you not understand what assets your
bank had to pledge, is the question, and you did.
Mr. Roffler, JPMorgan Chase and 10 other big banks
deposited $30 billion in your bank after SVB and Signature Bank
failed to rescue your bank. However, in a matter of weeks, your
bank failed. What amount would have been sufficient to save the
bank? That was $30 billion that 11 banks came together and gave
you. What did you need further after that?
Mr. Roffler. We were appreciative of those 11 banks, who
were helping to reinforce confidence in the regional banking
system, which is such an important part of the economy.
Unfortunately, First Republic was hit by the contagion of two
failures that were occurring, and when the contagion spread to
us, it is hard to recover confidence. And by the end of April,
investor and depositor confidence had not returned, not for
management's efforts and not for everything we did. And again,
we had very open and very direct----
Ms. Waters. Thank you. My time is over, but no amount of
money would have saved your bank. It was mismanagement that
caused it to fail. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you. The ranking member yields back.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Vice Chair Barr expressed a desire to assess how the
Federal Reserve performs analysis on bank mergers. This follows
President Biden's call for DOJ and the agencies responsible for
banking update guidelines on banking mergers to provide more-
robust scrutiny of the mergers. We strongly believe antitrust
analysis should be governed by the rule of law, not by the
individual views of those whom, at any particular point in
time, head the relevant agencies. So I am concerned any change
to that analysis that would depart from long-existing and
widely-accepted standards may not reflect actual changes in the
competitive environment. A functioning bank system must allow
stronger regional banks to be able to acquire those in a weaker
position.
Mr. Becker, do you believe the current hostile environment
towards mergers played a role in your bank's failure?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, that is not an area of expertise
that I have, so I don't know the answer to that question.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Mr. Shay, would you like to respond to
that?
Mr. Shay. I don't think the regulatory merger policy had
anything to do with what happened to Signature Bank. I thought
we were in a position to continue after March 12th/March 13th.
I thought we had a plan in place, a well-reasoned, solid plan
in place that would have brought Signature Bank to exist today
and continue to serve its customers without any merger from
anyone.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. A November 11, 2022, Wall Street
Journal article explained at length interest rate risks
presented to the banking system by the Fed's inflation-
fighting, rapid increase in interest rates, the kind of an
article that has been referred to hundreds of times now in this
committee. Silicon Valley Bank was mentioned as a particular
case with, as of September 30, 2022, a market value with held-
to-maturity bonds just slightly above the value of its total
equity. So clearly, regulators should have been becoming aware
of the risks surrounding Silicon Valley Bank.
Back to Mr. Becker. If the uninsured depositors had not
forced the bank to close with this mini-rush, how much longer
do you believe the regulators would have allowed Silicon Valley
to continue before intervening at all?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, I don't know what the regulators
would have done. I can't speak for them.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Let me ask it in a little different way:
Were you working in concert with the regulators, and was there
back and forth with the regulators that would have maybe laid
out the case that there are some serious issues emerging
related to Silicon Valley Bank?
Mr. Becker. Congressman, as stated in my written testimony,
we were very responsive to the regulatory feedback from
regulators at the FDIC, the Fed, and the State.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Okay. The issues with SVB were pretty well-
known in the days leading up to the failure, right? However,
Signature's failure came as a surprise announcement.
Mr. Shay, at what point was it clear to you that Signature
Bank could not last without some type of intervention?
Mr. Shay. I believed that Signature Bank on Friday was
sufficiently capitalized. It was well-solvent, and well-
diversified. It had a strong securities portfolio and had $29
billion pledged at the Federal Home Loan Bank and the Federal
Reserve. I fully expected Signature Bank to continue on, and I
fully thought that the plan that was presented for financing
against good collateral at Signature Bank would have allowed it
to continue to open successfully on Monday and still be serving
its customers, its middle-market customers, its customers
today.
Mr. Fitzgerald. I will yield back my time, and at this
time, I recognize the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Garcia, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses today. We have been talking about trying to have this
hearing--Democrats have constantly been asking Republicans to
bring you down here, and I am glad you are here. And I am glad
you cooperated and are here with us today because it is time
for accountability. Republicans have been pointing fingers at
regulators, but we finally have a chance now to visit with you
about your internal workings and your leadership at these
failed banks.
First up, I want to get into some lobbying questions here.
Mr. Becker, in 2015, you had lobbied Congress to raise the
asset threshold for banks that were considered systemically
important. Years later, in 2018, the former, twice-impeached
President had signed S. 2155, the Economic Growth, Regulatory
Relief, and Consumer Protection Act, into law, which raised the
threshold to $250 billion, an increase from the previous $50
billion. By this time, Silicon Valley Bank had just reached $50
billion in assets and quickly grew so that by 2022, as has been
stated earlier, the bank held more than $200 billion in assets.
The passage of this law, and the way Mr. Trump's regulators
implemented the law, reduced stress testing liquidity and other
requirements for banks, like Silicon Valley Bank.
Mr. Becker, was that your intended goal when you urged
Congress to roll back the Dodd-Frank Act's enhanced prudential
standards for regional banks or is it just a coincidence that
it was regional banks like yours that failed in rapid
succession earlier this year?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, the written testimony that I
provided in 2015 was focused on tailored regulation. And what
we wanted to do is empower the regulators to make the decisions
about risk and be able to then tailor those regulations based
on their assessment of the risk profile.
Ms. Garcia. So, you don't think that it was just a
coincidence that this happened to help your bank, and that your
bank grew as a result of the change in regulations?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, Silicon Valley Bank in 2015, was
one of many banks and other institutions or organizations that
were talking about tailored regulations.
Ms. Garcia. Okay. Mr. Roffler, let us talk about First
Republic Bank. Reportedly, you spent significant sums lobbying
Congress under your leadership. In 2018, First Republic spent
$370,000 on lobbying. This was reportedly some of the highest
lobbying spending in the bank's history. Do you recall what
congressional business or legislation might have been of
interest to First Republic in 2018?
Mr. Roffler. Thank you, Congresswoman. I was not the CEO at
the time. I was at the bank, and there are two topics that come
to mind. One is what you referenced before, S. 2155, and the
other was around tax deductibility around student lending and
its contributions to student loan forgiveness or student loan
repayment plans.
Ms. Garcia. Were your paid lobbyists urging Congress to
roll back the Dodd-Frank Act, and enhance prudential standards
for regional banks?
Mr. Roffler. I believe they were speaking with Congress
about the tailoring rules, as one of the panelists mentioned.
And at that time, as I mentioned, I was not the CEO, so I am
not entirely familiar with all of the communications.
Ms. Garcia. Were you at the bank at all?
Mr. Roffler. Excuse me?
Ms. Garcia. Were you at the bank at all?
Mr. Roffler. I was, yes.
Ms. Garcia. So, you were not privy to any of the
discussions about your lobbying efforts?
Mr. Roffler. Not always, no.
Ms. Garcia. No, not always, but it seems to me that you all
were lobbying for the changes that may have resulted in some of
the failures. But thank you for that response.
And now, Mr. Becker, the Federal Reserve stated that it
issued multiple supervisory issues to Silicon Valley Bank,
including Matters Requiring Attention (MRAs). And we have
talked about those MRAs, and Matters Requiring Immediate
Attention (MRIAs), which are typically considered to be more
urgent issues. Mr. Becker, why didn't the bank take these
warnings by the Federal Reserve seriously?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, I can assure you that we took
all regulatory findings seriously, regardless of whether they
were MRAs or MRIAs.
Ms. Garcia. You might be interested in knowing that when we
had the GAO Director here, he actually said that many, many
times you all, ``responded by saying that it would take a while
to fix a problem.'' What is your response to that, that their
analysis was you all took your time about fixing anything?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, it depends upon what regulatory
finding it would be. Some of the matters around the liquidity
were handled very quickly. Other systems changes took longer.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Barr. The gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. De La Cruz,
is now recognized.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you, Chairman Barr, for holding this
joint hearing today. It is important for all of us to talk
about what happened, what kind of oversight needs to be done
moving forward, and what led up to these banks failing and how
the regulators responded. With that said, I would like to thank
the witnesses for coming today. I am towards the end, so I want
to tell you a little bit about my district.
I am from South Texas. It is largely a Hispanic district,
in fact, one of the most-Hispanic districts in the entire
nation. That being said, we have a large rural community that
really depends on regional and small banks. And as I recall,
the banks in my area, when this was happening, were worried
about bearing the consequences of your bank failures and what
that may mean for them in the future. And with that being said,
our friends on the other side of the aisle have called for
higher capital requirements and increased regulations due to
your banks' failures. What I would like to know from each of
you is, do you think that increased regulation and/or increased
capital would have prevented this crisis? And I will start with
you, Mr. Becker.
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, as I laid out in my written
testimony, we are here today, from my standpoint, because of a
series of unprecedented events. As far as what are the rules
and regulations that could have prevented it, I don't have the
answer to that, but I am hoping my testimony and the other
testimony will help us get there.
Mr. Shay. Signature Bank was well-capitalized, solvent, and
well-diversified at the very end, and had a plan to go forward
that I sincerely wish had happened because I believe we would
have not been here today. But in response to your question, on
that afternoon, in those few hours in the late afternoon on
Friday, depositors I spoke to simply wanted to get their money
into a too-big-to-fail bank. They said, they didn't care if
there was a one-in-a-million chance. They didn't care if there
was a one-in-10-million chance. This was their family money,
their family business, their way to make payroll. They couldn't
take a chance of not being in a too-big-to-fail bank, and they
said, it is because the government won't let JPMorgan fail.
They know the government will save Citibank.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you. I reclaim my time. Yes, sir?
Mr. Roffler. Thank you for the question. Congresswoman, I
want to be very clear that I can't speak to what has happened
at the other banks here with us today. But what I can say is
that what happened at First Republic was not mismanagement; it
was an element of contagion. And if you think towards the
regulatory side of that, when contagion hits, it is very hard
to regulate and call for greater capital, greater liquidity.
As I said earlier, we had very strong relationships with
our regulators. We shared everything. We met all the time, and
we had zero Matters Requiring Board Attention (MRBAs) on March
9th, when the contagion moved towards First Republic. And I
think your question is very important for the communities that
are served to have appropriate regulation to keep them safe and
sound, but allow them to serve their clients each and every
day.
Ms. De La Cruz. That being said, given your expertise in
banking, how do you think smaller financial institutions,
community banks would be able to cope with increased regulatory
burdens?
Mr. Roffler. I think it is a great question, and probably
not one to which I have a great answer, but I think if
policymakers and regulators invite comment and engagement, I
think that is probably the best way to try to do that, and
hopefully, those banks will engage in that discussion.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you. Mr. Shay?
Mr. Shay. I would defer to banks who are of that asset
size.
Ms. De La Cruz. Okay. Mr. Becker?
Mr. Becker. Yes, I would agree that is something to which
this committee should pay attention.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you. I want to ask quickly, because
of what we saw happen, do you all have any suggestions for
Congress on how to address the technology of this that we have
talked about for so many hours now? Could we do something
different on the social media side or address something
different? Anybody who would like to take it?
[No response.]
Ms. De La Cruz. Okay. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady's time has expired, and the
gentlelady from California, Mrs. Kim, is now recognized.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
chairmen and ranking members of this committee for having a
joint subcommittee hearing. Since SVB's failure, our committee
has been laser-focused on getting complete information and
helping to prevent similar bank failures from occurring in the
future. There are two main points that stand out from the post-
mortem reports: bank mismanagement, and supervisory failures.
Mr. Becker, while I agree with you that the Fed and the
Treasury Department missed the mark by describing inflation as
a transitory risk, I am surprised that you decided to drop most
of the interest rate hedges by mid-2022, and this was after the
Fed started to increase rates in March 2022. And SVB by then,
we already know, had 31 open supervisory findings and did not
have a chief risk officer for most of 2022.
Mr. Becker, yesterday, you also mentioned that the specific
decisions about hedges were executed by the Treasury Team, but
as CEO, didn't you have the final say on the decision that was
executed by SVB's Treasury Team?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, I was not privy to the decision
on the hedges. They wouldn't have come to me for approval.
Mrs. Kim. The Wall Street Journal reported you reduced
hedges to $563 million, which is down from $15.3 billion just a
year earlier.
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, as I mentioned, I wasn't part of
the Asset Liability Committee, and I have every reason to
believe they made the best decisions they could with the
information they had at that time.
Mrs. Kim. Do you believe that not having a CRO played a
role in the decision to drop the hedges?
Mr. Becker. To the best of my knowledge, I don't believe
so.
Mrs. Kim. Mr. Becker, in early 2023, March of 2023, you
sold your available-for-sale securities at an $1.8-billion
loss. You didn't have an immediate need for liquidity, and this
sale had a negative impact on your regulatory capital. So, why
did you make that decision?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, that decision was made in
consultation with our board of directors and outside advisors,
and we believed that was the best decision for our clients and
for our shareholders.
Mrs. Kim. Those securities were sold to Goldman Sachs, the
same investment banking firm that was advising and underwriting
your capital raise, so didn't it seem like a conflict of
interest? And how did you ensure that you received the best
possible price for those securities?
Mr. Becker. Congresswoman, Goldman Sachs was our advisor on
our capital arrays, and the decision to ultimately sell the AFS
portfolio to Goldman Sachs was a decision that was reviewed
with the board of directors and the special committee of the
board. To my memory, they put in place a structure that would
be a benefit such that it was to get the best price we could
and then validate that in the market.
Mrs. Kim. We are going to move on.
Mr. Roffler, let me ask you a question. The unprecedented
speed of withdrawals in the digital era is pushing our
committee to rethink the rules, regulations, and the role of
the Fed as the lender of last resort. And it has been reported
that your firm was one of the banks that used both the 13(3)
facility and the discount window. Did these lenders of last
resort meet your liquidity needs in March, and, in your view,
what could have been improved?
Mr. Roffler. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
Yes, on March 10th, we began to engage with the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco and also the Federal Home Loan Bank. We
had previously pledged collateral with both of those
institutions from which we could borrow. And during the
weekend, when the contagion spread to us on that Friday, we
continued to prepare, and actually, the Federal Reserve Bank
worked with us to ensure our collateral was pledged and we
could appropriately access it, and that Monday, we accessed it
with no problem.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. I am going to come back to you, Mr.
Becker. How many years did you serve on the board of directors
at the San Francisco Fed?
Mr. Becker. I believe it was a little more than 4 years.
Mrs. Kim. And as a member of the board of directors, did
you at any point have any input on the supervisory activities
of the San Francisco Fed over any financial institutions,
including SVB?
Mr. Becker. I did not.
Mrs. Kim. Could you walk us through the role that you have
as a member of the board of directors at the San Francisco Fed?
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady's time has expired, and the
witness can submit an answer in writing to that question.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you.
Chairman Barr. I would like to thank our first panel of
witnesses for their testimony today.
The committee will take a brief recess to let the first
panel go, and to seat the second panel. These witnesses are now
dismissed. The committee will stand in recess.
[recess]
Chairman Huizenga. [presiding]. I now call up our second
panel of witnesses. Today, we welcome the Honorable Adrienne
Harris, Superintendent of the New York Department of Financial
Services, and Clothilde Hewlett, Commissioner of the California
Department of Financial Protection and Innovation.
We thank each of you for taking the time to be here. We are
going to be moving right into your testimony. There won't be
any opening statements, and you will each be recognized for 5
minutes. And without objection, each of your written statements
will be made a part of the record.
Ms. Harris, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ADRIENNE A. HARRIS, SUPERINTENDENT,
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES (DFS)

Ms. Harris. Thank you. Good afternoon, and thank you to
Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, Chairmen Huizenga and
Barr, Ranking Members Foster and Green, and members of the
subcommittees. I am Adrienne Harris, the Superintendent of the
New York State Department of Financial Services, and I thank
you for inviting me to this hearing today.
On Sunday, March 12, 2023, Signature Bank failed after
experiencing a propulsive run on deposits on Friday, March
10th. The run was instigated by the self-liquidation of
Silvergate Bank on March 8th, and then the failure of Silicon
Valley Bank on March 10th, following an unprecedented run on
its own deposits. In order to avoid a disorderly mid-day Monday
shutdown and further contagion across the banking system, on
the evening of Sunday, March 12th, DFS took possession of
Signature and appointed the FDIC as receiver.
Before its failure on March 12th, regulators had documented
liquidity-related regulatory concerns to the bank, beginning
with the 2018 report of examination. Despite orders from
regulators, the bank was slow to remediate Supervisory
Recommendations, and many issues identified by the regulators
remained unresolved when the bank failed. Signature's inability
to remediate the outstanding liquidity management issues
undoubtedly contributed to its collapse. However, the immediate
cause of the bank's failure was an unprecedented run on
deposits instigated by the self-liquidation of Silvergate and
the subsequent failure of SVB.
On Friday, March 10th, Signature experienced a runoff of
$18.6 billion in deposits in a matter of hours, reducing the
bank's deposit base by 20 percent. Throughout the day on
Friday, and into the night, the regulators worked closely with
each other and with Signature to find sufficient liquidity to
satisfy the significant volume of customer withdrawal requests.
After avoiding a default on Friday, regulators had time over
the weekend to assess Signature's condition and come to a
considered view as to whether the bank could open safely on
Monday.
DFS had one objective that weekend: to preserve the safety
and soundness of the banking system. Three paths were
identified for the bank, in order of preference. The first was
to find a way for Signature to open in a safe and sound manner
on Monday and continue as a stable institution. The second was
to find a purchaser for the bank on an open-bank basis. And the
third was that DFS and the FDIC would work in parallel to
prepare for the last-resort scenario of taking possession of
the bank and appointing the FDIC as receiver.
The regulator spent the weekend collecting and evaluating
information from Signature in order to make a data-driven
decision about the bank's viability. Signature's inability to
provide reliable data and a credible liquidity strategy to
operate in a safe and sound manner on Monday led DFS to take
possession of the bank and immediately appoint the FDIC as
receiver.
At the time DFS took possession, the bank had $4.27 billion
of certain liquidity available for Monday morning to cover
known withdrawals ranging from $7.4 billion to $7.9 billion.
These withdrawal estimates do not include additional unknown
withdrawals that could reasonably be anticipated on Monday in
light of market conditions.
Taking possession of the bank was the option of last resort
to avoid a disorderly midday Monday shutdown and stop any
further panic and contagion across the broader banking system.
DFS-regulated financial institutions are safe and sound today,
but the Department has instituted heightened monitoring of
banks with higher-risk profiles and is implementing
recommendations to modernize supervision of the global
financial system. Thank you, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Superintendent Harris can be
found on page 101 of the appendix.]
Chairman Huizenga. Thank you, Superintendent Harris.
Commissioner Hewlett, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE CLOTHILDE V. HEWLETT, COMMISSIONER,
CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL PROTECTION AND INNOVATION
(DFPI)

Ms. Hewlett. Chairmen, Ranking Members, and members of the
subcommittees, I appreciate the opportunity to testify on
behalf of the California Department of Financial Protection and
Innovation (DFPI). My name is Clothilde Hewlett. I have served
as Commissioner since December of 2021, building on over 100
years of State regulation. The current Department was
restructured in 2020 to strengthen California's financial
oversight. DFPI has broad authority touching every aspect of
the financial sector in California, including banks and credit
unions. Through regulation, supervision, and enforcement, DFPI
promotes safety and soundness in consumer protection.
State-chartered banks, like Silicon Valley Bank, are
regulated by both State and Federal regulators. State
regulators play a vital role in maintaining the strength of the
dual banking system, particularly for local banks that serve
diverse communities throughout the country. State regulators
supervise almost 80 percent of all the banks in the U.S., which
equates to more than 3,800 banks and $8.5 trillion in assets.
This includes overseeing two-thirds of agricultural lending and
half of small business lending.
The localized supervision equips State regulators to better
understand the unique demands faced by banks in local
communities. In California, DFPI supervises 99 State-chartered
banks, with an average asset size of approximately $4 billion,
nearly half with $1 billion in assets, and 9 of our banks are
over $10 billion. The Department also supervises 113 credit
unions, with an average asset size of $1.4 billion.
For nearly 40 years, Silicon Valley Bank was an important
service provider for California's economy, the life sciences
and healthcare sector, nonprofits, and small businesses. On
March 8th, the bank announced a loss of $1.8 billion and a
capital raise. Depositors reacted by initiating withdrawals of
$42 billion, or approximately 25 percent of total deposits over
a 24-hour period, causing an unprecedented run on the bank. At
the end of the day on March 9th, the bank had a negative cash
balance of approximately $958 million, and we determined that
the bank was insolvent.
On March 10th, the DFPI took possession of the bank and
appointed the FDIC as receiver. The DFPI examined the bank in
coordination with the primary Federal regulator, the San
Francisco Federal Reserve Bank. Federal examiners led the
examination of Silicon Valley's compliance with Federal
regulations related to enhanced prudential standards and the
review of SVB's liquidity and interest rate risk. The
Department and the San Francisco Fed flagged concerns about the
bank's liquidity management beginning in 2021, and interest
rate risk beginning in 2022. Although it is typical to provide
time to remediate, the timelines were not acceptable.
The Department has conducted and published an internal
review of the supervision and closure of Silicon Valley Bank.
That review, and the recent failure of First Republic Bank,
highlight the need to make changes to promote the safety and
soundness of State-chartered banks. The DFPI is committed to
working with Federal regulators to develop stronger and more-
effective systems to promptly remediate deficiencies and better
allocate staff according to risk. The DFPI will increase its
focus on a bank's level of uninsured deposits and require banks
to evaluate and account for emerging risks posed by technology-
enabled activities, such as social media and real-time
withdrawals.
I look forward to working with Congress, our Federal
regulatory partners, and our California State Legislature to
implement changes that strengthen our financial system. Thank
you very much.
[The prepared statement of Commissioner Hewlett can be
found on page 116 of the appendix.]
Chairman Huizenga. Thank you, Commissioner Hewlett. I
appreciate that. We will now turn to Member questions, and I
will recognize myself for 5 minutes. And I do want to thank you
both for being here.
Commissioner Hewlett, your report states that the Federal
Reserve was the leading regulator on interest rate risk due to
its expertise. Your November 2022 supervisory letter concluded
that SVB's interest rate risk simulations are not reliable. Did
you or the Fed identify concerns with interest rate risk prior
to November of 2022, or was that the first time that it was
officially raised?
Ms. Hewlett. Liquidity risks were identified in 2021, in
the November supervisory letter, and on May 31, 2022. Corporate
governance deficiencies were identified as well, as you have
noted, in November. But on August 17, 2022, there were numerous
MRAs and MRIAs noted, and, in addition, Silicon Valley Bank
board management was notified that a MOU would be initiated.
Chairman Huizenga. Just to be clear, you are saying that in
November of 2021, there was an official notification from the
Federal Reserve about their concerns with interest rate risk
mitigation?
Ms. Hewlett. It was more of liquidity risk management we
found to be----
Chairman Huizenga. So, not necessarily tied to the interest
rate risk?
Ms. Hewlett. Yes. The interest rates were not identified
until the the Large Foreign Bank Organization (LFBO) Team began
their review, and that was noted in the November 15, 2022,
letter.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. I will note that. In testimony
earlier today, the former head of SVB said that there had not
been any interest rate risk brought up either officially or
informally by the Fed until November of 2022. During the 2021
and 2022 examination cycles, DFPI collaborated with the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco on 10 out of the 16 targeted
exams. Aside from the horizontal reviews, DFPI did not
participate in the liquidity review, a capital review, and a
model risk management review. As a former State legislator
myself, I don't understand why the State regulator wouldn't
want to participate in a liquidity review on one of its largest
State-chartered banks?
Ms. Hewlett. We had two examiners who were assigned full
time. There was a decision made based upon the fact that the
Federal regulators had 20 highly-trained examiners at that
time, and were in the best position to conduct the review, but
we worked in consensus, in collaboration, and read the results.
Chairman Huizenga. But was that your decision or did the
Fed say, hey, we have the expertise, let us handle this?
Ms. Hewlett. That was the decision that was made by DFPI.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. And then, you had the supervisory
letter in August of 2022. The letter explained regulators'
plans to initiate an informal enforcement action in the form of
a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the bank. However, as
of March of 2023, the failure of SVB, the MOU was still in the
drafting process. What was DFPI's role in drafting the MOU, and
was it primarily the Fed or was it you driving that MOU that
had been in draft form for 6 months?
Ms. Hewlett. We worked in collaboration with our Federal
partners in the drafting of the MOU. However, there was a
consensus decision that was made by DFPI, working with our
Federal partners, to wait for the MOU until after the liquidity
risk and horizontal review was completed. We could have and
should have, looking back in hindsight, issued an MOU in August
of 2022 when we had noted numerous deficiencies and had
indicated that there were numerous MRAs and MRIAs open.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. My time has expired. And we will
be following up in writing because I would like to unpack more
of that particular issue as to why that was not done.
With that, the ranking member of the Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Green, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I would
like to make an observation. Obviously it is a part of my time,
but as you know, I have been very critical of our not having
gender balance on our panels. Usually, we have White men, and I
want to compliment you today that we have two women on a panel.
I think that if I am going to be critical when appropriate, I
should also be complimentary.
Chairman Huizenga. If the gentleman doesn't mind me making
an observation, I will suspend the clock. In our last few O&I
hearings, we did have an African-American woman, and three
Hispanics, and one of the Democrat witnesses was actually a
White female professor. So, we have been trying very hard to
make sure that we give everybody a voice at that table. I yield
back.
Mr. Green. Thank you. Thank you very much, and it means
something to me, given my history and the history of my
ancestors to see this occur. So much to be said, but let's get
back to the business at hand.
Superintendent Harris, you indicate on page 5 of your
written statement, and you said as much verbally as well, that
the management of Signature Bank, while acknowledging
regulatory findings, did not heed the regulators' orders. The
bank was slow to remediate Supervisory Recommendations, and
many issues identified by the regulators remained unresolved
when the bank failed.
You go on to indicate, however, that the immediate cause of
the bank's failure was an unprecedented run on deposits
instigated by the self-liquidation of Silvergate Bank and the
subsequent failure of SVB. This indicates that the supervisory
remediations identified remained unresolved when the bank
failed. While I do think that this is very important, there is
a belief by some that the supervisors, the regulators were not
severe enough with their punishment, and that this lack of
severity is the reason that the banks failed to do what they
should have done. Would you comment on this, please? And I
don't want to pull you into the real tug of war that is going
on here, but I will ask you, if you could, to comment on that.
Ms. Harris. Sure. Thank you so much, Congressman. First, I
will say that although the immediate cause of the failure was
the propulsive run and the self-liquidation of Silvergate, and
then the failure of SVB, of course, that is no excuse for the
bank not remediating the Matters Requiring Board Attention
(MRBAs), and the Supervisory Recommendations (SRs) in a timely
fashion. What I will say is that in addition to bank management
being more responsive and more accountable, I think we also
need regulators to act more quickly.
Since I took my seat 19 months ago, we have worked to
update our supervisory procedures and, of course, in light of
these failures, to make sure the feedback loop is faster and
tighter so that the examination process can take place more
quickly. Feedback can be given to bank management. And we are
reviewing our procedures at DFS to make sure recidivist bad
activity is escalated more quickly so that we can take more
prompt action.
Mr. Green. We have had the Government Accountability Office
as well as the prudential regulators indicate that at the end
of the day, the failure of the banks lies with them, and that
the regulators don't create the circumstances which cause
failures. I see you are nodding, but is that a fair statement?
Ms. Harris. I think that is a fair statement, but as
flagged in all of the reports, I think there are improvements
that regulators can make as well.
Mr. Green. I agree that we can all make improvements, but
as you know, it is the bank that has the liability.
Ms. Harris. Yes.
Mr. Green. The regulators don't have the liability. And the
banks have the duty, the responsibility, and the obligation to
have a good risk management team, and it's the banks, in the
final analysis, that show us with any failures.
But let's go on to the next brilliant panelist that we
have. You will note that I said, ``next,'' noting that both of
you are brilliant. Commissioner Hewlett, would you just tell me
quickly, do you believe that the banks' failures were due to
the regulators not being severe enough with their MRAs?
Ms. Hewlett. I think that there were many factors, not just
one that led to the banks' failures.
Chairman Huizenga. Yes. Sorry. The time has expired, and we
are going to have you respond in writing for the record. Thank
you for that. I appreciate it.
With that, the Chair of the Financial Institutions
Subcommittee, the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Chairman Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Superintendent
Harris, was Signature Bank well-capitalized at the time of its
failure?
Ms. Harris. They were well-capitalized, but they had
inadequate liquidity risk management and other risk management
practices.
Chairman Barr. Did your agency issue an MRA or an MRIA, or,
to your knowledge, did the FDIC issue an MRA or an MRIA related
to Signature's capital adequacy?
Ms. Harris. Yes, sir, and, of course, our MRIAs and our
Supervisory Recommendations are done jointly, so DFS and the
FDIC together.
Chairman Barr. But were any of those MRAs related to
capital?
Ms. Harris. Yes.
Chairman Barr. Explain that. If it was well-capitalized,
why issue a Matter Requiring Attention?
Ms. Harris. Because there is always room for improvement
and better risk management practices that can be----
Chairman Barr. Let me ask the question this way: Did the
FDIC ever raise concerns about Signature's capital adequacy?
Ms. Harris. Ever? Yes, I believe that we both did.
Chairman Barr. What was inadequate about those capital
levels? Did they not satisfy existing regulatory requirements?
Ms. Harris. I think the concerns centered around the types
of capital, and the ability of the bank to find appropriate
liquidity to manage that risk, given the risk profile of the
bank and the growth of the bank over a short period of time.
Chairman Barr. Would increased capital have saved
Signature?
Ms. Harris. It is hard to speculate, Congressman. I think
there was mismanagement on liquidity risk management, interest
rate risk management, governance, and other factors.
Chairman Barr. So, not as much of a capital adequacy issue
as these other issues, liquidity and interest rate sensitivity?
Ms. Harris. I think it is hard to disentangle them, but,
yes, I think liquidity issues were----
Chairman Barr. Let me ask you, Commissioner Hewlett, was
SVB well-capitalized?
Ms. Hewlett. At the time of its actual failure, it was
insolvent. Prior to the actual failure----
Chairman Barr. Before the run, was it well-capitalized?
Ms. Hewlett. Before the run itself occurred, it was
considered, in traditional terms, well-capitalized.
Chairman Barr. Yes. In fact, reclaiming my time, in the
prior 4 years, Silicon Valley Bank's Tier 1 common capital
ratio was similar to or higher than the average of its peer
banks, as well as above the applicable capital threshold set by
regulators. Would increased capital requirements have saved
Silicon Valley Bank, given a $42-billion run on deposits in 2
hours?
Ms. Hewlett. Once the run began, I don't think----
Chairman Barr. No.
Ms. Hewlett. ----anything could have addressed----
Chairman Barr. Here is the point. These bank failures did
not involve a capital adequacy issue. Is there any evidence
that these banks failed due to inadequate levels of capital,
and I think the answer to that is, no. Did the Fed or the FDIC
raise concerns with you as you all did joint exams related to
asset liability mismatches on the balance sheets of these
banks.
Ms. Harris. That was one of the areas flagged in several
reports, but not to the extent of liquidity and other risk
management issues.
Chairman Barr. Commissioner Hewlett, the Fed's recent
report on Silicon Valley Bank's failure lays blame on senior
management at the bank. Indeed, the Fed states that Silicon
Valley Bank had 31 unaddressed safety and soundness supervisory
warnings. It is my understanding, however, that the Senior
Management Team had acknowledged each outstanding warning and
set forth plans for remedial action. Ms. Hewlett, how did your
supervisors ever allow the bank to reach 31 unaddressed
warnings to begin with? Why didn't you or the Fed ever stop and
think, with all these warnings, there is clearly a larger issue
here?
Ms. Hewlett. We operated in consensus with our Federal
partners, and it was unacceptable that we did not operate in a
timely manner. However, most of our banks, smaller community
banks, and our State bank regulators work with our smaller
community banks to give them time to remediate their
deficiencies.
Chairman Barr. I think that may provide your agency with an
excuse, but certainly not the San Francisco Fed.
Ms. Harris, final question to you. Following the collapse
of SVB, Signature had to tap the Federal Home Loan Bank of New
York. You stated in your report that that is because they
didn't have the collateral to pledge to the New York Fed.
However, it has been reported that Signature had additional
borrowing capacity with the New York Federal Home Loan Bank,
but when the New York Federal Home Loan Bank attempted to
transfer that collateral to the New York Fed, they refused to
accept it. Could you please elaborate?
Ms. Harris. We had some operational challenges that we can
respond more to in writing. But in short, we had to have the
Federal Home Loan Bank subordinate its interest in the
collateral that had been pledged to the Fed in order to get
sufficient liquidity for the bank on that Friday.
Chairman Barr. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired. With
that, the gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I want to focus on this idea that these banks
were well-capitalized. There are a lot of countries around the
world that have what are termed, ``zombie banks,'' which are
undercapitalized in terms of what their assets are really
worth, but their bank regulators, for this or that political
reason, says they are well-capitalized by allowing them to list
those assets on their balance sheet as far more than they are
worth. I fear that we do the same here in our country, although
it is a little less obvious.
You can say Silicon Valley Bank was well-capitalized, that
is to say, its assets were worth a lot more than its
liabilities. But the fact is, when it was taken over, the FDIC
had to pay $20 billion to somebody to take it over. So in fact,
the liabilities exceeded the assets by at least $20 billion,
another $2.5 billion for Signature, and another $13 billion for
First Republic, all of them underwater, with assets not worth
anything. And the reason for that, in this case, was that when
interest rates go up, the value of your loan or your bond goes
down. That is interest rate risk, and we have a system of
disguising that at the regulatory level, and at the bank, at
the financial accounting level.
So, Ms. Harris, if you have a bank that says it has $20
billion in capital but if you actually look at the securities
that they have bought and they have lost $19 billion, so that
they are worth, in today's market, $19 billion less, is that a
well-capitalized bank or is that a bank that's barely holding
on--they had $20 billion in capital, but they lost $19 billion?
Ms. Harris. Sir, I think revisiting the accounting rules
and assumptions are well warranted in the case of what we have
seen in recent months.
Mr. Sherman. Now, I said this to Fed Vice Chair Barr when
he was here, that folks have come up with advice for the bank,
but the bank didn't take it. I used to be a business
consultant, and I would give advice and they would take it, and
they would pay me, and I was happy. When you saw these
problems, you didn't require the banks to use credit default
swaps to ensure their position or to sell their long-term
securities and buy short-term securities. Why were they allowed
to ignore your good advice?
I will first ask Ms. Hewlett.
Ms. Hewlett. First, a regulator's responsibility is to
promote safety and soundness and to identify deficiencies to
board management. It is board management's responsibility to
operate that bank.
Mr. Sherman. And when they don't take your advice, do you
pull the plug, or just shrug your shoulders and walk away?
Ms. Hewlett. When they don't take our advice, we should
move aggressively and swiftly with increased measures, even if
it means a cease and desist or consent decree.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. I want to focus on one other thing,
which is we are the only country in the world, I believe, with
this kind of bizarre system of overlapping regulatory
authorities. You can choose to go with the Fed, or you can go
with the OCC. And let's say, Ms. Harris, your institution was
really tough on banks. Couldn't they escape you by either
chartering themselves in New Jersey or going with Fed
regulation? And if several banks did that, you would lose
revenue. You would have fewer people to audit. Your institution
would decline. Is that what happens to a bank regulator who is
tougher than the Fed regulators or the regulators in adjoining
States?
Ms. Harris. I will tell you, we don't take those sorts of
things into account. We address risks of our institutions as we
see fit, whether it is banks, insurance companies, or the
virtual currency companies we regulate. The rules are the
rules.
Mr. Sherman. I would hope so, but in this case, the rule
tended to be, we see the problem, but we don't force the
solution.
Ms. Hewlett, you described the folks you audit as being in
that kind of $1- to $2-billion-range community banks, community
credit unions. Does it make sense to have your agency do a $200
billion organization like the Silicon Valley Bank?
Chairman Huizenga. I'm sorry. The gentleman's time has
expired.
Mr. Sherman. Please respond for the record.
Chairman Huizenga. The witness will respond for the record.
With that, the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer,
who is also the Chair of our Subcommittee on National Security,
is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to
our guests today. Ms. Harris, Ms. Hewlett just made the comment
that when banks are misbehaving, that in order to be able to
make your point, sometimes you have to do things maybe a little
more aggressively, take over and do stuff. Do you agree with
that?
Ms. Harris. Yes, I do.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. So, that brings up a question. In the GAO
report with regards to this that just came out last week, in
fact, the FDIC, in regards to Signature Bank, made the
statement that central banks management failed to take adequate
steps to mitigate the bank's longstanding liquidity and
management issues before the bank's failure. The other central
bank management will report to the FDIC that it mitigated an
issue, only for the FDIC staff to find the issue unresolved
during transaction testing. Waivers caused the FDIC to issue
repeated Supervisory Recommendations to Signature Bank. Were
you aware of this?
Ms. Harris. Absolutely. We regulated the bank jointly, and
as you will note, DFS is a co-signatory on every Supervisory
Recommendation in the order of examination.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. What were you not doing then to force the
action, if the FDIC was doing nothing? When you agree that
something needs to be done, why were you not doing something to
be more aggressive, as you agreed with the statement of Ms.
Hewlett here, to get things done?
Ms. Harris. Yes, sir. Since I have come into my position
over the last 19 months, and we have worked to update our
protocols----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. That is not my question. My question is,
why didn't you do something?
Ms. Harris. Sir, when I came into my seat, we were in the
middle of an exam report, but surely we would have taken
swifter action had that exam been able to conclude.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. In the middle of an exam report--that is
not the answer to my question, either. I asked you why you
didn't take action. You just agreed with that. When you have
somebody who is not doing their job, you need to be more
aggressive. Why are you not taking more aggressive action?
Ms. Harris. And as I noted, we were in middle of----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Is it a failure of your examiners to do
their job? That is my question.
Ms. Harris. No, sir. We identified the issues. The bank
management failed to----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Well, it is fine. You identified the
issue, but then you have to do something about it.
Ms. Harris. I agree, sir, and we are working to escalate
issues and take swifter action.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Actually, you didn't do anything about it,
so you all were incompetent at managing the banks; that is the
problem. You all didn't do your job. I used to be a bank
examiner in the State of Missouri. I knew what my job was, and
you didn't do yours. That is the bottom line.
Ms. Harris, interest rate risk is a real problem, and a lot
of the banks are upside down right now and have some liquidity
problems. Even the Fed itself is upside down. When Fed Chair
Jerome Powell was here the other day, he admitted that his bank
and his Federal Reserve is losing money because he is the guy
himself, upside down in his rates. Did the Fed ever discuss
with you the potential liquidity shortage due to rate hikes
with the two banks that are in California?
Ms. Harris. Discuss with me or discuss with my colleague
from California? I'm sorry.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Ms. Hewlett, she is from California,
right? Yes.
Ms. Hewlett. Yes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. You oversee those two banks, right?
So, did the FDIC or the Federal Reserve, either one discuss
with you the interest rate problem that those two banks
presented?
Ms. Hewlett. The Federal Reserve did discuss that there
were deficiencies in terms of the review of Silicon Valley
Bank's risk due to the rising interest rates and that their
simulations were unreliable, and they also discussed it with
Silicon Valley Bank's management in November of 2022.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Did they offer to work with you and in
conjunction to do something with this to force some action by
the bank to take some action here?
Ms. Hewlett. They were going to take some action along with
us, and the Silicon Valley Bank management was informed as a
result of their failure in this area and their lack of
sensitivity to interest rate risk.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay.
Ms. Hewlett. And an MOU was going to be issued, but the
bank run occurred prior to----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Listen, I have less than a minute--I
am sorry to interrupt, but I have less than a minute to go, and
one more issue I want to talk to you about. I think this is a
very teachable moment for all of us. Social media helped drive
this situation. This morning, a gentleman indicated how long it
took for them to lose all these dollars, these deposits out of
their bank. Social media has really turned our banking world
upside down with how quickly things can happen. I think that
there is a national security risk here from the Chinese
watching what is going on right now. We are self-imploding, and
I am very concerned about it. Do you have the same concerns?
Ms. Harris. Yes, sir.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Ms. Hewlett?
Ms. Hewlett. Yes, definitely.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. We want to continue to work with you. My
time is up, but we want to work with you to be able to try and
address this. To me, this is the newest challenge that this
industry has with real-time payments around the corner. We have
to figure out how to make sure that we can transfer money
safely and not endanger the entitlements. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentlewoman from Ohio, Mrs. Beatty, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
ranking members, and thank you to our witnesses here today.
Superintendent Harris, earlier today on panel one, we had
Mr. Shay here, the co-founder of Signature Bank, and he
indicated that he didn't think it was necessary for the
regulators to close Signature Bank. Can you address his claim
and explain the decision to close the bank that weekend in
March?
Ms. Harris. Absolutely, ma'am. Under my authorities and
banking laws, Section 606 of New York, I have the authority to
take possession of a bank if it is operating in an unsafe and
unsound manner or if it is operating in an unauthorized manner.
In this case, we knew the bank had at least a $4-billion
shortfall at the time we took it over. They had an inability to
demonstrate a credible liquidity strategy.
And I will give you one example, which is on Saturday
afternoon, they said to us that they had $5.1 billion in
pledgeable securities, and 35 minutes later, they revised that
estimate down to just $900 million. The regulators' inability
to get a clear and credible liquidity plan from the bank made
it clear that they would not be able to open in a safe and
sound manner on Monday.
Mrs. Beatty. I will ask you the question we asked him:
Whose fault is this, and maybe as a kind of follow-up to my
colleague's question, Mr. Becker was the only one who said or
halfway acknowledged and took responsibility as being the
president. So, do you think it was Mr. Shay's fault? Do you
think it was also your fault?
Ms. Harris. I think that primarily, bank management failed
to put the risk----
Mrs. Beatty. And who is bank management?
Ms. Harris. Mr. Shay and his colleagues who were running
the bank, both at the executive level and on the board, and I
think there are areas for regulators to improve as well.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Let me go to my next question. I will
ask both of you. I can start with you, Commissioner Hewlett. I
am concerned that without deposit insurance reform, we may
continue to see an outflow of bank deposits away from smaller
banks and into the nation's largest banks, and community banks,
as you probably will agree, are the backbone of our local
communities. And we saw how they pulled through to support
communities during the pandemic, for example, by ensuring that
small businesses could get access to the Paycheck Protection
Plan or PPP. We had some difficulties at first, as you will
recall, and had to come back, and many of us, especially on
this side of the aisle, had to make sure that we were dealing
with small businesses.
Here is where I am going. There are 193 community banks in
Ohio--in my State and district--with a combined $134 billion in
assets. Almost 80 percent of these banks have been in
businesses for over 100 years. As a comparison, Silicon Valley
Bank had over $212 billion in assets. Do you share my concerns
on how are these community banks in your State going to do
after the aftermath of this recent bank failure, and do you
have any recommendations for us?
Ms. Hewlett. Yes, first and foremost, regardless of what
Federal legislation has been introduced in the past, I think
there must be emphasis placed upon supporting our community
banks. Our community banks are on the front lines providing
lending to our small businesses, which are the engine of our
country. Our community banks are the entities that are
providing lending to our most-underserved people, whether in
inner cities or rural America. So whatever solution we discuss
or collaborate with together, our community banks should not
bear the burden, and everything possible should be done to
support them.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. And I am going to ask you the same
question. When we talk about the bank presidents, whose fault
was it that this happened?
Ms. Hewlett. I don't think there was just one factor. I
think there was a combination of factors. I think there were
deficiencies in governance and management. There were
deficiencies in the board management and taking into
consideration all the different types of liquidity and capital
risk.
Mrs. Beatty. Do you think it was the regulators' fault as
well?
Ms. Hewlett. I believe that the regulators did not act in a
timely fashion, and we take responsibility for that, combined
with the impact of social media and how fast one can withdraw
their money through digital platforms. I believe all of those
facts----
Mrs. Beatty. I'm sorry, my time is up, but thank you for
your response.
Chairman Huizenga. And the gentlelady's time has expired.
With that, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams, who is
also the Chair of the House Small Business Committee, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank
the witnesses for being here today. In the California DFPI's
internal review report on their supervision of Silicon Valley
Bank, it states that there was a staffing shortage, with only
two examiners supervising SVB. The report goes on to say that
SVB had already failed by the time additional examiners were
available. And the report also indicates that the agency failed
to act when an examiner in charge elevated need for additional
resources to review SVB's materials in 2021 and 2022.
California DFPI's proposed budget for 2022 through 2023 was
$157 million. I am from Texas. That is a lot of money in Texas,
okay, and I assume that would be adequate to keep a full-time
supervisory staff up and running. So, I am curious as to what
the California DFPI prioritized allocating resources towards?
Commissioner Hewlett, what was that money used for if not for
an adequate number of supervisors?
Ms. Hewlett. Going forward, we have taken our existing
resources, and we have added more staff to our examination team
as it relates to large banks. We have strengthened an early
module system and mandated a large supervisory plan with
emphasis on looking at uninsured depositors, particularly in a
particular sector. And we have tightened our adherence to
timelines to ensure that moving forward, our large banks
remediate in a timely manner.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Let me follow through. Did a similar
staffing issue occur at any of the eight other banks that DFPI
oversees or was it just this one?
Ms. Hewlett. There were staffing issues, which we have now
addressed and created an enhanced monitoring team, as well as a
large supervisory plan for large banks.
Mr. Williams of Texas. It sounds like there are a lot of
people involved now. Since 2019, Signature Bank had retained a
less-than-satisfactory rating in liquidity. And in the reports
that were released, it was stated that Signature Bank was
warned multiple times by regulators of their risks. And even
though the bank was aware of these risks, they left many of
these weaknesses unresolved. I think we have talked a little
bit about that.
Again, Superintendent Harris, in your testimony, you said
that Signature's failure to remediate the outstanding liquidity
management issues undoubtedly contributed to its collapse. So,
why was there no action taken when you had already downgraded
Signature's liquidity and management ratings, and how often do
you downgrade to the lowest level, and how did that not signal
a potential bank collapse?
Ms. Harris. Sir, as we have noted, the regulators,
including DFS, should have taken more swift and prompt action
to force the bank to remediate those items that had been
flagged year-after-year and that were left open.
Mr. Williams of Texas. This has been an expensive learning
experience, hasn't it, for everybody?
Commissioner Hewlett, Silicon Valley Bank was without a
chief risk officer for 8 months. We have talked about that. And
in the DFPI report, it indicates that the circumstances of the
role of the chief risk officer at SVB were unknown. He was
there, but he didn't know what he was supposed to do. And I
know that in that report, he says issues with risk management,
the board's failure to hold the senior management accountable
for risk management plans, were the basis for the MRAs and
ratings downgrade.
Lastly, Commissioner Hewlett, when the DFPI issued the
MRAs, were you aware of the status of the chief risk officer,
or did you expect Silicon Valley Bank to provide those updates
for you?
Ms. Hewlett. We should have moved in a much more aggressive
and timely fashion to make Silicon Valley Bank address their
deficiencies.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. And given the interest rate
risk was a major factor in SVB's failure, should these have
been elevated to a Matter Requiring Immediate Attention?
Ms. Hewlett. In terms of the interest rate risk, they were
elevated. An MOU was in the process of being initiated.
However, before the MOU was initiated, the bank run had begun.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. Usually, you hear about having
more people than you need with the government; now, we have too
few. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Illinois, Mr. Casten, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Commissioner Hewlett,
I would like to start with you. A couple of hours ago, Greg
Becker told us that he was not aware of any discussion of
interest rate risks at SVB prior to early 2023. I think you
just mentioned in your conversation with Chairman Huizenga that
in November 2022, you were raising concerns. And in an April 2,
2023, Washington Post article, ``Silicon Valley Bank's risk
model flashed red. So its executives changed it.'', it says
that Silicon Valley Bank purposely changed their assumptions
about interest rate risks which hide interest rate
mismanagement, and maximize short-term profits, and says that,
``Changing assumptions about interest rate risks were shared
with Federal and State regulators in late 2021 or 2022.'' Can
you either confirm or deny that you were aware of them changing
their interest rate risk models, possibly in late 2021?
Ms. Hewlett. The liquidity risk management project plan
that Silicon Valley Bank----
Mr. Casten. I am not trying to get in trouble, but I am
asking specifically about interest rate risk, that they had
changed their interest rate models. And I am just asking----
Ms. Hewlett. Their interest----
Mr. Casten. Can you confirm that the article is correct?
Ms. Hewlett. On November 15, 2022, in a supervisory letter,
which noted the MRA----
Mr. Casten. And I am sorry. Just a yes or no is all I am
looking for, whether you can confirm or not.
Ms. Hewlett. They received a supervisory letter on November
15, 2022, which very clearly indicates----
Mr. Casten. Okay. So you are saying when the article says
late 2021, that is incorrect?
Ms. Hewlett. In November of 2021, they were notified
through supervisory letters that their liquidity risks were
miles----
Mr. Casten. I am asking specifically about the interest
rate models. This says that they changed their models and the
regulators were aware that they had changed their interest rate
models. I am not asking when you notified them. I am asking,
when did you become aware, and is the article right, that it
was earlier?
We will follow up for the record because I want to use the
rest of my time to talk about some of the New York issues. If I
understand it correctly, the stablecoin rules in New York
require that stablecoin issuers are backed by a reserve of
assets that is fully redeemable. Is that correct?
Ms. Harris. Correct.
Mr. Casten. And am I also right that issuers are not
allowed to lend against stablecoins?
Ms. Harris. That is correct as well.
Mr. Casten. Does New York regulate how much a stablecoin
issuer can keep in uninsured customer deposits?
Ms. Harris. We do not, although we monitor all of our
stablecoin issuers and virtual currency companies to make sure
they are holding both commercial accounts and reserve accounts
in diversified, well-regulated, FDIC-insured banks.
Mr. Casten. Okay. Now, I asked that because Circle had $3.3
billion at SVB. They also had uninsured deposits at Signature
Bank that they couldn't access. Coinbase disclosed having $240
million in corporate cash at Signature. We know what happened
to USDC and the collapse. Did New York regulations, either by
statute or through the supervisory authority you have, prohibit
Signature from loaning against the deposits that they had from
Circle and Coinbase?
Ms. Harris. No, but I think it is important to realize that
Signature did not hold digital assets. They held the USD in the
commercial account.
Mr. Casten. Sure. But if it is a stablecoin, it is only as
good as the reserves, so what I am asking is if the assertion
in New York law is that those assets have to be fully backed,
does an uninsured dollar deposit at a bank with all of this
interest rate risk count under New York State law as fully
backed?
Ms. Harris. Yes. Our stablecoin issuers have to have one-
to-one on-chain to off-chain deposits. So if there is a
stablecoin outstanding, our dollar denominates stablecoin
outstanding, there has to be $1 on deposit with a depository--
--
Mr. Casten. Which only matters if the dollar is actually
accessible and someone can reach it because they can be----
Ms. Harris. The required could be held in USD and cash and
cash equivalents; they can't be held in illiquid assets.
Mr. Casten. The reason I raised that is because the only
reason why the peg has come back for the USDC is because the
Fed stepped in and bailed out all the depositors, and I am very
concerned about the exposure that happens if we regulate them.
And you all have done a great job in New York, but if you have
approved this and now the Fed has to bail it out, the only
thing that a stablecoin does is destabilize our financial
system.
Ms. Harris. And to clarify, USDC is not approved by DFS. It
is not available for New York. We regulate Circle, and Circle
is licensed, but as you know, we have product approval and USDC
is not approved for----
Mr. Casten. Last quick question for you, in your written
testimony, you said that Signature advised the regulators that
its available liquidity on Monday would be bolstered by
substantial deposit inflows from an unspecified DFS-regulated
virtual currency company. To which crypto company were they
referring?
Ms. Harris. That is confidential supervisory information,
so I would like to maybe be responsive to that in a private
setup.
Mr. Casten. But you know who that was?
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Casten. I will follow up on that. Thank you.
Chairman Huizenga. And you can follow up in writing on
that.
With that, the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Rose, who is
also the Vice Chair of our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Huizenga, and thanks to our
other chairman and ranking members for holding the hearing. And
thanks to the witnesses for being here.
Commissioner Hewlett, your report notes that beginning in
March 2020, onsite examination functions were performed
virtually due to the pandemic. Are the examination functions
still performed virtually with staff working from home?
Ms. Hewlett. During the period of COVID, the examinations
were performed virtually and frequently, and as many of the
examinations involved reviewing of documents, we were able to
perform our examination review virtually.
Mr. Rose. And is that still what you are doing today?
Ms. Hewlett. We are more in a hybrid state today where some
examinations are onsite and some are actually----
Mr. Rose. Thank you. Do you think it is more effective for
examiners to be onsite and in-person or working from home?
Ms. Hewlett. It really depends upon the bank itself.
Mr. Rose. Sure. I can answer this. As a former bank board
member, I can tell you there is no substitute for in-person,
on-site examinations. There is nothing that strikes fear in the
hearts of bankers more than that on-site examination. And I
would encourage you to move away from that as swiftly as
possible because I do not think you can effectively supervise
these banks without the specter of that onsite examination
happening. So, thank you for that.
Superintendent Harris, you serve on the Financial Stability
Oversight Council (FSOC) as a non-voting member, correct?
Ms. Harris. Yes.
Mr. Rose. In 2021, FSOC identified three key priorities
related to significant vulnerabilities in the financial
system--non-bank financial intermediation, climate-related
financial risk, and Treasury market resilience--and in 2022,
FSOC identified a fourth key priority: risk related to digital
assets. Superintendent Harris, which is more concrete and an
imminent threat to the current financial system, climate-
related financial risk or interest rate risk?
Ms. Harris. I think there are lots of important factors
related to risk, but I also want to clarify that I joined FSOC
at the beginning of this year, in January 2023.
Mr. Rose. Okay. But again, which one do you think is more
concrete, and maybe I will stress imminent, maybe to point you
to the answer I am looking for in the current financial system.
Ms. Harris. Certainly, the interest rate risk that we have
been seeing materializes is----
Mr. Rose. Sure. And I think therein lies part of the
concern that I would have in the current scenarios that we have
seen play out is that, I would tell you, I think you took your
eyes off the ball, and that it is these longstanding
fundamental issues that affect banks that were at play here.
And unfortunately, my fear is that regulators were looking too
far down the field, too far ahead, and thinking about things
that maybe got their minds off of the real inherent risk to
banking.
Commissioner Hewlett, your report notes that DFPI will
require banks to evaluate and account for emerging risks posed
by technology-enabled activities such as social media and time
withdrawals. Do you attribute the run on SVB more to the use of
social media or to its emergency 8-K filing on March 8th?
Ms. Hewlett. The run on the bank, I feel, is a combination
of factors, which I have just indicated, that created the
perfect storm. I cannot assess whether one impacted this run
more than others. I think after more time and review, we will
have a better picture. But to be able to say, was it the
filing, or was it that people could withdraw their deposits on
digital platforms in less than a second--I can't say whether
one or the other was the main factor. I do know that all of
them together resulted in the perfect storm.
Mr. Rose. In the time remaining, do you think that
institutional investors on Wall Street react more to social
media or other forms of communication like Bloomberg terminal
notifications, SEC filings, client notes, and email chains?
Ms. Hewlett. I haven't done----
Mr. Rose. I am out of time, so if you could please respond
in writing for the record, I would appreciate it. Thank you,
and I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired. And I
think you are both going to be doing some writing of responses
to these last questions at the tail end of the 5 minutes.
With that, the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, is
now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to the
ranking member. Ms. Harris, I was curious as to what happened
to banks in New York when Circle broke the buck, when their
stablecoin broke the buck?
Ms. Harris. They depegged.
Mr. Lynch. Yes, when it did peg--we have had situations
like that occur with money market funds in the past, and I was
just curious what the impact was locally.
Ms. Harris. Sure. Again, I want to be clear that while
Circle is licensed and regulated by DFS, USDC is not approved
by DFS and, therefore, not available in New York, for New York
consumers. The impact on banks from USDC depegging, I think is
maybe less the issue than banks looking to derisk from banking
cryptocurrency customers and their fiat deposits, not their
digital asset deposits necessarily.
Mr. Lynch. It has a run effect, in other words?
Ms. Harris. No, sir. At least in the case of Signature,
when we saw the deposits leaving on that Friday afternoon, the
deposits that left that were digital asset customer deposits
still in USD were roughly proportional to digital asset
companies' deposits in the deposit base overall. So, what we
saw was a run across the diverse customer base of Signature
Bank.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. What we saw elsewhere, I guess across the
country, was people moving to bigger banks that they felt were
safer. And that avoided the risk that banks that actually had
crypto assets after Silvergate, SVB, Signature--after those
problems, we saw a migration. I am worried about that trend
because I don't think it is over yet. We see in small, local
community banks that people are nervous about that. And there
are billions and billions of dollars in deposits that are
migrating from those small banks that take care of a lot of
smaller businesses and individual depositors, and that is a
huge shift. Do you think that is helpful for the entire banking
ecosystem?
Ms. Harris. No, absolutely not. I think the health and
safety of our banking system depends on having this diversity
in the size of institutions.
Mr. Lynch. Yes. I am just wondering--and I did read the
Fed's guidance. They came up with a rule that presumptively
prohibits banks from taking crypto deposits or stablecoin
deposits, in many cases. Do you worry that the volatility,
because crypto products and stablecoins for that matter,
stablecoins that are not stable, when you marry up the banking
industry with the crypto industry, you invite in or import in
all of that volatility, which is extremely harmful to the
stability of that bank?
Ms. Harris. I agree, sir. I want to distinguish between
banks that hold digital assets themselves and banks that hold
USD as part of deposits for virtual asset companies. They both
obviously present risks and banks have to have appropriate risk
management protocols in place. DFS has also issued guidance to
our DFS- and State-regulated banks, making sure they understand
that they have to get preapproval from us before being engaged
in any type of virtual asset activity.
Mr. Lynch. Yes, the thing I am worried about is the
migratory effect. If a bank is considered to be a crypto bank,
and FTX happens or something like that, you have an inducement
for moving assets, and whether or not that is backed, we are
continuing to see volatility.
Ms. Harris. I think having the one-to-one backing as we do
in New York also helps prevent depegging because consumers know
the liquidity is there. It is one of the reasons we have been
so eager to continue working with you and your colleagues to
put a Federal framework in place that looks like what we do in
New York.
Mr. Lynch. Yes, in Massachusetts, it is odd because we have
excess deposit insurance above the $250--actually, the limit is
$10 million, and we still saw people moving their money to
bigger banks, so it continues to be a problem.
Anyway, thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Ogles, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Ogles. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, ladies,
for being here. Ms. Hewlett, you previously stated that a
regulator's primary responsibility was to evaluate and
highlight deficiencies, and, ultimately, it was up to the bank
to remediate those deficiencies. My question would be, did you
have the authority or did your peers have the authority to
escalate and essentially force compliance?
Ms. Hewlett. We had the authority to escalate and force
compliance.
Mr. Ogles. Yes, ma'am, and, Ms. Harris, same question for
you, ma'am.
Ms. Harris. Yes, we do.
Mr. Ogles. Yes, ma'am. And Ms. Hewlett, is there anything
in the regulations that would have prohibited you from
escalating the matter at hand with the banks that you were
overseeing?
Ms. Hewlett. There is nothing in the regulations that would
have prohibited us from escalating it.
Mr. Ogles. Is there anything in the rules that would have
prohibited escalation?
Ms. Hewlett. No.
Mr. Ogles. Ms. Harris, same question.
Ms. Harris. No.
Mr. Ogles. No, on both accounts? Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
Ms. Harris, you have said in reference to climate change,
that it is a very data-driven approach to risk mitigation,
operational resiliency, and so forth. So I am curious, there
was a 3\1/2\ degree change in climate temperatures. In exact
numerical terms, can you quantify how that will affect interest
rates?
Ms. Harris. No, sir.
Mr. Ogles. Yes, ma'am. If there is a 10-percent reduction
in polar ice, can you tell me how that will numerically impact
deposits versus say interest rate risk?
Ms. Harris. No, sir.
Mr. Ogles. Yes, ma'am. So, I am curious as to why any bank
or any regulator would somehow assert climate change as part of
the regulatory process when your role is fiduciary and not
activism?
Ms. Harris. Sir, I agree with you. But what I would say is
where we have institutions with concentration, for instance, a
set of mortgages in a flood zone, we want them to engage in
fair lending processes but also have proper risk management in
place, which doesn't mean not lending in those areas, but being
cognizant of concentration risk that may be new in the face of
climate change.
So instead of thinking of it as activism, we, at least at
DFS, approach it as something that should be part of an
existing risk management framework, the same way banks should
approach any other risks. And one of the examples I use for
operational resiliency, for example, is put the generator on
the roof, not in the basement.
Mr. Ogles. Yes, ma'am. But still, that has nothing to do
with interest rates or deposits or deposit structure, or, quite
frankly, bank governance. So again, to my colleague's point, I
think there were some priorities given by some of the banks,
not all, to climate change, and literally, in the minutes of
their meetings, they are spending virtually no time on interest
rate risk. And this is problematic from a bank management
perspective.
But also, as you both have stated, you had a
responsibility. You had the authority to escalate, but that did
not occur, and obviously, there is plenty of blame to go
around, but I think what we have to do in this process is learn
from the situation. And I think and I would caution that we
have had some of the agencies come before this body and ask for
more authority, but I think we understand clearly that the
regulations at hand give you the authority to act. There was
nothing that prohibited your ability to act. And I have not
heard you ladies ask for more authority, so I want to be clear
on that fact. But I would caution, don't come before the
committee and ask for more authority when the authority that
was given wasn't used appropriately.
I want to go to capital requirements, and I think it has
been stated that Fed Chair Powell and Vice Chair Barr had said
at the time, that the banks that failed were well-capitalized.
But I think it is important to understand that deposit
structure and interest rate risk was the key factor here and
more money--I don't think there was enough money that we could
have poured into the system to save a couple of these banks,
right? And in fact, what I would argue is that the capital
requirements, especially for your smaller community banks, are
too high.
If you have a well-managed bank with lower liquidity risk
or exposure risk, that should be taken into account. And
instead of being at 9 percent, let's not ratchet that up,
because what we risk here is forcing smaller and mid-sized
banks out of the marketplace. I come from a working-class
family. I started my first business when I was very young, and
it was the local banker who gave me my first loan, not because
I had a great business plan, but because he knew my family. And
I just think as you move forward, we must take that into
account. Ladies, again, thank you for being here. Mr. Chairman,
I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the ranking member of the Full Committee, Ms. Waters
of California, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like
to direct my questions to Commissioner Hewlett from California.
In your report regarding the failure of Silicon Valley Bank,
you indicated that your agency is working to better coordinate
with Federal regulators to develop stronger and more-effective
systems to promptly remediate deficiencies. And if you could
share with us some of the things that you envision could be
done, working with the Fed, that would help deal with a crisis
such as we have just had before us. What are you thinking about
in ways to work with the Fed to help deal with these
deficiencies that led up to the failure?
Ms. Hewlett. First and foremost, we have added, through our
existing resources, more people to our examination team, to
mandate adherence to timelines. We recognize how important our
community banks are to our community and working with our
Federal partners. We are from the very beginning going to scope
out our plan, define our roles as equal partners in recognition
of that importance, and work more closely with our Federal
partners to ensure that those timelines are adhered to. And we
believe that we are both going to have to work much more
aggressively, effectively, and efficiently, in ensuring that
the banks for which we provide oversight remediate their
deficiencies in a timely manner.
Ms. Waters. That is very good. Are there steps that the
Federal regulators can take to better coordinate with State
regulators like you? I think that it is important that the
Federal and State regulators know and understand what each are
doing and how to work together. Do you think there is anything
in particular that you would like to suggest that could help
strengthen that relationship?
Ms. Hewlett. As I indicated, it is really important at the
very beginning of the exam to get the roles straight and also
clearly define where we might have to act independently, if
necessary. I also think that after Silicon Valley Bank's run,
we all have to consider in evaluating the risk, the impact of
social media, the impact of how fast one can withdraw deposits
through our digital technology, and we all have to move faster.
We cannot get held up in the bureaucracy anymore in this new
age.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. As I have listened to the
witnesses, there have been a number of deficiencies that have
been articulated here during these hearings. And I just wonder,
when we talk about if the bank hadn't grown so fast that, that
was a problem, and that, with that growth and the uninsured,
and I don't think the bank provided private insurance.
What do you do when you see that a bank is just growing
fast because, of course, we all support our businesses? We want
them to be successful, et cetera. But when you are going fast,
does it mean that you have to take a look at the underwriting?
What can you do when you see that?
Ms. Hewlett. It is the responsibility of bank management to
operate their bank. We won't tell the bank how to invest, but
we should act swiftly in identifying the deficiencies,
particularly in liquidity and risk management, and hold the
bank's feet to the fire to make sure that they are taking that
risk seriously.
Ms. Waters. Thank you so very much for your presence here
today. I appreciate the information that you have shared with
us, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Huizenga. The ranking member yields back. With
that, the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Timmons, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Commissioner Hewlett,
your report is notably silent on any examination activity prior
to 2020. Yet, GAO's report makes clear that, in fact, there
were concerns related to SVB's management practices that were
outstanding going back to 2018. Why did you not include those
in your report?
Ms. Hewlett. Prior to that day, the management practices
were primarily concerned with IT audits, but it wasn't until
2022, that we got into the areas of real liquidity risk, and at
that point in time, we felt that was the most important. We
didn't know that there were management deficiencies prior to
that time, again, in terms of our review of their IT practices
and some of the data privacy, but where we found the most
significant deficiencies is when they were evaluated for
management, governance, liquidity, and capital risk.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you for that. Can you explain how
supervision by DFPI was conducted jointly with the Federal
Reserve when a bank was in the Fed's regional banking
organizations portfolio?
Ms. Hewlett. We will assign dedicated examiners. In this
case, there were two dedicated examiners. We meet with our
regional Federal partners, and we will become involved in the
scoping and the planning of the exam, segmenting the different
areas. And in this particular matter, we took the areas of
governance and management from enterprise perspective, asset
review, and IT review, whereas more enhanced reviews as they
related to capital and liquidity risks were taken primarily by
our Federal partners who did the review.
But we are in collaboration with our regional Federal
partners when it relates to larger banks, and when we say
larger banks, we mean banks that are over $10 billion in
assets. And when the bank reaches a point where it is over $100
billion in assets, it even goes to another level of review
under the Large Foreign Bank Organization program.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you. Your report states that from late
2021 throughout 2022, a dedicated examiner in charge
highlighted the need for additional resources to review SVB
materials. Even the DFPI financial institution managers
elevated the need to divert resources to SVB, yet the
discussions did not result in assigning additional staff to the
exam team.
In August of 2022, the examiner again reported the need for
additional resources. According to your report, no additional
resources were scheduled to be added until after the bank
failed. How many times, typically, is a resource request raised
with respect to an examination team before it is addressed?
Ms. Hewlett. That is one of the reasons why we have added,
from our existing staff, a more enhanced team. We have also
added another level of supervisory review, so that when you see
areas that will put a bank at a high risk, particularly, a
large bank with this level of assets, that it is addressed
immediately.
Mr. Timmons. And that was done after SVB failed?
Ms. Hewlett. That is correct.
Mr. Timmons. Okay. And prior to the bank failure, did a
similar staffing issue occur at any of the other eight large
banks that DFPI oversees or was it only SVB that had the
resource request issue?
Ms. Hewlett. SVB was an outlier. It grew at a very, very
fast pace. It had assets over $200 billion, and as I previously
indicated, the average size of our community banks is $4
billion, and about half of ours are $1 billion in assets.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Illinois, Mr. Foster, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Superintendent Harris,
in the Signature Bank failure, it seems like one of the most
significant factors in this demise was not so much the
concentration of crypto client deposits, but a lack of
pledgeable assets that were immediately available for liquidity
support. And as the speed of runs increases with technology, it
is going to be necessary to have even better real-time
liquidity information available to regulators. I was also
surprised to see in your testimony that in the days immediately
before the failure of Signature, there was a lot of real-time
uncertainty about the net and pending deposits and withdrawals.
So, why isn't that real-time information? What are the limiting
factors that cause you not to have real time?
Ms. Harris. I think the limiting factor in this case was
the inability of management to produce the data that is very
basic, and that any set of bank managers, board members should
be able to produce at a moment's notice. As we have noted in
our report and in my testimony, the numbers that all regulators
were getting with the bank were inconsistent and unreliable,
and it is just unacceptable.
Mr. Foster. But did the bank management have some sort of
real-time dashboard where they can just sit there and look and
see how deposits are flowing in and out?
Ms. Harris. I would say they should or, at the very least,
have the ability to assess the value of collateral, that they
have the value of the securities they have----
Mr. Foster. Yes. Separate them. It seems like deposits
might be a simpler case. What are the things that limit having
real-time deposit and withdrawal information?
Ms. Harris. I think mostly settlement times and the variety
of payment systems that a bank might use, but I think certainly
in the case of Signature, they were too slow and unrealistic
about their deposit and withdrawal inflows and outflows,
respectively.
Mr. Foster. Okay. And then when they get in trouble, do you
get access to whatever dashboards they have?
Ms. Harris. We requested data from them many, many times
throughout that weekend, and often, we were faced with hours-
long delays, and then, swiftly-changing estimates within
minutes.
Mr. Foster. It seems like they should have just given you
the password to an account where you could see whatever
dashboard they were looking at. And now, to the issue of
collateral. Are there mechanisms? For example, what is your
view of the Home Loan Bank System and how rapidly it was able
to respond? Are there deficiencies there? Are there other ways
that we could speed up a qualifying collateral or was that just
mechanism that existed and weren't used ahead of time?
Ms. Harris. I think the mechanisms for evaluating pledging
collateral probably bear some modernization. It is one of the
reasons why in our report, we suggested operational stress
testing, as we have termed it, almost tabletop exercises that
institutions can engage in with their regulators, to be able to
run these drills in real time so that in the event of a real-
life crisis, they are better equipped to provide data pledge
collateral and take the steps that they need to, to get
liquidity.
Mr. Foster. And are there any significant third parties who
could step in, that have the same level of technological
connection, for example, the Federal Reserve was, I guess, the
main backstop when this sort of thing happened?
Ms. Harris. Yes, I think the Federal Reserve and the other
regulators--DFS, FDIC--worked very quickly and very well to
help overcome some of those operational challenges. For
instance, working with the Federal Home Loan Bank and the New
York Fed to make sure that the Federal Home Loan Bank could
subordinate its interest in collateral to the Fed in order to
get faster liquidity for the bank when it couldn't get that
liquidity as fast as we would have liked from the discount
window.
Mr. Foster. What sort of risk were they taking on, when
they subordinated the interest? I am a physicist, not a banker.
I'm sorry.
Ms. Harris. I think it's the same amount of risk whenever
you subordinate your interest in some sort of debt. When you
lower yourself in the priority stack, you enhance the risk
because you are a lower-priority debtor, but I think that is
the case with any type of debt.
Mr. Foster. So this would be the Home Loan Bank going belly
up that would cause them trouble, which presumably shouldn't
happen?
Ms. Harris. Presumably.
Mr. Foster. Or we would be forced to do something about it
if it did? So there wasn't a major risk there?
Ms. Harris. No, I think----
Mr. Foster. During the crisis 12 years ago, you had
instances where Warren Buffett stepped in and said, I am going
to help out. Is there a merit to having a group of accredited
people with the right technology who can step in and provide
liquidity support in emergency situations? Is there a need for
something like that to have something besides the Federal
Reserve, the liquidity provider of last support?
Ms. Harris. I think in the phase of what we are learning
about the speed of runs, the impact of social media, digital
banking, we should be considering all kinds of alternatives to
make sure our banking system is safe and sound.
Mr. Foster. And it has to respond on the same timescale as
the Internet.
Ms. Harris. Yes. And we want to make sure that it is
subject to the same safeguards as well.
Mr. Foster. Great. Thanks so much. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Fitzgerald, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On November 11,
2022, a Wall Street Journal article explained at length
interest rate risks presented to the banking system by the
Fed's inflation-fighting rapid increases in interest rates.
Silicon Valley Bank was mentioned as a particular case, as of
September 30, 2022, a market value of its held-to-maturity
bonds just slightly above the value of its total equity. So
clearly, the regulators should have been becoming aware of
risks, if they weren't already, surrounding Silicon Valley
Bank.
Commissioner Hewlett, if the uninsured depositors had not
forced the bank to close, how much longer do you think the
regulators would have allowed Silicon Valley to remain open
without intervening?
Ms. Hewlett. The MOU was in the process of being initiated.
However, the bank run occurred before the MOU was initiated, so
I believe it would have depended upon how the bank responded to
the MOU. If they did not respond to the MOU or any subsequent
orders, we would have had to take it to another level in the
form of a consent decree in a cease and desist. It is hard for
me to say, sitting here today, how long, because it would have
depended upon their response.
Mr. Fitzgerald. And as you are well aware, there are State-
chartered banks and there are Federally-chartered banks. And I
am just curious, because something that has not come up much is
the involvement of the State of California and your office. And
Governor Gavin Newsom talked about his interactions with both
the White House and with Treasury. Were you part of those
conversations or how did those evolve as it was discovered that
the bank could be in trouble?
Ms. Hewlett. I was not involved in any systemic risk
discussions nor did I discuss anything in regards to systemic
risk with the Governor.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. And when the banks see rates
move up such as they did, and the realized losses on the long-
dated securities were in place, did you anticipate you would
have other regional banks in California that could actually see
deposits are to be pulled?
Ms. Hewlett. At the point that Silicon Valley Bank's run
began, we really began enhanced monitoring of all of our
community banks. We received hourly reports and we monitored
the deposits towards the outflows on an hourly basis, because
once that fear starts, it is easy for it to spread. Regardless
of how well any bank management is running the bank, and
regardless of how much capital, the fear spreads. So, we were
monitoring very closely to try to contain it.
Mr. Fitzgerald. In your role as Commissioner, what do you
feel was your responsibility as this started to develop?
Ms. Hewlett. We were focused as a result of the run on all
of our other banks within California. And in that focus, we
contacted each and every one of our banks that we thought might
be at risk from the fear and the contagion to give them as much
support as possible.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Okay.
Ms. Hewlett. Fortunately, we were able to resolve a number
of the issues, and that fear and that contagion did not spread
throughout our financial system.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Were you in contact with the FDIC
throughout this process as well?
Ms. Hewlett. I was only in contact with the FDIC in terms
of taking possession of the bank, liquidating it, and then
turning it over to the FDIC and receivership. From that point
on, I was not in contact with the FDIC as to what would be done
in terms of the uninsured depositors or whatever negotiations
may or may not have been taking place.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlewoman from Massachusetts, Ms.
Pressley, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. And thank you to our witnesses for
joining us today. Obviously, the collapse of Silicon Valley
Bank and Signature Bank have had significant implications for
both our financial system and our regulatory framework. So, it
is good to have State regulators before this committee to
testify and discuss the reports regarding Signature Bank and
Silicon Valley Bank. The report from California regulators on
the failure of SVB identified several areas of concern about
SVB's governance and risk management in May of last year, and
the regulators eventually downgraded the management component
of SVB's 2021 CAMELS rating and the governance and controls
rating at the holding company.
Commissioner Hewlett, the report notes that at the time
that SVB's management rating was downgraded, the regulators did
not perceive any imminent threats to the bank. Can you explain
why this was the case?
Ms. Hewlett. At the first downgrading of that bank, the
deficiencies that were noted were primarily in IT. On the
second downgrade of the bank, when they were doing the
liquidity reviews and it had been downgraded further two or
three less than satisfactory, the regulators felt they had more
time. They did not anticipate the type of run that occurred in
this bank, in which $42 billion went out in one day. In
hindsight, regulators should have been much more aggressive and
made the bank management adhere to the timelines.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. And to follow up, Commissioner,
the report also mentioned that historically, bank examiners
have not viewed a high ratio of uninsured deposits to total
deposits as a significant risk factor, but you recognized that
a high level of uninsured deposits at SVB contributed to the
run on SVB. So, do you think regulators should commit to
increasing their focus on banks with high ratios of uninsured
deposits?
Ms. Hewlett. I do, and that is exactly what we are doing
right now. As a result of this, in hindsight, we have enhanced
our team. And one of the areas that we are taking into
consideration in our early warning modules is those banks that
have a high percentage of uninsured depositors in one
particular area. But I would say that this really was an
outlier in Silicon Valley Bank--93 percent of uninsured
depositors is highly unusual and is not what you see in your
average community bank.
Ms. Pressley. Very good. So, we agree regulators should
take steps to mitigate risks that can arise from having such a
large amount of uninsured deposits. And we really do want to
learn the lessons from the turmoil of these last few months and
reform these practices to ensure this does not happen again.
I am of the opinion, as are many of my colleagues on this
side, that reinstating the Dodd-Frank regulatory requirements
on mid-sized banks, that were rolled back in 2018 by
Republicans, is really critical. We can learn from this on the
State level as well. So, I urge my colleagues to support these
measures being reinstated. Again, thank you for coming before
the committee, and I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlewoman yields back. The
gentlewoman from California, Mrs. Kim, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. High inflation over 4
decades has led to real-life consequences in the form of failed
banks, with over $400 billion, in essence, wiped out from two
of the largest banks that are headquartered in California. And
in total, we have seen three banks failing under the watch of
the California State regulator.
And more recently, First Republic is the second-largest
bank in the United States, just behind Washington Mutual. So
with that, Commissioner Hewlett, why do you think California
financial institutions are bearing the brunt of the current
distress in the banking industry?
Ms. Hewlett. In terms of Silicon Valley Bank as I
previously stated, I don't think there was just one factor.
There were numerous factors that created the perfect storm.
Once the run started as a result of deficiencies in governance,
management deficiencies, and taking into consideration risk
management in the areas of capital risk and liquidity risk,
once you see the impact of social media and digital platforms,
and how quickly one can withdraw their money from the bank, in
addition to regulators not acting in a timely manner, all of
that started the run on Silicon Valley Bank. And once that fear
starts, it spreads.
Mrs. Kim. So, it is fear-driven, social-media driven,
Internet-driven?
Ms. Hewlett. And then, it will spread.
Mrs. Kim. Sure. Let me reclaim my time, so I can ask you
other questions. Can you explain how supervision by DFPI was
conducted jointly with the Federal Reserve when a bank was in
the Fed's regional banking organizations portfolio?
Ms. Hewlett. Generally, when we have banks that are over
$10 billion, and particularly in this case where you have a
very large bank that may be over $50 billion, $100 billion, or
$200 billion, we will examine that bank in accordance with
whomever is the primary regulator. The primary regulator in
this case was the Federal Reserve Bank. We meet together at the
regional level to determine the different portions of the exam
and who is going to do which portions of the exam, and some
portions of the exam we will do together. In this case, you
have an added factor, because it had grown so rapidly that it
fell under the category of a Large Foreign Bank Organization.
So in addition to working with the regional regulators, it also
went up to the examiners in D.C., who are highly trained in
examining the banks.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Commissioner Hewlett. I want to talk
about the report, so let me stop you there and then talk about
the report. In the beginning of that, you state that there was
divided oversight over SVB such that the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco (FRBSF) assumed a lead role for supervisory
activities of SVB. Yet later on in that report, it states that
SVB was examined jointly by DFPI and FRBSF. The wording makes
it appear as though the DFPI is only involved in a subset of
oversight activities related to banks within its jurisdiction.
So, is it true that DFPI relies on supervision by examiners
from the Federal Reserve for certain oversight activities of
State-chartered banks?
Ms. Hewlett. First, we examined different sections
separately. DFPI was very much taking the lead on the
governance and management of that bank from an enterprise
perspective. They took the lead on the IT examination of that
bank. They took the lead on the asset examination of the bank.
However, when it came to examination under a Large Foreign Bank
Organization program in that case, that is when a more-
experienced team from the Federal Reserve----
Mrs. Kim. How does DFPI conduct itself as a primary State
regulator over the bank if it is only involved in a portion of
the supervision?
Ms. Hewlett. And this is one of the reasons why we added an
enhanced team on----
Chairman Huizenga. Sorry to interrupt, but the time has
expired.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you.
Chairman Huizenga. And we can get you a written answer to
that.
With that, the gentlewoman from Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Superintendent Harris,
do you think what happened with Silicon Valley Bank led to the
other failures?
Ms. Harris. Yes, I do.
Ms. Tlaib. Why?
Ms. Harris. I think social media, the speed of being able
to withdraw, and the association, however valid, between some
of the banks led to a contagion effect.
Ms. Tlaib. Superintendent Harris, Mr. Becker was here
earlier. Did you listen to his testimony?
Ms. Harris. I did.
Ms. Tlaib. You did?
Ms. Harris. In part, yes.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. Superintendent Harris, one of the
interesting things is, Mr. Becker kept talking about social
media. I can understand the other two things, right? But he
kept emphasizing that was a major factor in some of the
mismanagement, and somehow it was because social media, and
that is why they were in there. But how much of that really was
weighed? I can ask the Commissioner, but Mr. Becker basically
is leaning on this claim that social media was the reason. I
hope you got all that.
Ms. Harris. I think the failure of bank management to have
adequate liquidity risk management is really at fault.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. Commissioner Hewlett, thank you so much for
being here. I think Silicon Valley Bank exposed a lot of areas
for us as Members of Congress to work on. I don't know if you
listened to the testimony of Mr. Becker, the former CEO,
earlier. Did you?
Ms. Hewlett. I heard about some portions of it.
Ms. Tlaib. Sure. How do you send the correspondence to
Silicon Valley Bank, for example, Matters Requiring Attention.
What was being sent to them? Email, of course----
Ms. Hewlett. We received seven supervisory letters
detailing their deficiencies. There were 31 MRAs and MRIAs, so
they were on notice as to their deficiencies.
Ms. Tlaib. I think, the committee should just send you the
full transcript of his testimony, because I went through this
timeline, as you can see. And I think in January, they started
changing their trading plan--is that what they call it, a
trading plan? Were you aware of that in January, that they
started to implement what they call a trading plan change? Were
you aware of that, Commissioner?
Ms. Hewlett. We became aware from the State perspective
afterwards and we highlighted the risk.
Ms. Tlaib. So, on January 26th, they do that. They
implement a change to the corporate trading plan. If you
listened to his testimony, he says it is completely unrelated.
It is like, oops, we failed, but this is after the bonuses,
after compensation, which they claim was already set and
scheduled beforehand. Do you believe that?
Ms. Hewlett. The matter is under investigation right now,
and I think it will come to light soon.
Ms. Tlaib. Okay. Are you going to investigate the role of
compensation incentives in your report, ma'am?
Ms. Hewlett. We have other programs under DFPI, and I can't
confirm or deny other investigations that are ongoing.
Ms. Tlaib. Okay. Do you think that incentive compensation
plans have contributed to the poor risk management and
insufficient response to warnings demonstrated by senior
employees at Silicon Valley Bank?
Ms. Hewlett. I do think it did contribute. I think there
was more of a focus on earnings and gain than there was on risk
management.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. I really think there should be an
investigation on whether or not Mr. Becker was fully truthful
with us as Members of Congress in this committee. It was very
telling, how little he claimed to know, and that others knew,
and that this was just by coincidence. This timeline, if you
look at it, any layperson could look at this and see this was
set up in a way, again, for him to make millions and to walk
away, while our financial system in this country is basically
harmed, as we can see with the two other banks that failed.
I really would love for you all to respond directly to some
of the testimony of Mr. Becker. I think it is very telling how
little he claims to know and I really don't believe he didn't
know what was going on.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Donalds, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Harris, Ms.
Hewlett, thanks so much for being here.
Ms. Hewlett, let me start with you. From what I have been
able to surmise from today's hearing, there was a dual
regulator for SVB: it was part of your Department; and part of
the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. At what point did
you or the SF Fed realize you were having structural balance
sheet liquidity issues with SVB?
Ms. Hewlett. We recognized that on March 9th, when SVB had
a negative cash balance of $958 million, they were insolvent
and we had at best----
Mr. Donalds. Ms. Hewlett, I want to go back, because I
think everybody understands the insolvency aspects when it
actually occurred. But at what point did the supervisors of the
bank, the actual people on the ground that day, start to see
that there were some potential issues with the structure of the
balance sheet, when did that start occurring, because the bank
had been cited at least 13 times before its failure. So, give
me that process. When were they notified?
Ms. Hewlett. They were notified numerous times.
Mr. Donalds. And what was the response from them?
Ms. Hewlett. But definitely, in 2022. However, I can't
speculate as to what was in their mind.
Mr. Donalds. No, no, no.
Ms. Hewlett. But they were given numerous supervisory
letters, and definitely when that run started to happen and
depositors started to withdraw their money out of the banks----
Mr. Donalds. Ms. Hewlett, once the run starts, the game is
over.
Ms. Hewlett. Right.
Mr. Donalds. So the run, we understand that piece. What I
am trying to ascertain is, they were cited numerous times. And
by the way, I was in commercial banking. That is where I
started my career. I have dealt with regulators. They were
cited numerous times. What was the response from Silicon Valley
Bank when they were being cited? And actually, what was the
tone from your agency or from the SF Fed in response to Silicon
Valley Bank's lack of curing the issues that were coming up in
their audits and their reviews?
Ms. Hewlett. Liquidity risks were noted in 2021.
Mr. Donalds. I know, but----
Ms. Hewlett. And remediation was not taken seriously by
bank management.
Mr. Donalds. Okay.
Ms. Hewlett. Regulators did not move aggressively in time.
Mr. Donalds. Why didn't the regulators move aggressively
enough?
Ms. Hewlett. I do believe that regulators at the time
worked more in a culture, particularly on the safe banking
side, to give a bank time to remediate the problems.
Mr. Donalds. Ms. Hewlett, I have 2 minutes left. I
understand what you are saying. From our perspective, we have
various Members who want to talk about new regulations and
different things like that, but what it appears to me is that
SVB was too cozy with the regulators. There was a lot of
fraternization going on, and nobody put the hammer down when
they should have at the time when they noticed structural
liquidity issues on the balance sheet.
Ms. Harris, I know we have talked a lot about SVB in this
hearing. In New York, with Signature Bank, were there any
supervisory findings that were given to Signature Bank prior to
their collapse?
Ms. Harris. Yes, numerous findings.
Mr. Donalds. And what was the response from Signature Bank?
Ms. Harris. Inadequate remediation.
Mr. Donalds. What was the response from the regulators?
Ms. Harris. In some cases, downgrades. In some cases,
additional Supervisory Recommendations, but nothing as strong
as there should have been.
Mr. Donalds. Nothing as strong. Okay. It seems we are in
the same place here, and by the way, I am not a fan of Dodd-
Frank. I never have been. As somebody who worked in the
industry and understood what happened during the financial
collapse, Dodd-Frank is an albatross of a regulatory scheme
that really didn't make a lot of sense. And under Dodd-Frank's
framework, we still have these banking issues. It may not be
the large, massive banks, but regional banks play a significant
role in our financial system.
I guess I would ask both of you, as representatives of your
regulatory agencies, what is going to change in terms of
holding bank management to sound banking principles, if they
can just look at your letter and ignore you?
Ms. Harris. Sir, I will take the first step. I think it is
a good point. I have been working to escalate things quickly,
in my 19 months at DFS, and to take swifter and more-severe
action where necessary.
Mr. Donalds. And final question, Ms. Harris, I am going to
ask you. Do you think it is appropriate at this point for the
Federal Reserve to actually be in charge of supervisory
oversight of banks?
Ms. Harris. Yes.
Mr. Donalds. Do you think they are good at their job?
Ms. Harris. I think all regulators are working on
recommendations to improve oversight.
Mr. Donalds. Okay. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired.
I would like to thank Superintendent Harris and
Commissioner Hewlett for your time today. This has been helpful
and gives us an additional picture of what has been going on.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for these panels, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
I would ask each of you to respond as promptly as you are
able to, and note that there were a number of instances where
your answer was either truncated, or a question was asked that
we were not able to get an answer to here today.
Again, I appreciate this, as we look to make sure that we
have safety and soundness of our financial institutions here in
the United States and make sure that the regulators that are
supposed to be holding them accountable are held accountable by
us. And that is the goal of today's hearing.
With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:21 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

May 17, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
