- MODERNIZING FINANCIAL SERVICES THROUGH INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MODERNIZING FINANCIAL SERVICES
THROUGH INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL ASSETS,
FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY,
AND INCLUSION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 25, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-50

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-315 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL ASSETS,
FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY, AND INCLUSION

FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts,
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                     Ranking Member
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio, Vice          BILL FOSTER, Illinois
Chairman                         JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 RITCHIE TORRES, New York
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               BRAD SHERMAN, California
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AL GREEN, Texas
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
October 25, 2023.............................................     1
Appendix:
October 25, 2023.............................................    35

WITNESSES
Wednesday, October 25, 2023

Kelley, Jodie, Chief Executive Officer, Electronic Transactions
Association (ETA)..............................................     5
Lenz, Jimmie H., Director, Master of Engineering in Financial
Technology, Duke University; and Principal, Frontier Foundry-
Advanced Research and Financial Services.......................     6
Palaniappan, Ram, Founder & CEO, Earnin..........................     8
Sanz, Parris, Executive Vice President, General Counsel, and Head
of Policy and Government Relations, WebBank....................     9
Spotser, Mitria W., Vice President and Director of Federal
Policy, Center for Responsible Lending (CRL)...................    11

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Kelley, Jodie................................................    36
Lenz, Jimmie H...............................................    50
Palaniappan, Ram.............................................    55
Sanz, Parris.................................................    62
Spotser, Mitria W............................................    80

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Hill, Hon. French:
Letter from the American Fintech Council to the Center for
Responsible Lending and the National Consumer Law Center,
dated October 23, 2023.....................................    86
Steil, Hon. Bryan:
Innovative Payments Association (IPA) press release, ``IPA
Supports Introduction of New Earned Wage Access House Bill
Sponsored by Representative Steil,'' dated October 25, 2023    93
Letter from 119 labor, civil rights, consumer, legal services
and community groups and academics opposing the Earned Wage
Access Consumer Act........................................    96
Kelley, Jodie:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   103
Lenz, Jimmie H.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   105
Palaniappan, Ram:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   107
Sanz, Parris:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   109
Spotser, Mitria W.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Steil.......................................   110
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   115

MODERNIZING FINANCIAL SERVICES
THROUGH INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

----------

Wednesday, October 25, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Digital Assets,
Financial Technology,
and Inclusion,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:07 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. French Hill
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Hill, Davidson, Rose,
Steil, Timmons, Flood, Houchin; Lynch, Foster, Gottheimer,
Green, Casten, and Nickel.
Chairman Hill. The Subcommittee on Digital Assets,
Financial Technology, and Inclusion will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Modernizing Financial
Services Through Innovation and Competition.''
I want to thank our great panel of witnesses for being
here.
And I now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Having used an extensive amount of time over the last few
months to work in a bipartisan fashion to craft digital assets
bills--one on payment stable coins and the other on taking
hearings and crafting a regulatory framework for digital
assets--I am excited that the subcommittee has come together
today to explore financial technology issues more generally,
which is a major focus of this subcommittee.
Since our task forces that Mr. Lynch and I were involved in
back in 2018 and 2019, on fintech and on AI, today we want to
continue that broad foundation regarding the state of fintech
today, and specifically, the innovative products and services
that financial technology enables for our consumers.
My goal is for Members to use the time to better understand
the fintech ecosystem and its evolution from, when we were
together 4 and 5 years ago, disruption, to much more of a sense
of collaboration, and how it can deliver products and services
that consumers want and can benefit from, and the policy
questions that we should be thinking about as lawmakers.
At a time when there are so many exciting new technologies,
like digital assets, quantum computing, and the greater use of
artificial intelligence (AI), it is important to remember that
innovation and technology have always been at the heart of
financial services. That is true even of the humble ATM, which
changed the way we thought about cash and credit, how we pay
for things, and how we have had access to money over the past
50 years--to access that cash whenever we wanted it, whenever
we needed it. And that was no small feat back in that 50-years-
ago timeframe.
But like the ATM, I believe that fintech today has the
potential to drive even greater innovation in financial
services, while also delivering even more customer-centric
experiences based on trust, convenience, and service in an
increasingly-digital world. For example, Earned Wage Access
products allow people, as the name suggests, to access their
wages as they earn them. This can give people flexibility and
liquidity to meet short-term credit needs, for example, when a
bill is due next week but payday isn't until the end of the
month.
The same goes for bank-fintech partnerships, a great way
that community banks in Arkansas are meeting customer demand
through new products and services at a scale through white-
label offerings. Or Buy Now, Pay Later (BNPL) products, like
the old layaway systems, which many of us grew up with. This
gives consumers a technological way to have a choice at
checkout and more flexibility to pay on their own schedule in a
way, that they can easily understand.
The massive rise in popularity of these kinds of financial
products demonstrates that consumers already recognize how
these innovations are improving their lives. However, changes
driven by technology also merit thoughtful consideration of how
they affect existing laws and regulations, particularly if laws
and regulations inhibit that innovation.
The key is that we have balance between both consumer
protection and innovation. And that being said, I think the
benefits of fintech firms and the products and services they
provide far exceed the risks that they might pose. And that is
why I am excited about the bills attached to this hearing that
talk about our regulators, the sandbox innovation centers in
our regulators, and their evaluation of their own technological
prowess.
So today, we look forward to hearing from our excellent
witnesses about fintech and how it innovates innovative
financial products and services that consumers want, and what
lawmakers should be thinking about to make sure we get that
balance between innovation and customer protection just right.
With that, I yield to the ranking member of the
subcommittee, my friend from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, for 4
minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank our panel of expert witnesses for
coming before the committee and helping us with our work.
I also want to recognize Lacy Clay, a continued friend, and
former Member, who is here from Missouri, and I want to thank
him for his great service to this committee and to Congress in
general. Welcome back, my friend.
Before we begin discussing fintech and Buy Now, Pay Later,
I would like to acknowledge that the House still does not have
a Speaker. And while I appreciate the relentless drive that the
chairman has in continuing with our work, I don't want to
pretend that this Congress is functioning, because it is not.
And I think, in a sense, to go about committee work sort of
business as usual feels inappropriate and tone-deaf to the
larger, global situation. When you think about the attention we
could be spending in focusing on the situation in the Middle
East, or in Ukraine, or on other very, very important and
urgent matters here in Congress and in our own country, we do
not have a Speaker.
I would just suggest to my colleagues that that should be
job one, and we should not divert any energy or attention away
from getting a Speaker so this government can begin to function
again, because we are not.
And even though there are bills attached to this hearing,
they go nowhere without a Speaker.
So, I just implore my friends on the other side--and I do
have friends on the other side, and the chairman is one of
them--that we redouble our efforts to try to get this
government back on track, because we are losing the faith of
the people that we represent. And we are losing face with and
the confidence in our international neighbors.
Every day that this House of Representatives goes without a
Speaker, we are diminished in the eyes of the world and of the
people we have an obligation to represent. We are not
representing them today. We don't have a Speaker. We are
dysfunctional, and we are not fulfilling our oaths of office to
those very people who supported us to take these positions.
We are in the midst of two wars, and as policymakers, we
have a responsibility to address the current situation. And
while I remain engaged and interested in this topic before us,
it pales in comparison to the lives being lost as we speak.
For several weeks, we have waited for my friends on the
other side of the aisle to move forward with a Speaker.
Instead, they have played their own internal politics and put
that forward and put that ahead of the people that we are here
to represent.
So, I simply urge my colleagues to end this mess and begin
governing as we were elected to do.
Now, with respect to the subject matter that is before us,
I believe technology does have the potential to lower costs and
improve accessibility for those left out of the traditional
financial services sector. However, while remaining interested
and really believing in the potential of fintech and Buy Now,
Pay Later products, I want to say that some of these are simply
repackaged versions of traditional finance, but packaged in a
way to evade laws and regulations under the claims of
innovation.
Simply put, all fintech and Buy Now, Pay Later is not
equal. Some of them, I think, are making honest and deliberate
efforts to reach the unbanked, to save consumers cost, and to
reduce the friction in the traditional system.
But in November of 2021, as Chair of our Fintech Task
Force, I held a hearing that examined fintech liquidity
products, such as Buy Now, Pay Later, Earned Wage Access, and
overdraft avoidance products. The emergence of these products
raised larger questions about consumers' need for liquidity and
whether consumers make enough to afford those necessities.
With the rising interest rates that we have in the country
now, we are seeing greater problems, greater default rates, and
other issues that amplify the problems in this area. So, I
question whether these products are truly innovative, as
industry may claim, or just redesigned for regulatory evasion.
With that, I appreciate your courtesy, Mr. Chairman, and I
yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
I am going to yield to the gentleman from Massachusetts,
Mr. Lynch, the time of Full Committee Ranking Member Waters.
Mr. Lynch. A report from California's Department of
Financial Protection and Innovation found that fees averaged on
APR are more than 300 percent. Additionally, I don't believe
that consumers should have to pay to access wages that they
have already earned in that system.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) has issued
guidance that cautions against Buy Now, Pay Later products, and
several State regulators have opened investigation into whether
Earned Wage Access and overdraft avoidance companies break
State lending laws.
And lastly, we are seeing a trend towards fintech players
partnering with small, online banks to conduct bank-like
activity. This raises questions as to whether fintech companies
are using bank partnerships to evade State laws. Regulators
have raised numerous red flags about the fair lending and
consumer protection practices of these banks.
In closing, while consumers do have a true need for
liquidity, products that are seemingly lower cost but do not
comply with lending laws are not the answer. As policymakers,
we should be exploring true innovative approaches to improving
access to credit and financial services products.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on what they
view as innovative approaches.
And I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hill. I appreciate the ranking member's opening
statement.
Today, we welcome the testimony of Jodie Kelley, the chief
executive officer of the Electronic Transactions Association;
Jimmie Lenz, the director and master of engineering in fintech
at Duke University, and managing principal of Advanced Research
and Financial Services at the Frontier Foundation; Ram
Palaniappan, the founder and CEO of Earnin; Parris Sanz, the
executive vice president, general counsel, and head of policy
and government relations at WebBank; and Mitria Spotser, the
vice president and director of Federal policy at the Center for
Responsible Lending.
We thank each of you for taking the time to be with us this
morning. Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to give
an oral presentation of your testimony. And without objection,
each of your written statements will be made a part of the
record.
Mrs. Kelley, we are going to start with you. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JODIE KELLEY, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, ELECTRONIC
TRANSACTIONS ASSOCIATION (ETA)

Mrs. Kelley. Thank you.
And good morning, Chairman Hill, Ranking Member Lynch, and
members of the Subcommittee on Digital Assets, Financial
Technology, and Inclusion.
My name is Jodie Kelley, and it is my privilege as CEO of
the Electronic Transactions Association (ETA) to speak with you
today about how the payments technology industry is powering
the U.S. economy, helping consumers and small businesses, and
fostering financial inclusion through the deployment of
innovative, secure, and cost-effective products and services.
Each year, ETA members process more than $44 trillion in
purchases worldwide. The payments infrastructure is
sophisticated, secure, and fast, processing hundreds of
thousands of transactions a minute and using cutting-edge
technology to do so securely.
ETA members are committed to providing consumers, including
historically-underserved Americans, with payments choice and
choices that are secure, widely accessible, easy to use, and
affordable. I would like to take a moment just to highlight a
few of those products.
We are all familiar with credit and debit cards which are
used for the vast majority of transactions in this country.
Credit and debit cards are accepted virtually everywhere, are
easy to use, and provide zero liability protection for
fraudulent transactions.
Prepaid products also provide cost-effective and convenient
payment options for millions of consumers. And the utility of
prepaid cards was never clearer than during the COVID-19
pandemic, when ETA members helped Federal and State Government
agencies deliver billions of dollars in benefits, including on
prepaid cards.
Prepaid cards are also particularly helpful for consumers
with limited or no access to other financial services--9 out of
10 unbanked Americans use prepaid cards for core financial
functions, including paying bills or receiving income. And
given their utility, numerous Federal and State Governments
deliver benefits through prepaid cards every day.
Digital payments are also widely used. Peer-to-peer payment
(P2P) services allow people to quickly make payments to friends
and family, usually for free, using apps online or on mobile
phones. And digital wallets store payment credentials, such as
credit, debt, and prepaid cards, that can also be used to make
secure purchases in person or online.
There are also digital products for consumers who transact
in cash, that allow them to order a product online, then take a
QR code to a local store and complete the purchase with cash.
And similarly, many P2P solutions allow cash-based consumers to
load their P2P account on their mobile phone by presenting cash
to a local retailer.
And finally, Buy Now, Pay Later allows consumers to
purchase an item without paying the full price upfront, with
payments made through, typically, four cost-free installments.
These products serve all consumers, including historically-
underserved consumers, by providing them with an interest-free
option to purchase the items they need, when they need them.
These products are convenient, they are simple, and consumers
are adopting them at a record pace.
In addition to benefiting consumers, these payment options
also help small businesses to thrive. And, again, this was
highlighted during the pandemic, when in-person shopping was
dramatically reduced and small businesses were at risk.
The payments industry helped small businesses adapt by
establishing global online presences, accepting payments
online, or by tapping to pay, which allowed many small
businesses to remain in business. And that innovation continues
as new technology now helps merchants to receive funds quicker
and to access much-needed capital.
I would like to conclude today by discussing how ETA and
policymakers can continue to work together to ensure that high-
quality and affordable payments are accessible for all
consumers. But first, I think it is important to note that the
payments fintech industry is already subject to a comprehensive
legal and regulatory framework which has been supplemented
through robust self-regulatory efforts, including security
standards.
At ETA, we support policies that provide certainty,
engender trust, protect consumers, and encourage innovation. To
that end, we encourage policymakers to advance policies that
are technology-neutral, principles-based, and allow for
industry-led standards, and use the, ``same activity, same
risk, same regulation,'' framework.
As the industry continues to evolve, it is imperative that
the policy framework protects consumers while encouraging
continued progress.
At ETA, we are proud to represent the payments technology
industry. On behalf of the industry, I want to thank you for
the opportunity to speak with you today, and I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Kelley can be found on page
36 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you, Mrs. Kelley, for your testimony.
Dr. Lenz, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF JIMMIE H. LENZ, DIRECTOR, MASTER OF ENGINEERING IN
FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY, DUKE UNIVERSITY; AND PRINCIPAL, FRONTIER
FOUNDRY-ADVANCED RESEARCH AND FINANCIAL SERVICES

Mr. Lenz. First, let me thank you all for having me here.
Chairman Hill, Mr. Lynch, it is really a pleasure to be with
such an esteemed group of my colleagues up here. It is great to
have this opportunity.
As you mentioned in your opening comments, I am currently
at Duke University. I lead the master of engineering in
financial technology. I also have another role where I lead a
team in advanced research and financial services for Frontier
Foundry, and that company works directly in industry.
My roots in this industry go back about 35 years. I
actually checked with the Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority (FINRA), my broker check, to see when I was first
licensed, and it was in 1985, which I am guessing is before a
lot of you were born, but I have been in financial services
that long. And my career in financial services has been defined
by innovation.
When I started, there were no laptops or computers on
desks. Exchanges were still open outcry. There was not a lot of
technology, but it was coming, and that is what has kind of
brought me to where I am today.
I have seen innovation do so many things to the industry,
and to finance in general, and what that has meant for
consumers is huge. When I started, spreads on stocks were 12.5
cents, an 8th, often 25 cents, 50 cents. Now, typically a
penny. Everything is transparent. You can do everything online.
And how did that come about, online trading, online
banking, online access? Well, innovation. And sometimes,
innovation comes from areas that people don't expect. I know
that most people, when they think innovation, they think about
the big players--big banks, big brokerage firms.
But the first bank to put accounts online was a small
community bank in Knoxville, Tennessee. The first bank to give
folks access to their accounts, Presidential, and then,
Stanford Federal, were small players.
Mr. Hill, you mentioned ATMs. They weren't invented by a
big bank; it was a Scottish engineer, who sold it to a big
bank.
Those kinds of developments are directly beneficial to
consumers at the end of the day. And while we think about
innovation in terms of big, big financial institutions, at the
end of the day, these trickle down to consumers. They mean
access, they mean price advantage, and they mean transparency.
Are there risks involved? Absolutely. I have spent my
career basically looking at risks. I was a trader on the
electronic and algorithmic side, I ran a trade desk, I ran a
brokerage firm, and I was a chief risk officer of one of the
largest brokerage firms in America, along with a chief credit
officer.
Did I care about risk and did I think about it? Every
single minute of every single day. But risk is what we do. It
is inherent to the business. It is inherent to what I think is
the financial system in the United States.
With innovation comes that, but you don't get that
tradeoff. You can't have no-risk situations and still move
ahead. Everybody needs to take a little bit of risk. It needs
to be measured. It needs to be quantified. It needs to be well
understood. But remember, when you eliminate risk from any
equation, you also eliminate reward. There is a reason we call
the risk-free rate of return the lowest rate you can get, and I
think sometimes that is forgotten.
The other thing I think that sometimes doesn't boil up is
the fact that innovation doesn't happen in a vacuum. Sometimes
there are failures, and it actually happens more often than
not. In fact, one of the things I tell my colleagues and my
students is if you are not failing on a pretty regular basis,
you are not trying hard enough.
And I think as we go forward, as we think about innovation,
in particular in financial services, we need to be very mindful
that it does come with some tradeoffs. Are there going to be
risks present? Absolutely. Should they be well understood?
Absolutely. But options are always a positive thing, and more
options are better.
Thank you very much for the time.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lenz can be found on page 50
of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you very much, Dr. Lenz.
Mr. Palaniappan, you have 5 minutes for your oral remarks.
Thank you for being here.

STATEMENT OF RAM PALANIAPPAN, FOUNDER & CEO, EARNIN

Mr. Palaniappan. Chairman Hill, Ranking Member Lynch, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify today on modernizing financial services through
innovation and competition.
My name is Ram Palaniappan. I am the CEO and founder of
Earnin, a company focused on improving the financial health of
our customers by giving them more control and choice over their
finances.
Our primary product, known as Earned Wage Access, or EWA,
addresses the problems caused by the archaic and rigid system
of fixed paydays. Two-thirds of our country lives paycheck to
paycheck, and much of their lives revolve around waiting for
payday. With EWA, workers can access the money that they have
already earned without waiting for payday.
Around 2 million people use our product: retail workers,
teachers, nurses, and even government employees, such as TSA
agents and over 100 congressional staffers. Today, there are
also several other companies that offer similar EWA products.
I would like to tell you about how Earnin started. I didn't
set out with the intent to start a company. I was working at
another company, and there I heard that some of my employees
were running into overdrafts. And I spoke with one of them. I
was surprised because I thought we were paying everybody well,
so I spoke with one of them.
The problem that she had was she needed money the next day,
couldn't wait till the following payday, and it was already
halfway through the week. So, I said we would pay her for the
days that she had already worked, but I couldn't make the
payroll system do that, so I gave her the money that she had
already earned, and we settled it on payday.
And I continued doing this in person for a handful of
people for about 4 years. Then, I left the company, and they
wanted to know if I would still do it for them. And I didn't
mind doing it. These were people whom I had seen in the office
for years.
At first, I did this over Instant Messenger, and that was
not very convenient, so I built a web form. When I had this web
page up, people whom I didn't know tried to use the product,
and I did it for them as well. And what I realized was that
when you give someone access to the money that they have
already earned, when they need it, their life is much simpler.
They are paying all of their bills. The bills are not piled up
on payday with late fees. There are no more overdrafts, no more
expensive loans, and that is when I realized that if I didn't
try to make this into a product, I would always feel bad about
myself.
We now do this at scale. Every month, over a million people
use Earnin to pay their rent on time, to buy gas to get to
work, and to buy groceries. And by accessing their wages when
they need it, our customers are avoiding over a billion dollars
a year in overdraft fees.
The benefits of EWA are not just financial. I met with one
of our customers in Columbus, Ohio. She works at a hospital,
and her daughter has a passion for dance. And she was telling
me that she needs to pay for the dance classes upfront at the
beginning of the month, and if not for our app, she wouldn't
have been able to do that. To me, it is amazing that through
our app, her daughter is able to pursue her passion for dance
and participate in dance competitions.
If we want more financial access, if we want more financial
inclusion, then we need new financial products. If we need
financial products to work, we need innovation and the right
regulatory frameworks for them. EWA is one of the innovations
that provides a great option for people who do not have any
good ones, but it does not fit well into existing regulatory
frameworks.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), under
Director Cordray, exempted EWA from the payday rule, and in
recent budget proposals, the Biden Treasury Department has said
that on-demand pay arrangements, a common term for Earned Wage
Access, should not be considered loans for tax purposes. We
agree, and think EWA needs its own regulatory framework. EWA
solves problems in a unique way, with much-needed consumer
protections.
Last year, Treasury Secretary Yellen spoke about how the
delays in our payroll system harm those with lower incomes. EWA
helped solve that. But if we don't create new legislation and
regulations, then we are left with the same products we already
have, and that means we are satisfied with the status quo and
we are comfortable with the amount of inequality we have.
I believe we can do better, and I think we all want that,
and that is why we need legislation and regulation that
preserves and promotes innovation and consumer choice.
I would like to thank Congressman Steil for the discussion
draft, and I look forward to working with all Members to find
solutions that help consumers.
Chairman Hill, Ranking Member Lynch, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today,
and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Palaniappan can be found on
page 55 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Sanz, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give your
oral presentation.

STATEMENT OF PARRIS SANZ, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, GENERAL
COUNSEL, AND HEAD OF POLICY AND GOVERNMENT RELATIONS, WEBBANK

Mr. Sanz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hill, Ranking Member Lynch, and members of the
subcommittee, I am honored to appear before this subcommittee
today on behalf of WebBank to discuss how responsible bank
partnerships, like WebBank's, drive innovation, enhance
inclusion for underserved consumers, and support compliance
with applicable laws and regulations. We also wish to express
support for innovative BNPL and EWA products, and efforts to
regulate them as noncredit products.
My name is Parris Sanz. I am the EVP, general counsel, and
head of policy at WebBank. WebBank has the longest track record
of successfully overseeing third-party lending programs through
bank partnerships and has originated and funded over $180
billion in consumer and commercial loan products.
The bank provides its credit products through the platforms
of its nonbank strategic partners, including well-recognized
technology companies like PayPal, Intuit, Shopify, and Toast.
Based on the bank's experience as a pioneer in the industry, we
believe that bank-fintech partnerships can unlock the greatest
strengths of each participant, yielding a sum greater than its
parts.
Fintech companies develop amazing technology platforms that
deliver minimal friction, state-of-the-art customer
experiences, serving customers on their mobile phones and
online, where they want to transact. These technologies provide
the ability to scale up quickly and reduce cost, but banks
often struggle to develop them on their own.
Banks like WebBank have deep expertise in financial product
design, regulatory compliance, and oversight. When these
capabilities are combined, they enable the parties to bring
innovative and valuable financial products to market
efficiently and at scale, while ensuring legal and regulatory
compliance.
At WebBank, we believe the best way to operate these
partnerships relies on three key pillars. First, the bank must
engage in rigorous due diligence and risk assessments of the
fintech partner upfront and on an ongoing basis, commensurate
with the applicable risks of the partner and the program.
Second, the bank must carefully structure its agreements
with the fintechs to limit the bank's exposure and to ensure
that the bank has the rights it needs to control the program
effectively and to oversee its lending programs, including
control of the credit policy, marketing, and customer-facing
materials.
Third, the bank must apply ongoing supervision and
oversight across all aspects of third-party lending programs.
Banks should require their fintech partners to adopt and
maintain bank-approved compliance management systems and to
regularly test, audit, and report on them.
WebBank's application of these core pillars has enabled us
to bring valuable consumer products to market in compliance
with applicable laws and regulations, subjecting our fintech
partners to the supervision and oversight of the bank and its
regulators.
But some stakeholders would have this subcommittee believe
that bank partnerships are inherently problematic because they
present the theoretical possibility of supporting high APR
consumer products. They point to rare exceptions of banks
supporting high-APR programs through bank partnerships to claim
the bank partnership model itself is problematic, ignoring that
most high-APR programs come from other entities, not bank
partnerships.
Moreover, these stakeholders take the position that if a
nonbank has a predominant economic interest in a bank-
originated loan, then the partnership is a rent-a-bank, and the
nonbank must be treated as the lender under State law. This
position is illogical and completely inconsistent with Supreme
Court precedent and the realities of the secondary market.
For example, if a bank originated a 5-year installment loan
and sold it to a credit fund in the first year, the conclusion
is that the purchaser is the true lender, subject to the myriad
laws of the State in which the borrower resides, which would
bring the entire secondary market for such a loan to a grinding
halt.
These stakeholders attempt to obscure the reality that the
bank partnership model is a neutral one by which banks and
fintechs can work together to leverage what they each do best
to drive innovation, inclusion, and compliance, while operating
within the regulatory perimeter.
WebBank provides the strongest counterexample to these
claims by providing consumers with financial products that are
innovative, inclusive, fairly priced, and comply with all
applicable laws and regulations.
For all these reasons, State and Federal lawmakers should
be wary of attacking bank partnerships, lest they throw the
baby out with the bath water. Laws affecting bank partnerships
that are intended to keep out predatory programs have been
overly-inclusive and have the effect of keeping out responsible
programs as well.
Accordingly, we ask members of this subcommittee to support
efforts to create greater legal certainty regarding the
treatment of loans originated by banks and bank partnerships.
We ask Congress to support a more reasonable and practical
framework than the predominant economic interest test to
determine when the bank is the true lender and when
inconsistent State laws are preempted by Federal banking laws.
Finally, WebBank cautions this subcommittee against
adopting a one-size-fits-all approach to regulating BNPL and
EWA products that conflates them with traditional credit
products. To do so risks overregulation that is not appropriate
for such noncredit products.
The appropriate balance between financial innovation and
regulation lies in a tailored regulatory framework based on the
provider's activities and commensurate with the actual risks
associated with such products.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sanz can be found on page 62
of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. We appreciate your testimony.
Ms. Spotser, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral presentation.

STATEMENT OF MITRIA W. SPOTSER, VICE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR OF
FEDERAL POLICY, CENTER FOR RESPONSIBLE LENDING (CRL)

Ms. Spotser. First of all, good morning, everybody. On
behalf of the Center for Responsible Lending (CRL), I would
like to thank you, Chairman Hill, Ranking Member Lynch, and
members of the subcommittee, for the opportunity to testify
today.
Two words really stick out in the title of this hearing,
and those are, ``innovation,'' and, ``competition.'' And the
core of my testimony is going to focus on those two words and
talk about why it is important that we actually remember what
those words mean and why they matter.
And I am going to start with, first of all, why they
matter. We believe in innovation in the financial services
market, and the Center for Responsible Lending does as well,
but we believe in it because, done correctly, innovation
improves lender efficiency. And by improving efficiency,
lenders will be better able to market a product at a more-
affordable cost to consumers.
The goal here in innovation is to expand access by
competing on price. The reason why that matters in this
conversation in particular is that some of the regulatory
exceptions that are being asked to be made today are to, in
fact, not have to compete on price. So, we are talking about
products that are asking that they not be held accountable to
the same disclosure obligations that other financial
institutions, credit unions, community banks across this
country are required to do. And the rationale behind that is
that somehow, these products are different.
Let's take an example. And since I have a very short amount
of time, I am only going to give one example. But let's take a
product like Earned Wage Access, and the notion is, well, you
get your wages early. But these third-party products are not
connected to the employer. The employer is actually not
transmitting your pay. The third party is, in fact, using their
own financials, their own cash that they have available, and
they are submitting it to the consumer. The company does not
actually go to your employer to deduct that amount from your
paycheck. So, it is not an employer payroll deduction, and the
recourse is not against the employer. The recourse is against
you and your bank account.
That is a loan. The reason why it is a loan is this. We
have all been working in the financial services sector for a
number of years, and I have to tell you, any time I advance
cash to someone with the expectation that they repay that
capital to me, it is a fundamental business proposition where I
look at their ability to repay that based on their future
income. That's called underwriting. It is a really important
component of underwriting that every single financial
institution does.
So, you are always repaying a loan based on your future
earned income, and I am always structuring the repayment of
your loan based on when I anticipate those wages will come.
What we have here is not a fundamental distinction of the
characteristics of the product; we have a really interesting
way to explain a product that already exists.
I am from a small town, and we have these kind of
traditional sayings, and one of them is, if it looks like a
duck, it swims like a duck, and it quacks like a duck, it is
probably a duck.
Buy Now, Pay Later and Earned Wage Access look and function
like credit. They look and function and act like capital and
loans. And they should be regulated as such.
And here is why this matters on the second end about
competition. I talked about the fact that I am here from the
Center for Responsible Lending, but we are also an affiliate of
a financial institution, Self-Help, and we have the Self-Help
Federal Credit Union.
The reason why this matters so much is because this
committee is also inherently concerned about the brick-and-
mortar financial institutions in your district that work with
your constituents to actively report credit histories from
payments, and to push them into assets and develop long-term
relationships with them that lead to wealth-producing assets.
They are all required to meet the same disclosure
obligations that these institutions are somehow representing
they should not be subject to, but that is not competition.
That is, in fact, inherently anticompetitive.
I say to you that we have no aversion to Buy Now, Pay Later
products and Earned Wage Access products, anything that people
want to do with respect to these products, as long as they are
required to be able to produce the same information about their
costs, and as long as they compete under the same
characteristics that every financial institution in this
country should compete on, and that is price.
Voluntary tips and monthly subscriptions disguised as
excuses other than actually charging the cost of credit are not
competing on price.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Spotser can be found on page
80 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you for your testimony.
I appreciate the entire panel's participation.
The Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes for
questions.
In my opening remarks, I talked about community banks in my
home State of Arkansas partnering with fintech startups to be
on the cutting edge of technology and meet consumer demand. We
are blessed in Little Rock to have a venture center that has
been open now for 11 years, and our fintech partnership with
FIS, the publicly-traded company there, has Little Rock at the
top of its innovation hub, looking for fintech solutions that
they can offer to banks for both internal compliance and cost
reduction, as well as customer acquisition and customer service
aspects of it. And it has been impressive over the last decade
to watch their innovation and the expansion of what they are
doing.
According to McKinsey & Company, when you look at the top
100 banks by asset size, 80 percent of them have now partnered
with at least one fintech company over the years on that same
sort of approach, internal improvement and reduction of cost,
or customer acquisition or service.
Mr. Sanz, why is it when only a few years ago, we viewed
this fintech-bank situation as disruptive and the fintech
companies were testifying that they were going to put
traditional commercial banks out of business, that we now see a
lot more collaboration? Can you reflect on that change over the
past few years?
Mr. Sanz. Yes. And thank you for your question, Mr.
Chairman.
I would say that over the last few years, many banks have
come to the realization that if you can't beat them, join them.
The DNA of banks and fintech companies are very different.
Banks are focused on risk management and regulatory oversight.
Fintech companies' focus is on the customer experience, minimal
friction, ease of use, and essentially, bringing, if you will,
Apple-like design principles to financial services and
products.
These are technologies that are difficult for many banks to
develop internally, both because they don't have the DNA, if
you will, and often because they don't have the resources to do
it.
Chairman Hill. Let me interrupt you there, because that
brings up a good point, I think, about traditional banking,
their access and the use of Big Data to enhance their own
customer database, their own geographic data knowledge.
Would you say that has really helped banks reach out to
more customers and expand the product availability to people
who have little or no credit history, because the traditional
banks just don't have access? Have you blended that in with
what you are doing with the fintechs?
Mr. Sanz. Yes, absolutely. Although banks certainly have
developed their own internal technological capabilities,certain
technologies definitely have been outside of their focus. I
will give you one example. WebBank established a partnership
with a company called Petal. Petal had developed cutting-edge
technology with respect to cash flow underwriting, pursuant to
which they could ingest bank statement transactional history,
consumer-permissioned information. And with that, they could
develop a risk score for someone with a no-file or thin-file
credit history that could be used to either underwrite them a
loan or in conjunction with traditional scores.
We have partnered with them since 2018, and we have been
very successful in being able to provide introductory credit
cards to credit invisible consumers who likely would have been
declined by other financial institutions.
Chairman Hill. That is helpful.
Just continuing with that theme, since you partner with
these companies and you provide that bank compliance focus,
really to Ms. Spotser's concept about everybody playing by the
same rules, effectively, WebBank has a high standard of
compliance. So, what do you think recently about the third-
party risk management guidelines that have recently been
published?
Mr. Sanz. Yes. Thank you for the question. I will tell you
that our view is that we generally agree with the sentiments
and thoughts expressed by Governor Bowman. Although we think
that some of the principles put forth are helpful, it is a one-
size-fits-all recipe that is being provided, that doesn't
provide sufficient tailored expectations for smaller
institutions.
When we initially saw the guidance at WebBank, we held it
up to ourselves and felt comfortable that we live up to those
principles, but we are a bank that has been focused exclusively
on managing fintech partnerships for over 25 years, with 250
people dedicated to it. As I look at that guidance and think
about other banks which would want to begin to leverage
relationships with fintechs, I think it could be very daunting
in terms of the resources----
Chairman Hill. Thank you. In my time remaining, if you
could respond in writing just how you would tailor that scope
so that we could have some feel for that in the committee, that
would be very helpful.
That concludes my time, and I turn to my good friend, the
ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Lynch, for his 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Spotser, you highlight, I think very well, the conflict
between the business practices of credit unions and traditional
small banks, and what they have to do in order to report and
track the creditworthiness and loan performance of their
products versus the carveout that is being urged by folks in
fintech and Buy Now, Pay Later.
There is a generational change going on here where a lot of
young people-- I don't think my two girls have ever been in a
bank. They do everything on their phone. They have that iPhone,
and so they are much more likely to gravitate towards this
product. And I think in a way that is what the industry is
doing here. They are sort of following customer preferences.
But there is a trap. We have seen a spike in delinquency
rates among Buy Now, Pay Later customers that is worrisome,
especially in recent months where interest rates are going up.
And I know that many Buy Now, Pay Later products don't charge
interest rates. They have different ways of monetizing this.
However, there is pressure in the general economy, so
people are borrowing more, so the default rates and delinquency
rates among Buy Now, Pay Later customers is far higher than
those who are nonborrowers in that space. And I just wonder if
you could talk about the trap that young people or anyone using
that product might fall into?
Ms. Spotser. Sure. The biggest issue here is that these
products are marketed as being interest-free and free. And as a
consumer, the first thing I think is that really means that it
is free. And then, when you go into the weeds of looking at the
product, there is a service fee or something else that is
associated with it. So, the costs themselves are not upfront.
So, you are right, sir. I think to the extent that there is
a technological advantage, you have an app, although there are
very few financial institutions in the United States right now
that do not have apps. But to the extent that you have that,
there is some familiarity and ease.
But what we are seeing as the most significant point here
is that we are not accurately reflecting the cost of these
products. And because of that, we do have an increase in
delinquencies because individuals are, in fact, not fully aware
of the costs upfront, whereas, financial institutions,
traditional brick and mortar do have an obligation to disclose
that.
Now, I want to be clear: I believe that these institutions
have that same obligation to disclose it. That is a regulatory
matter for which the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau will
hopefully provide some guidance. But it is imperative that
people actually disclose the full cost of credit.
Mr. Lynch. Right. And simply looking at that one payment,
monthly payment, does not illustrate or give a picture of the
true cost of that overall purchase, right?
Ms. Spotser. Yes. Not if you are charging a service fee or
a late fee that comes on top of that. And there is an
expectation--one of the issues here is that these are not one-
and-done products even by their own analysis. There was a
report from FTI Consulting that was convened by Earnin and a
couple of other organizations, and they are saying that
consumers use these products every 2 weeks.
We remember a product that looked a little bit like that.
So, it is not just the $100 that you borrowed and the $10 fee
there, and then, the expedited processing fee, none of which
are disclosed as actually being the cost of credit. But it's
the fact that you are going to do that 3 or 4 times. And
because I have access to your bank account, there is a high
probability, since I am saying that my product is being used to
cover overdrafts, that I, in fact, am overdrafting your account
in that process. So now, I need to borrow even more money.
And one of the things that we want to be clear about here
and why we are saying, not, again, that these products should
be taken out of the market, but that they should be upfront
about their disclosures, is that consumers have the right to
know what the full cost is and to understand the risk that they
are taking by taking out one of these products.
Mr. Lynch. That's great. What are some of the standards
that you would like to see applied to the Buy Now, Pay Later
space and some of these arguably innovative platforms that are
offering different ways, although not fully transparent, to
consumers on financing their debt?
Ms. Spotser. I would like them to abide by the existing
law, which is the Truth in Lending Act and the Credit Card Act,
to the extent that their products actually meet those
obligations. And that means that they would be upfront about
the cost of their products.
Mr. Lynch. That's great. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Davidson, who is also the Vice
Chair of the subcommittee, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the chairman, and I thank the
witnesses. I really appreciate your expertise and your time and
travel here to help educate us and inform us on policy.
It is a dynamic time in our financial markets, and fintech
is really making people wrestle with these things. Even as I
listen to you all, and your statements have some overlap and
agreement and some healthy disagreement, it is important for us
to understand this because we have to adapt as well to make
sure that our laws stay relevant and functional so that our
markets do that for our consumers.
I just think it is great that we have this subcommittee. It
took a while for the Financial Services Committee to get to
here.
But one of the constants has been go back to the Bill of
Rights, the Fourth Amendment, the right to privacy. So much of
our data is collected through the payment system, through
financial technology, going back to the whole Bank Secrecy Act
and the third-party doctrine. It has all been established with
financials.
I had a conversation recently where I was asked, why would
a business still accept cash? And there are a host of reasons,
but one of my answers was, maybe they don't want to spy on
their customers or facilitate spying by others on their
customers.
This week, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau--or
about a week ago--introduced their 1033 privacy rule, and there
are lots of comments coming on it. People have digested about
300 pages and gone through it.
And, Mrs. Kelley, I just wonder what you think about
payment privacy as we work towards, maybe a payment privacy
act?
Mrs. Kelley. Yes, Congressman Davidson. Thank you for that
question.
We represent the payments industry, and there is no issue
that is more top of mind for the payments industry than
security and trust. Consumers have to know that their data is
secure. They have to know that they can trust the system, and
they have to know that their privacy remains intact. So, as we
think about the issues of data security, privacy, and trust as
an industry--I was saying that is exactly why the industry has
devoted billions of billions of dollars to security to----
Mr. Davidson. Yes, it has to be secure. But obviously, you
collect information about the consumer to know this is who they
say they are, and that they have the credit that they claim to
have.
I think the concern is, what happens with that information
afterwards? There is a big market for it. How do you protect it
and recognize kind of the property right that consumers have?
And I think that is the fundamental question.
I look forward to collaborating with you, and your sector,
and frankly, people broadly, because I think this is something
where the CFPB is focusing on one of the core issues our
consumers care about, which is their data. And people are
monetizing it in a lot of ways. And, frankly, the government is
kind of exploiting it in some ways.
So, I look forward to wrestling with that. I think that is
one of the most important topics for our committee to resolve.
Mr. Sanz, in your testimony, you lay out how poorly-devised
State laws have created legal uncertainty regarding whether
bank-originated loans will remain enforceable on their original
terms after they are sold to nonbank entities. Obviously, the
structured credit market is a very big part of our financial
markets.
Can you relay how this legal uncertainty is impacting
consumers and our markets?
Mr. Sanz. Absolutely. I will tell you, Congressman, that it
is a repeat of what we saw after the Madden v. Midland case in
the Second Circuit. When that case came out, it raised legal
uncertainty regarding the enforceability of bank-originated
loans at APRs above certain State regulatory caps in Vermont,
New York, and Connecticut, in the hands of nonbank purchasers.
The result was that the secondary market seized up, and
those loans were no longer originated. The impact was very
clear. It was set forth in a study that I included in my
written testimony, and it showed that, whereas consumers before
the Madden decision said that FICOs below 640 were able to
receive capital, after the decision, those loans dried up
entirely. And when you look outside the Second Circuit, you see
availability increasing for that same risk profile population.
The same legal uncertainty is being created in States like
Illinois, New Mexico, Maine, and others which are passing laws
that basically say that if a nonbank in a partnership has the
predominant economic interest in a bank-originated loan, that
the nonbank itself is the lender, and subject to State laws.
Mr. Davidson. It changes the terms of the deal. So, how do
you know you really have a deal? It essentially kills the
market, right?
Mr. Sanz. Yes. I completely agree, sir. This is a one
variable outcome determinative test, who enjoys most of the
economics in the underlying loan. It is completely inconsistent
with the secondary market. Banks originate loans and sell them
all day long. That is how we can make more capital available.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you.
My time has unfortunately expired, and I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Casten, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank you all
for being here.
Before we start, and I do want to spend most of my time
talking about your expertise, which I appreciate you sharing
with us today, I just want to chat with you all for a moment as
Americans. We are less than 3 years after January 6th, and
after the House was attacked, we walked back to the House
Floor. We walked through the broken glass on the floor. We
walked past cots with National Guard officials who were
sleeping in shifts so they could continue to protect us.
And I went up and I sat with Mr. Hill up in the gallery and
watched the debate start on whether or not we were going to
overturn the Arizona election results. And I watched the
majority of the Republican caucus vote to continue the work
that the insurrectionists tried to start.
And I want to thank Mr. Hill for your vote that day in not
voting to overturn the election. I want to acknowledge that the
chairman of this committee also did not. It should not be
exceptional or praiseworthy to defend our democracy, but I
understand the courage that takes in today's Republican Party.
And I say that because we are moments from going to the
Floor and deciding whether to elect a Speaker, someone who not
only voted to overturn the election, but wrote the legal
framework that his colleagues had empowered them to do the
same. And I say that, because democracy only survives if we
defend it.
I hope to be able to tell you at the end of the day that
there was robust bipartisan support for the peaceful transfer
of power and democracy, but I fear that I am not going to be
able to, because everything we are talking about today is
predicated on that continuing.
I am going to move to EWA. Mr. Palaniappan, it's nice to
see you again. And I don't want to make you the poster child
for the whole industry, but I'm hoping you can educate us a
little bit.
As I recall from our prior conversations, your payment
model--you have a no-cost model, but people can offer to pay
tips if they like the service. And then, you have a separate
cost where people pay $1.99 to $3.99. I see you are nodding
your head, so hopefully, I have that about right.
Is $3.99 the maximum fee if they do that?
Mr. Palaniappan. That is correct.
Mr. Casten. Okay. And, again, I don't know if you are
representing the industry, but what percentage of your
customers opt for the immediate payment versus the delayed
payment?
Mr. Palaniappan. Thank you for the question. And I can
speak about our numbers. I think the industry----
Mr. Casten. Just an estimate, because I want to get through
it, because I am trying to educate myself on this limited
question.
Mr. Palaniappan. We allow what we call tips, voluntary
payments, on all transactions. Over half of our transactions do
not have a tip, and the average tip is $1.45. And then, on the
Lightning Speed, which is the wire light service, that is $1.99
to $3.99; the usage varies. On the weekends, it's higher,
because ACH shuts down.
Mr. Casten. Okay. But overall, about 50 percent on an
annual basis?
Mr. Palaniappan. It could be a little bit higher than 50
percent.
Mr. Casten. Okay. And what is the average amount that
people are taking out when they are doing that expedited
payment? I see that you have a cap of $750, but what is the
average that people are taking that they have to pay that $1.99
to $3.99 on?
Mr. Palaniappan. The $1.99 is a choice. They can also get
it same day, no cost, without Lightning Speed, because we use
same day----
Mr. Casten. Yes. I am just talking about the Lightning
Speed piece.
Mr. Palaniappan. The average across all transactions is
about $85 a transaction.
Mr. Casten. Okay. And you may not want to answer this, I am
sure you are a private company, but what is the return on
equity you have to hit in order to make sure that you have the
capital necessary to keep your business running?
Mr. Palaniappan. I am not exactly sure how you calculate
return on equity.
Mr. Casten. What I am saying is you are providing,
effectively, a working capital revolver. And your ability to
access the capital, to fund that and to grow is going to be
contingent on delivering some acceptable return to your capital
provider. So, what is the number you have to hit, whether
through tips, through $1.99, through $3.99, whatever the range,
what do you have to manage your business to?
Mr. Palaniappan. We don't have any thresholds that we are
required to hit. I think we are trying to make a business that
is sustainable. It is sort of interesting like how the whole
pricing model came about, if you would let me talk about it.
Mr. Casten. Again, if you are uncomfortable--what I am
trying to understand, and let me sort of maybe get to the punch
line and work backwards. I admire what you are doing, and I am
trying to understand how this all sits together. But there is
the question, I think Ms. Spotser raised of, at some point,
where is the bright line between a lending product and an act
of charity and something that doesn't need to be covered?
And, of course, in this hearing, we have a bill that has
been noticed, that would exempt the EWA industry from the Truth
in Lending Act.
Let me just call the question: Do you support EWA not being
subject to the Truth in Lending Act?
Chairman Hill. You can respond to that question in writing.
Mr. Casten. Ms. Spotser, I would welcome your thoughts on
that question as well, because I am trying to understand, to
the degree this is a loan, and how we think about that.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mrs. Houchin is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you, Chairman Hill, and Ranking Member
Lynch.
And thank you to the witnesses for testifying today.
Since I became a member of this committee in January, one
of my top priorities has been to ensure that everyday
Americans, including those who live in my district in southern
Indiana, have flexibility and choice when it comes to planning
for their own financial futures and for their day-to-day
financial activities.
Innovation in fintech has been instrumental in helping to
bring about more opportunities for all Americans, from
delivering products to underserved communities, to providing
flexibility with payroll and payments.
Clearly, financial technology has already changed the way
people interact with their banks and the financial sector.
While many Americans access their bank accounts online and
invest with their smartphones, fintechs have also made it
possible to make larger-payment purchases through flexible
payment arrangements, which can allow an employee to access
earned wages without waiting until payday arrives.
With all the benefits that financial technology has to
offer, I think we need to ensure that our regulatory
environment ultimately helps people access some of these
financial services products and that they have the tools they
need to invest and save on their own terms.
Mr. Sanz, WebBank has entered into a partnership in which
the bank provides credit access to individuals who lack
established credit history, an example being small business
loans. Could you walk us through why a bank-fintech partnership
would be critical to offering these types of products?
Mr. Sanz. Yes. Absolutely. And thank you for the question.
We have entered into various partnerships that take
advantage of transactional data, as you indicated, some on the
small business side, and some on the consumer side. I mentioned
the consumer one before. It is one of a number, but the
relationship with Petal stands out in that Petal has developed
leading-edge cash flow underwriting technology that really
provides incredible real-time visibility into the financial
condition of a consumer.
You can see the income that they are bringing in, and other
amounts coming in. You can see how much they are spending, and
how much they are saving. And these are categorized in a way
that is not getting into the nitty-gritty or favoring a
purchase at one kind of a store versus another. But with that,
you can essentially effectively underwrite folks who have a
thin file or no file.
Similarly, on the small business side, we have been able to
achieve similar results with PayPal, where we have flexible
payment loans that are based on the transactional history that
we see flowing through PayPal's closed-loop system. We are
seeing the revenue that is coming in, and that provides really
powerful insights, especially since COVID, given that credit
scores are a lagging indicator and they have been really
muddied by the stimulus.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you.
Mr. Palaniappan, families working paycheck to paycheck
currently are bound by a 2- to 4-week pay cycle, and there
could be real-life factors and unexpected medical bills where
they can't wait for payday. We know that according to a study
conducted by Branch Logic, approximately 48 percent of hourly
employees have no savings, and 83 percent have less than $500
saved. So, the Earned Wage Access products can help consumers
pay bills on time and avoid overdraft fees.
Will you describe the additional benefits that come with
giving access to consumers, depending on that traditional 2- to
4-week wait, and how these products offered by Earnin allow
consumers to manage their finances in a way that meets their
own needs in paying bills before payday?
Mr. Palaniappan. Sure. And like on the antiquated payroll
system and people waiting 2 to 4 weeks, it actually wasn't
always this way. Previously, people used to get paid every day
after they worked, and really nothing else in our life works in
a 2-week batch. Just imagine if Google said, give me all of
your search queries, and in 2 weeks, I will give you the
results? Nobody would use Google. That is the payroll system we
are forcing everybody to live with, and it doesn't need to be
that way, because the technology exists to run payroll much
faster for people.
In terms of benefits, like I told you about the billion
dollars in overdraft fees that our customers avoid every year
because they can access their wages when they need it to pay
bills on time, to pay rent, to buy gas, to buy groceries, there
are also lots of benefits that are not financial.
We have heard from lots of customers who, after years, have
celebrated their birthday on their birthday and not on payday;
people who have gone to the dentist when their tooth aches and
not put it away till payday because they couldn't afford to go
to the dentist. I heard from a customer who was able to send
her son on a field trip because she could access Earnin, and if
not for Earnin, he would not have gone on the field trip.
So, I think there are all these ways in which people's
lives are being held back because we lock their pay in the pay
cycle.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you.
And finally, with the remaining time I have, Mrs. Kelley,
what about the Buy Now, Pay Later products? What options would
be available to these consumers if those products weren't
available? Who is using these, and why are the flexible payment
arrangements so popular?
Mrs. Kelley. Yes. Consumers across-the-board are using
them. It is an incredibly popular product, and for good reason:
It gives consumers choice, flexibility, and optionality that
they wouldn't have without this product.
And similar to what we just heard, sometimes people need to
make a purchase when it is not convenient for their pay cycle,
for other reasons. Buy now, Pay Later allows them to do that.
Paying what is, in fact, typically free over four installments,
which just provides choice to consumers, that is important that
they wouldn't have otherwise.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Hill. I thank the gentlewoman for yielding back.
Mr. Nickel is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is great to be back here in the committee room, getting
to work. I am excited about the work we are doing here in a
bipartisan way. The Digital Asset Market Structure bill, the
Stablecoin bill, I am ready to start working together to
improve those bills and get things moving again on the Floor of
the House.
But today, we are here to talk about fintech, and fintech
companies play a crucial role in driving economic growth and
financial inclusion. We need to strike a balance that
encourages innovation, while ensuring robust consumer
protections, as this will not only boost our economy but also
provide better access to the financial system for marginalized
communities. It is our responsibility to foster an environment
where fintechs can thrive, creating jobs and expanding access
to affordable financial services, while never losing sight of
the need to shield consumers from potential risks.
Mr. Palaniappan, can you please explain the regulatory
structure, if there even is one, for Earned Wage Access
products?
Mr. Palaniappan. Thank you for that question. In 2017, the
CFPB, under Director Cordray, exempted EWA from the payday
rule. Despite being exempt from the payday rule, there are a
number of other regulations that we adhere to: Unfair,
Deceptive, or Abusive Acts of Practices (UDAAP); the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA); and then, privacy things, like the
California Consumer Privact Act (CCPA).
In addition, Nevada has passed a law that establishes a
framework for Earned Wage Access, SB290, and Missouri has
passed another law that has the framework for Earned Wage
Access, SB103.
Mr. Nickel. So, what is the need for new legislation?
Mr. Palaniappan. I think it provides clarity with the right
consumer protections. And Earned Wage Access has a number of
new and much-needed consumer protections. The product is always
available to customers at no cost. It is a nonrecourse product,
so there are no collections, there are no penalties, and there
are no late fees. It does not impact your credit score.
I think we want to get those protections in the law so that
the consumers can continue to access the product with
confidence.
Mr. Nickel. I have heard a lot of concerns about Earned
Wage Access products locking people into a cycle of debt. Can
you please explain what happens if a consumer doesn't repay
their funds?
Mr. Palaniappan. The service is simply paused. And if they
want to use it again, they call us up and make us whole, and
then they can use the product again. There are no late fees.
There is no interest accruing. There is no impact on their
credit score.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you very much.
Again, charges or interest, there are none that have to be
repaid by the consumers?
Mr. Palaniappan. That is correct.
Mr. Nickel. Mr. Sanz, can you explain the role of
technology and innovation in underwriting approaches, such as
cash flow underwriting and promoting financial inclusion, and
providing credit to thin-file or no-file customers?
Mr. Sanz. Yes. I would be happy to. Thank you for the
question. This has been an answer that I have presented a
couple of times today. But to maybe expand more generally
beyond our relationship with Petal, I would tell you that I
think what many fintech players have realized is that
traditional credit scores don't provide the insight, the real-
time insight needed to effectively underwrite consumers, small
businesses, et cetera. And attempts have been made to tap into
real-time information, including bank statement information,
credit card processing information, and other receivables flow
information to be able to see the actual real-time financial
health of a potential borrower.
That is incredibly powerful information, especially for
people who are new to credit, low- and moderate-income
individuals who have thin files or no files. If a traditional
approach were applied to them, you would look at the FICO, and
if they are below 640, the answer would be, no. If you look at
their bank statement information and you can see that they have
reasonable income coming in, they are spending at reasonable
levels, they are net savers, for example, then they are a
reasonable bet.
And one great thing about this information is that it has
actually been studied and largely validated by FinRegLab run by
Melissa Koide. She looked at about six different firms that use
cash flow underwriting in their business and found that these
cash flow underwriting models are predictive. They are
inclusive. They are helping people who otherwise have trouble
accessing credit. And there is no indication that they present
any proxy or fair lending problems of any kind.
Mr. Nickel. My goal is, how can we expand credit,
especially to marginalized communities, and communities of
color? That is my goal.
But in your experience, what distinguishes responsible bank
partnerships from predatory lending practices, and how can
policymakers differentiate between the two when we are crafting
laws and regulations?
Mr. Sanz. Yes, thank you. I will tell you that responsible
bank partnerships are ones where the bank has control of the
program, oversees the program carefully, controls the credit
policy, the marketing materials, requires compliance management
systems and audits them, and offers products that comply with
the existing guidance regarding what constitutes nonpredatory
products.
Predatory products, on the other hand, are holistically
problematic in terms of their repayment rates, fee harvesting,
and repeat usage that indicates that it is not healthy
reborrowing; it is a debt trap.
Chairman Hill. Thank you, Mr. Sanz.
Mr. Nickel. I yield back.
Chairman Hill. I thank the gentleman from North Carolina
for yielding back.
And now, the gentleman from the inspiration for the Fintech
Flyover in Lincoln, Nebraska, Mr. Flood, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you to the good chairman from the State of
Arkansas.
Mr. Sanz, according to a study conducted in 2021, banks
that partner with fintechs average 2.5 partnerships per
institution. In your view, why are banks partnering with
fintechs?
Mr. Sanz. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I would
say that what banks, like WebBank, have realized is that when
you combine very knowledgeable, effective fintech companies
with a bank, you unlock the best of each of those participants.
Fintech companies are incredibly customer-focused. They
build amazing tech platforms at scale with reach, excellent
customer experience, minimal friction, what have you. Banks are
very good at underwriting, at credit, and at regulatory
oversight. They are not necessarily the best at building really
great tech platforms. So, when you combine those capabilities,
one plus one equals three, if not a larger number.
And I think that is why you have seen over the last handful
of years is banks coming around to the conclusion that if you
can't beat them, join them, and that they are better off
partnering in order to leverage the capabilities of fintech
companies.
Mr. Flood. I am really interested in financial technology.
And as the chairman said, Lincoln, Nebraska, is a fintech hub
for the United States. And we would like to have more.
In the case of the State of Nebraska, I think that
technology can also be useful in ensuring that smaller
community banks--we have about 140 community banks in Nebraska,
more State-chartered banks than anybody would ever imagine--get
access to some of the same tools that larger banks have, like a
slick mobile app, and an updated consumer interface on their
website. These are the types of features that customers,
especially younger customers, have grown to expect.
The problem is, for some of the smaller banks in our
communities, they don't necessarily have the bandwidth or the
resources to provide these features that consumers are
increasingly expecting. That is where, to your point, I think
these important partnerships come in.
This is a question for both Dr. Lenz and Mr. Sanz. Could
you both speak to the potential benefits that bank-fintech
partnerships can provide to community banks and their
customers?
Mr. Sanz. I will start with the quick answer. I will tell
you that the benefits of a fintech relationship are available
to all banks, including community banks. But I would say that,
in the current environment, banks will need to invest
substantial resources to take advantage of any of those
benefits. The benefits could be myriad, depending on what they
are looking for, from a slick front end to better data
analytics to better underwriting, whatever it may be.
But in order to unleash the benefits of any fintech
relationship, especially given the current third-party risk
management guidance, they will have to devote some pretty
substantial resources to be able to structure their
relationship with that partner and oversee it effectively. And,
unfortunately, I think that guidance makes it difficult for
community banks to live up to that standard.
Mr. Lenz. Thank you for the question. And I would second
that. I think that community banks--I come from North Carolina;
I grew up in the southeast--serve a lot of small towns, and the
big banks don't show up for those kinds of things.
The opportunity that fintech allows community banks is
phenomenal, but in a highly-regulated environment, it becomes
difficult for them to adopt those kinds of things. The only way
I think that community banks can stay viable is to offer those
kinds of products, because it is too easy for consumers to get
ahold of things. I think community banks offer a lot to the
rural communities in particular. I think they have a place in
the United States, and these kinds of partnerships are
instrumental.
The idea that a community bank can develop fintech products
is not even possible. They are too small. They don't have the
resources. And let's face it, even the large financial
institutions have trouble. That is why they partner.
Mr. Flood. Along those lines, let's talk about the recent
guidance issued by the Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and the OCC
regarding risk management for some of these fintech
partnerships.
Do you think that would it have a chilling effect on some
of these community banks being able to offer their customers
what a large bank can offer?
Mr. Lenz. I think it will have a chilling effect on all
banks, not just the small banks, across-the-board. If you look
at where innovation is coming from, for the most part, it is
not coming from banks. Square did not come from a bank, but it
has afforded millions of small businesses the opportunity that
they would only have if they were large.
If you look at innovation kind of across-the-board, there
is a reason that it is not coming from banks. So, yes, I agree
with that 100 percent.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Dr. Lenz.
I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Steil, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Chairman Hill.
And to the witnesses, thanks for being here today. I think
this is a really important topic.
I want to start with you, Mr. Palaniappan. In your opening
statement, you were talking about kind of the impetus for the
creation of your company.
Why are people paid monthly instead of paid daily, paid by
the hour, meaning the transfer of money, not earned, but why
are they not paid on a very regular basis?
Mr. Palaniappan. Thank you for your question. People were
actually paid every day for a long time.
Mr. Steil. And then it shifted, right? Exactly. So, we go
back 100 years and you carried a 50-pound sack over your
shoulder, and you worked your tail off throughout the course of
the day, and you expected to be paid at the end of the day,
right?
Mr. Palaniappan. Exactly. And society never accepted that
employers could hold back someone's pay past that day.
Mr. Steil. And then, these giant enterprise resource
planning (ERP) systems came in, very expensive, complicated
systems, with huge global companies and some smaller companies
using them as well. And the bookkeeping became so complicated
to navigate through where workers were paid different amounts
throughout the day, that these massive ERP systems started
batching the payment structures, avoid fraud, good accounting
standards, and started doing this probably on a monthly basis.
Is that fair?
Mr. Palaniappan. That is correct.
Mr. Steil. If a young person comes to the United States
House of Representatives, works for the Federal Government, and
they come here and they start a job, and they start after the
15th of the month, they are 6 weeks away from their first
paycheck. And that young person may need to put a down payment
or a deposit on their rental unit; they are not only going to
have to cover this month's rent, they are going to have to put
a deposit down. And they are still not going to be paid in the
course of 4 weeks. So, they are going to hit their third rent
payment before they get their first paycheck. And that is true
for countless Americans who are taking their first job. Is that
right?
Mr. Palaniappan. That is correct.
Mr. Steil. And that is a huge burden on that individual.
And further, we have really disconnected work from reward in
this country. I think it is one of the biggest challenges we
face writ large, outside of just the financial services space.
But as we are thinking about our entire benefits structure
in the U.S., how we help people get a job, come out of a
dependency situation and lift themselves up on their feet, the
number-one thing we can do for people, work is at the core. And
what we have done as a country is disconnect work from reward.
And in the case of the employment structure here in the
United States House of Representatives, your Federal
Government, and in countless companies across the United
States, these burdensome ERP systems are actually preventing
people from getting paid in a timely manner. Is that fair?
Mr. Palaniappan. That is correct.
Mr. Steil. And in your example at your company, people came
to you and said, ``Can I get a loan simply on the money I've
already earned?'' But that's not really a loan, is it?
Mr. Palaniappan. They wanted the money that they had
already earned. And this happens in millions of small
businesses across the country where the business owner or the
store manager gets asked by their employees for money that they
have already earned.
Mr. Steil. So, it is not a loan. It is simply giving them
the money that they have already earned.
Mr. Palaniappan. That is correct.
Mr. Steil. And I am thinking that maybe there is a young
woman or a young man, and they have kids, and it is coming up
towards the Christmas season, so they want to work an overtime
shift. Maybe they work at Target. Maybe they work at a store.
If they were a waiter or a waitress and they worked an overtime
shift, what would happen? They would take the money home,
right? They would put it in their pocket. So, if the manager
came to them and said, ``Hey, Mr. Bartender, do you want to
work an extra shift, we are down somebody,'' they would think,
``Boy, this is a great way I could save a little in my back
pocket and buy some presents for my kids.''
That is a work-reward connection immediately. And if you go
to a restaurant, people work pretty darn hard in a restaurant
because that work-reward connection is there for everyone.
But we see many people not taking that extra shift, not
because they are lazy, but because we have removed the work-
reward connection that historically existed in a very common
way.
And I think the Earned Wage Access tools that we are
discussing in my discussion draft actually addresses one of the
key problems that we have created as a society over the last
100 years, which is a disconnect between work and reward. We do
that in a number of ways.
I think we have to break those burdens down to help people
find that opportunity to help themselves. If your car breaks
down, and you need $300, and you are a bartender, you can go
ask your manager to pick up a couple of shifts and try to walk
home with a couple hundred bucks by the end of the weekend.
That is quite reasonable. But if you work for countless other
companies across the United States of America, and you went in
to your boss and said, ``I would like the overtime shift
because I have a $200 issue,'' you don't really have that
opportunity to actually get that money in any reasonably tight
period of time. Is that fair?
Mr. Palaniappan. You can get it now through Earned Wage
Access.
Mr. Steil. You could get it through Earned Wage Access.
Mr. Palaniappan. And over 100 congressional staffers use
our product.
Mr. Steil. I think it is essential--I will wrap up here
really quick, Mr. Hill, if you give me an extra 10 seconds.
But I think it is essential that we look at the discussion
draft of the Earned Wage Access bill to give stability to these
companies, because I think it really breaks through this burden
that many people feel where we have disconnected work from
reward and work to access to the wages that you earn.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman's----
Mr. Steil. I will finalize by just asking unanimous consent
to submit for the record a press release from the Innovative
Payments Association.
Chairman Hill. Without objection, it is so ordered.
The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Steil. I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the witnesses for appearing today. And I am pleased
to have an opportunity to ask a few questions on what I think
is an important issue that has been called to our attention.
Ms. Spotser, permit me to ask you, do you agree that the
Truth in Lending Act (TILA) applies to loans with at least five
installment payments, if you know?
Ms. Spotser. Yes, sir, I believe that TILA does apply to
loans with at least five installment payments.
Mr. Green. And if you have a loan with less than five, then
TILA would not apply?
Ms. Spotser. I don't necessarily agree with that
proposition, sir.
Mr. Green. Is that, generally speaking, what many others
agree with?
Ms. Spotser. I think there is a presumption--I think we are
still waiting for the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to
provide some clarity around the TILA disclosures, but we
believe that they have the legal authority through the Truth in
Lending Act to actually expand that standard.
Mr. Green. I understand.
Ms. Spotser. And, again, this would be a disclosure
standard.
Mr. Green. I understand.
The point I am making is this: It seems that many of these
companies will, with intentionality, structure their loans such
that there are only four payments. That way, they don't have to
engage in this debate about whether TILA applies if they move
to five payments.
Has that been the case as you have analyzed these
circumstances?
Ms. Spotser. Yes, sir. And what I think is actually really
important is, again, by their own analysis, these are not one-
and-done loans. They are, in fact, loans that you take out one
and then a day later you take out another and then--or 2 weeks
later, you take out another.
And even though we have these 4-week constructions, the
full amount is actually far more significant, which is why the
costs are more significant. And it is not a 4-week repayment
period. It is, in fact, an ongoing debt.
Mr. Green. I understand. But the point I am making is that
the companies with intentionality are evading TILA, which is
something that I happen to believe is important. I think Truth
in Lending is something that benefits the borrower.
I also believe that when you avoid these disclosures, you
can avoid telling the consumer upfront how issues will be
resolved when there is a dispute. And dispute resolution is
pretty important, especially if you find that the means by
which the dispute will be resolved is one that is not to the
benefit, but rather to the detriment of the consumer. You would
like to know this, I would, and I think most consumers would.
And my concern, quite frankly, is with what you have called
to our attention, as it relates to the companies, these fintech
companies not wanting to be regulated or having to adhere to
the same rules that other lenders have to adhere to, like
saying that this is not a loan when, quite frankly, as you put
it so appropriately, the money that the consumer receives does
not come from the business that the consumer works for; it
comes from a third party. That third party is making this money
available.
Now, you can call it many things, but it does quack and it
does swim and it does wobble when it walks. As you have put it,
it probably is a duck if it does all of these things.
My point, finally, is this: I am concerned also because of
the statistical information that the staff has afforded us, and
I think this is pretty important. Staff has indicated that
Black and Hispanic consumers are 63 percent and 50 percent,
respectively, more likely to use these Buy Now, Pay Later
products than White consumers. That is pretty important. Blacks
and Hispanics are more likely to make less, earn less, and as a
result, need these products more and as a result, become
victims more so than other folks.
They also indicate to us that--let's see. This is
important--female consumers are 35 percent more likely than
males to use these Buy Now, Pay Later products. We know that
females don't get equal pay for equal work in our society. We
don't like to admit it, but it is true.
Thank you for the time, Mr. Chairman.
And for the record, if I may ask that the witnesses please
confirm for me that 72.6 percent of the Buy Now, Pay Later
users earn less than $75,000 a year?
Chairman Hill. I thank the gentleman from Texas, and ask
the witnesses if you would confirm that in writing to the
gentleman from Texas.
I now recognize the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Timmons, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Bank-fintech partnerships have created significant
competition in the financial services industry by providing
consumers with the services they seek. The environment created
through open banking has yielded financial freedoms never
before seen by consumers. Through products like Earned Wage
Access or Buy Now, Pay Later services, consumers wield the
flexibility to meet their financial needs at the touch of a
button.
With the increase in banking-fintech relationships, we have
seen many banks face increased scrutiny by bank examiners and
enforcement staff simply due to their business model. This
increased regulatory scrutiny has no basis in real-world
evidence and actively stymies innovation.
Mrs. Kelley, do you agree that it is crucial for Federal
regulators to continue working with market participants to
ensure they create pragmatic guardrails around bank-fintech
partnerships instead of pursuing regulation by enforcement due
to the fear of potential harms?
Mrs. Kelley. Thank you for the question. We certainly agree
that it is very important to work in partnership to ensure that
the necessary guardrails are in place but the guardrails that
are put in place are appropriate and continue to foster
innovation as we are seeing in the partnerships that you
describe.
Mr. Timmons. And it creates predictability as well.
Mr. Sanz, some have criticized bank-fintech partnerships in
the wake of the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) on the
grounds that such partnerships allow for high levels of fraud
within the program. Is that a fair assessment?
Mr. Sanz. Absolutely not. And thank you for the question. I
think this is another example of a very limited number of cases
being the basis for tarring all fintech programs with the same
brush.
Although the McCombs School of Business study out of the
University of Texas, and the subcommittee report indicated that
there were elevated levels of fraud in the PPP, I can tell you
that WebBank provided over 117,000 loans for over $3 billion in
the PPP. And in that same McCombs study, our lending was
equated with that of traditional lenders because we did not see
escalated fraud rates.
And, in fact, we actually received a letter from the
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), which I included
in my written testimony, that thanked us for our Bank Secrecy
Act (BSA) program because it did lead to information that was
the basis for successful prosecution of a PPP fraud.
Mr. Timmons. Sir, I would argue that the PPP loan program
was legislatively flawed. It was not implemented poorly. We
needed to have better protections on our end.
Open banking has the potential to revolutionize the
financial services industry by allowing third-party developers
and financial institutions to access and share consumer
financial data in a secure and standardized manner.
Along these lines, the CFPB recently issued a long-
anticipated notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM), further
defining Section 1033 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which serves as a
first step to creating clear rules of the road for data sharing
between banks, data aggregators, and third-party fintech
developers.
Mrs. Kelley, again, what lessons can we learn from rules
similar to Section 1033 in other jurisdictions such as Europe?
And did the CFPB correctly implement these lessons in the NPRM?
Mrs. Kelley. Thank you for the question. As you can
imagine, we are working our way through the NPRM and will be
commenting as it is, in fact, a very lengthy document.
But we welcome movement on the open banking front. We do
think it has the possibility to revolutionize the financial
system, including through payments. What we have seen as we
look in other jurisdictions that have implemented open banking
rules is the need to ensure that the incentives are aligned,
that industry has the incentives to engage in these
partnerships, which we think are the ones that are going to
unlock the key.
Mr. Timmons. Sure. Quick followup: The NPRM scope is
currently limited in nature to the use of checking and prepaid
accounts, credit cards, and digital wallets. What would the
pros and cons be of expanding the scope of 1033 from the CFPB's
initial NPRM to other financial tools?
Mrs. Kelley. From our perspective, obviously, we are
focused on payments. ETA is a payments trade association, so we
are focused on payments, and we think that is appropriate. It
has obviously been a long time coming, and we are going to work
through this NPRM first.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you.
Dr. Lenz, in an article that you co-authored, you advocated
for the advancement of legislation that will create a Federal
regulatory sandbox to help fintech startups better navigate the
thicket of existing regulations.
Can you describe why you think a Federal regulatory sandbox
is a legislative solution to foster the development of new
financial products and services?
Mr. Lenz. Thank you for the question. Yes, sir. I believe
that a Federal sandbox is necessary. There are about a dozen
States now that have sandboxes, which are fantastic, including
my home State of North Carolina. However, most fintechs don't
want to operate within one State; they want to operate
nationally.
So, the opportunity to have a Federal fintech sandbox would
allow folks to develop new, innovative technologies that could
be used across the United States, which I think is what
everybody wants at the end of the day.
Mr. Timmons. Sure. It seems predictability is something we
are pursuing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Hill. I thank the gentleman from South Carolina.
The gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Rose, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Hill, for holding this
important and very timely hearing. And thank you to our
witnesses for being here today and sharing your time and
expertise with us.
Dr. Lenz, in your written testimony, you noted that the
United States has been the undisputed leader in financial
services around the world for the past 75 years, in no small
measure due to the willingness of its various constituents to
take chances and embrace innovation.
Do you worry that there is a risk that the United States
might overregulate new and emerging fintechs, and could
overregulation put in peril the current position of the United
States as a global leader in the financial services industry?
Mr. Lenz. Mr. Rose, thank you for that question. I do
believe that overregulation is always going to be problematic,
and we it has to be checked. I think regulation is appropriate.
I think consumer protection is appropriate. However, I think it
has to be done with incentivizing innovation at the heart of
everything we do.
We do take risks. As I said in my opening statement, that
is part of what makes us Americans. We have seen what happens,
what fruit has been borne from that risk-taking. And it is that
we are the undisputed leader in the world. That has come about
because we have been incentivized to innovate.
I think that keeping that sort of incentive open will
continue to lead us down that path. Problematic regulations can
certainly stymie that or slow it down significantly, and I
don't think that is where we want to go.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
Mrs. Kelley, I would like to ask you a similar question. Do
you worry that overregulation of new and emerging fintechs
might cause some fintechs to relocate abroad to friendlier
jurisdictions with less-restrictive regulatory environments?
Mrs. Kelley. Thank you for the question. Yes. Again, we are
not anti-regulation, but we are pro-smart regulation. The
regulation has to encourage innovation if we are going to
continue to see the kind of advances that we have seen. So, we
are always focused on and do worry about regulation that
stifles that innovation.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
And, Mr. Sanz, I will go ahead and pose the same question
to you. Do you worry that overregulation of new and emerging
fintechs might cause some fintechs to relocate abroad to
friendlier jurisdictions?
Mr. Sanz. Absolutely. I worry that overregulation will have
a dampening effect on innovation within the U.S., and that it
may lead to innovation moving abroad. I worry that the current
regulatory environment is one that has become so intense that
banks like my own that have been focused on bank-fintech
partnerships for 25 years and, arguably, with a source of the
FDIC's proposed guidance on how to run those third-party
lending platforms the right way, is seeing the most-intense
regulatory reviews in its history.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
Mr. Palaniappan, according to a study conducted by Branch,
approximately 48 percent of hourly employees have no savings,
and 83 percent have less than $500 saved.
Will you describe how innovative products like Earned Wage
Access are allowing consumers from all walks of life to manage
their finances differently and in such a way that it could
actually help them grow savings?
Mr. Palaniappan. Thank you for your question. We see with
Earned Wage Access, just with our customers, that our customers
are avoiding a billion dollars a year in overdraft fees, and
that can go to savings. We also see other things.
On the overdraft fees, it was interesting, I met with a
customer of ours from New York, and when she came to meet with
me, she brought a journal with 27 days on which she had avoided
overdraft fees because she used Earnin. So, it is a lot of cost
savings. People are paying their bills on time and not getting
late fees on bills. And that is money that can go into savings.
We also see that incomes go up when someone starts using
Earned Wage Access. As Congressman Steil mentioned, people are
actually more eager to work and they get more shifts and they
get overtime.
Lots of my customers cannot afford to put $50 or $100 in
their gas tank, so they fill up $10 at a time. If something
unexpected happens and they can't buy gas, they used to miss
work. Now, they can download the previous day's earnings and
they go into work. They are working about 3 hours more per
week.
There are lots of interesting things. If you work in
retail, there are different types of jobs. At some jobs, you
are tied to a particular store. And there are other roles where
you are tied to a department and you work across multiple
stores and that role pays higher.
One of our customers was offered a higher-paying role and
did not take it because she could not afford to front the gas
money and wait for reimbursement.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I appreciate your answers.
And I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
I ask unanimous consent to submit a letter to the record
dated October 23, 2023, from the American Fintech Council to
the Center for Responsible Lending about their report on Earned
Wage Access.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
And I want to join my friend, the ranking member, in
welcoming our former colleague, Lacy Clay, to the hearing room
today. We miss Mr. Clay on this committee. And I want you to
know that your relatives, both current and former, in Arkansas
are well-represented in the Second Congressional District.
I want to thank all of the witnesses for their testimony
today. This was an excellent panel.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
With that, this hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:44 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

October 25, 2023

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
