- HOLDING THE BIDEN ADMINISTRATION ACCOUNTABLE FOR WASTEFUL SPENDING. AND REGULATORY OVERREACH

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HOLDING THE BIDEN ADMINISTRATION.
ACCOUNTABLE FOR WASTEFUL SPENDING .
AND REGULATORY OVERREACH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 8, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-6

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-362 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JUAN VARGAS, California
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           RITCHIE TORRES, New York
YOUNG KIM, California                SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE LAWLER, New York                BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan, Chairman

PETE SESSIONS, Texas                 AL GREEN, Texas, Ranking Member
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee, Vice Chairman  SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
March 8, 2023................................................     1
Appendix:
March 8, 2023................................................    29

WITNESSES
Wednesday, March 8, 2023

Bialek, Hon. Mark, Inspector General, Office of Inspector General
for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed)
and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB)............     5
Delmar, Richard K., Acting Inspector General, Office of Inspector
General, U.S. Department of the Treasury.......................     7
Sharek, Rebecca L., Deputy Inspector General for Audits,
Evaluations, and Special Projects, Office of Inspector General,
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)..................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Bialek, Hon. Mark............................................    30
Delmar, Richard K............................................    44
Sharek, Rebecca L............................................    57

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Huizenga, Hon. Bill:
Letter to Hon. Gary Gensler, Chair, U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission, dated March 1, 2023...................   113
Bialek, Hon. Mark:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Barr........................................   115
Delmar, Richard K.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Barr........................................   117
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Sessions....................................   118
Sharek, Rebecca L.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Meuser......................................   120
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Sessions....................................   122

HOLDING THE BIDEN ADMINISTRATION
ACCOUNTABLE FOR WASTEFUL SPENDING.
AND REGULATORY OVERREACH

----------

Wednesday, March 8, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:17 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bill Huizenga
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Huizenga, Wagner, Mooney,
Rose, Meuser, Ogles; Green, Horsford, Garcia, and Williams of
Georgia.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Chairman Huizenga. The Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations will now come to order, and I would like to
welcome everybody.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Holding the Biden
Administration Accountable for Wasteful Spending and Regulatory
Overreach.''
The Chair now recognizes himself for a brief point of
personal privilege.
Today's hearing marks the first hearing of our subcommittee
in the 118th Congress and my first as its chairman. Now, that
does not mean we have been inactive. It does not mean that we
have not been doing anything. In fact, we have had a number of
discussions, letters that have gone out, and conversations
with, for example, Agency Inspectors General, which actually
led to this hearing, and so many more to come. And I would like
to extend a welcome to all of our subcommittee members, both
the Republicans and the Democrats, and look forward to serving
with you over the next 2 years.
Like some of you, this is my first term as a member of the
Oversight Subcommittee specifically. And while I am no stranger
to oversight issues, I look forward to learning how we can make
our government more accountable to the American people and the
consumers that we serve. I want to be clear. The subcommittee
will approach oversight in a fair and even-handed manner. That
being said, I will not hesitate to use my authority as chairman
to hold regulators accountable, and I certainly am not going to
shy away from topics that might be sensitive or frankly
uncomfortable to either side of the aisle. I think that is part
of our duty. I look forward to working with the ranking member,
Mr. Green of Texas, as we work to accomplish our shared
objectives. And I would like to now recognize the ranking
member for a brief point of personal privilege.
Mr. Green. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I concur with
you that many things have been done prior to today, and I would
like to accentuate the meeting that you and I had; it was very
beneficial. We have made many agreements. Probably one that you
and I both understand is that there will be times when we won't
agree, but we have also agreed that we won't be exceedingly
disagreeable, and we have agreed that we will meet again. You
have a great mentor on this subcommittee to assist you_Mrs.
Wagner is a former Chair, and she and I worked closely
together. I will look forward to doing a similar thing with
you, and I would like to welcome all of the members to the
committee as well.
And I thank the witnesses for being here.
And, Mr. Chairman, without question, reservation, or
hesitation, I am convinced that there will be something that
you and I will be able to work on together, and I look forward
to doing that thing as well as many others. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman yields back. I appreciate
that. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Holding the Biden
Administration Accountable for Wasteful Spending and Regulatory
Overreach.'' Oversight of the Executive Branch is a vital check
on the President's power, regardless of who occupies the Oval
Office. In fact, I had a mentor in my first couple of terms
from Michigan, the lion of the House of Representatives, John
Dingell, who taught me a number of things. One was the tyranny
of the vote, which is what we just experienced earlier. It
doesn't matter what plans you have, it doesn't matter who you
are with or where you are at, when they ring the bells, we have
15 minutes to go and perform our constitutional obligation of
voting on the House Floor. That said, we were delayed a couple
of minutes because of that today.
But the other is oversight, and, in fact, I decided that I
was just going to look up a simple definition of,
``oversight,'' and this was what popped up on Wikipedia, of all
things: ``Congressional oversight is oversight by the United
States Congress over the Executive Branch, including the
numerous U.S. Federal agencies. Congressional oversight
includes the review, monitoring, and supervision of Federal
agencies, programs, and activities, and policy
implementation.''
If it is good enough for Wikipedia, it should be good
enough for us and this committee to know what our lane is here,
and that is to make sure that we are holding those in the
Administration accountable. The Inspectors General before us
today represent four agencies who touch nearly every part of
our financial system. The work done by your offices is
paramount to make sure that these agencies stay within the
bounds Congress established for them.
In recent years, these regulators have pushed those limits,
leaving Congress with little or no recourse. In fact, I would
argue that there is no better example than the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). Over a decade ago, as a
response to the great financial crisis, Congress created the
CFPB as an Agency charged with protecting consumers. Since its
inception, the Bureau has grown to radically transform the
notion of consumer protection, often at the expense of small
business owners and hardworking Americans, with little to no
benefit for the actual consumers. I say, ``actual,'' because
oftentimes these so-called advocates are really ginning up a
paycheck rather than looking for protection. And now, CFPB
Director Chopra's strategy of regulation by enforcement has
left many wondering how one Agency can have so much autonomy
with virtually no oversight from Congress. Well, we know that
the courts are weighing in on that at this point.
Mr. Bialek, you lead a staff that has the difficult job of
providing independent oversight and investigations into two
governmental agencies, both with very different missions, but
equally consequential in today's financial system. In 2022, the
Federal Reserve's Office of Inspector General conducted 13
audits of the Reserve Banks, compared to just 5 of the CFPB, a
less than 30-percent allocation. While I am aware that new
programs created under the CARES Act have increased your
workload, this begs the question, why did Congress fail to give
the Bureau their own Inspector General? I was not here for the
creation of the Dodd-Frank Act, but I came immediately
afterwards, and I have been living with the echo effects of it.
Mr. Delmar, like the Fed, the Treasury's IG office has been
tasked with overseeing massive programs that had billions of
dollars in Federal spending, whether they be programs that were
a result of the pandemic or of the partisan American Rescue
Plan. The Treasury Department will face challenges in holding
participants of these programs accountable for proper use of
those funds.
Lastly, I want to spend some time focusing on the
Securities and Exchange Commission. The SEC oversees $118
trillion in annual trading volume, 29,000 registered entities,
24 exchanges, 95 alternative trading systems, and, depending on
the day of the week, digital assets. Last year, the SEC
proposed an unprecedented 34 rules_34_with an additional 20 or
so left on their most recent agenda.
Ms. Sharek, the IG report your office released last fall
was, frankly, jaw-dropping. While the SEC Chair continues to
push a rushed rulemaking agenda in his effort to rewrite nearly
every aspect of securities law, the Agency has failed to keep
its own house in order.
Furthermore, these efforts have been met with little
question or inquiry from committee Democrats. Ranking Member
Waters continues to defend Chair Gensler at every turn. What
makes the above statement so alarming is the lack of stability
at the SEC's Inspector General's Office. Since the last
appointed IG retired in May of last year, 3 different
individuals have assumed the acting Inspector General position
over the last 10 months.
Ms. Sharek, while I have no doubt you will be able to
answer our Members' questions, it is worth noting that the
current acting IG has only been on the job for roughly 90 days
and will be need to replaced again in April, this April. Given
the volume of rules currently before the SEC, one would hope
that it is the Chair's preference to resolve this vacancy issue
in a timely manner, but, then again, maybe not. Regardless,
that is unacceptable in my mind.
Without objection, I ask unanimous consent to enter into
the record the letter we sent to Chair Gensler last week
calling on him to appoint a permanent Inspector General at the
SEC to allow for consistent and proper oversight of the Agency.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
I look forward to hearing from all of the witnesses, and I
yield back the balance of my time.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 4
minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today, friends, the
subcommittee will hold a hearing entitled, ``Holding the Biden
Administration Accountable for Wasteful Spending and Regulatory
Overreach.'' No mention of President Trump. Dear friends, we
live in a world where it is not enough for things to be right,
they must also look right, and much of today's hearing will
emanate from what happened during the pandemic.
You see, it doesn't look right when the world knows that
the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic on
March 11, 2020, during the watch of a Republican President,
Donald Trump, and today, this powerful committee will focus
only on the watch of the Democratic President, Joe Biden.
Sadly, this looks like a partisan witch hunt focused on a
Democratic President, wherein the perfect will become the enemy
of the good by overlooking the good that was done while
ignoring the performance of his predecessor, Republican
President Donald Trump.
Therefore, a better title for this hearing, my friends,
would be how Republicans are out to get a Democratic President
by making the perfect the enemy of the good. The danger with
making the perfect the enemy of the good is the adverse impact
it is likely to have and produce during a future pandemic when
millions of lives may be at risk and immediate action is
necessary.
Understanding this, I will focus on the good done by
putting the American people above Republican politics during a
pandemic. This was done by providing direct support to the
American people with $814 billion to households and
individuals; by supporting small businesses with $792.6 billion
through the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP); by helping
States keep schools, businesses, and emergency services open,
with nearly $150 billion, which included dollars to almost
90,000 local businesses; by fighting the pandemic with $47.8
billion for COVID-19 testing, contact tracing, and mitigation,
and with $16 billion to fund vaccine distribution as well as
supply chains; by keeping people in homes with $29.6 billion in
emergency rental assistance to 6.5 million households; and by
keeping children out of poverty with $109 billion through the
child tax credit.
All of this was done because Democrats put the American
people above Republican politics. Therefore, my refrain will be
that while Republicans are making the perfect the enemy of the
good, generally speaking, I will focus on the good accomplished
when Democrats put the American people above Republican
politics. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman yields back.
We will now turn to the testimony of our witnesses.
First, Hon. Mark Bialek. Mr. Bialek is the Inspector
General of the Office of the Inspector General for the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau. I will note that earlier today,
seated right down there, was Fed Chair Powell, and I believe it
was Mr. Rose who had asked about some of that interplay between
the Fed and the Board of Governors and the CFPB. Mr. Bialek,
for over 40 years, has been an Inspector General, in that
community at least, and has experience. He previously served in
numerous capacities at the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, the Department of State, and the Department of
Commerce, all in the Offices of Inspector General. As the
Federal Reserve and CFPB Inspector General, he serves as a
member of the Pandemic Response Accountability Committee.
Second, Mr. Richard Delmar. Mr. Delmar is the acting
Inspector General at the Department of the Treasury Office of
Inspector General (OIG). He has served as Deputy Inspector
General and Counsel, and as a Media and Legislative Liaison,
and as a Whistleblower Program Coordinator at the Treasury OIG.
Prior to the Treasury OIG, Mr. Delmar served on active duty in
the Navy JAG Corps, and as a trial attorney in the Department
of Justice Tax Division. Sir, we thank you for your service to
our country.
Mr. Delmar is also a member of the Pandemic Response
Accountability Committee and chairs the Council of Inspectors
General on Financial Oversight.
And third, Ms. Rebecca Sharek. Ms. Sharek has served as the
Deputy Inspector General for Audits, Evaluations, and Special
Projects at the SEC since January of 2014. Last year, she
served as the acting Inspector General following Mr. Carl
Hoecker's retirement. Ms. Sharek is active in the Federal
oversight community, and has chaired the Enterprise Risk
Management Working Group of the Council of Inspectors General
on Integrity and Efficiency.
We thank each one of you for taking time to be here today.
Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to give an oral
presentation of your testimony, and without objection, each of
your written statements will be made a part of our permanent
record.
Mr. Bialek, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARK BIALEK, INSPECTOR GENERAL,
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM (FED) AND THE CONSUMER FINANCIAL
PROTECTION BUREAU (CFPB)

Mr. Bialek. Thank you, and good afternoon, Chairman
Huizenga, Ranking Member Green, and members of the
subcommittee. I am Mark Bialek, the Inspector General of the
Federal Reserve Board and the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau. I very much appreciate the opportunity to discuss our
oversight of the Board and the CFPB.
Independent, objective oversight is critical for ensuring
government agencies work efficiently and effectively, and that
they abide by the laws, the regulations, and the rules and
practices that govern them. Such oversight work is, of course,
also vital for maintaining public trust and confidence in
government institutions. Toward that end, over the last 5
years, we have issued 108 audit and evaluation reports: 61 of
those reports focused on the Board and included 175
recommendations for improvement; and 47 of those reports
focused on the CFPB and included 122 recommendations.
To provide the most-effective oversight, we consider a
number of factors when we plan our discretionary work. We look
at levels of risk within a program or operation and areas that
we see as major management challenges. As risk areas shift over
time, we appropriately adapt our work to address those changing
conditions. The result is that the balance between our Board
and CFPB workload will fluctuate from time to time.
Our Board and CFPB audits and evaluations cover a broad
area. In 2021, we identified several major management
challenges facing the Board, including pandemic response,
emergency lending facilities design and implementation,
organizational governance and enterprise risk management, and
information security and cybersecurity oversight at supervised
financial institutions. We also identified major management
challenges facing the CFPB, including information security,
supervision and enforcement strategy, and managing consumer
complaints. We are currently updating our management challenges
for 2023.
In addition, we have other ongoing work covering the
Board's and Reserve Banks' ethics programs pertaining to
personal investment and trading activities, the CFPB's process
for conducting enforcement investigations, and the CFPB's
effectiveness and timeliness in responding to consumer
complaints. The details on these projects are contained in our
publicly-available work plan, which we update quarterly.
We also conduct investigations into possible violations of
law, regulation, or policy. The matters that we often
investigate include bank fraud, employee misconduct, ethics
violations or conflicts of interest by agency officials, leaks
of protected information, and waste or mismanagement of funds
or government resources. Since the start of the pandemic, we
have dedicated significant resources to investigating potential
fraud related to the Board's emergency lending facilities. Over
the last 5 years, we have closed 170 investigations, leading to
116 convictions and $4.4 billion in financial actions. We
opened a total of 141 pandemic response-related cases, 37 of
which are now closed, resulting in 62 convictions.
In conclusion, I am so very proud of the breadth of our
oversight work, especially given the challenges posed by the
pandemic. Congress is a key stakeholder for us, so we, of
course, always welcome your feedback on risk areas that you see
facing the Board and the CFPB. This concludes my statement and
I would be pleased to respond to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Inspector General Bialek can be
found on page 30 of the appendix.]
Chairman Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Bialek. We appreciate
that.
Mr. Delmar, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD K. DELMAR, ACTING INSPECTOR GENERAL,
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Mr. Delmar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Green,
and members of the subcommittee. I am Rich Delmar, the acting
IG for the Department of the Treasury, and I appreciate the
opportunity to talk about the oversight work that we have done
on the many programs for which Treasury is responsible. I will
also discuss at the end, if I have time_I understand the
committee has an interest in some of the work we are doing with
respect to the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN).
Treasury has responsibilities under all three of the major
pandemic statutes that have passed since 2020, and its
responsibilities have expanded. Because of that, they have been
responsible for dispersing over $650 billion to a large
universe of recipients, governmental organizations, businesses,
and many others. We have oversight responsibility for 12 of
those programs, and I am going to talk about 4 of them today
where we have found concerns about improper payments, instances
of fraud, and costs and internal control concerns. The programs
are the Air Carrier Payroll Support Programs, the original
Coronavirus Relief Fund, the Emergency Rental Assistance
Programs, and the State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds. To put
all of these in context, I want to mention a couple of concepts
that are key to the work we do, and that is the whole concept
of improper payments and fraud, the concept of questioned
costs, and the role of a Treasury bureau, the Bureau of the
Fiscal Service (BFS), and its Do Not Pay Program.
Improper payments are, as it suggests, payments that are
not authorized. They were incorrectly done. It is not the same
thing as fraud. Any incidence of fraud will be, by definition,
an improper payment, but not every improper payment will
constitute fraud. It could be something that happened by
mistake, by accident, by misinterpretation of eligibility, but
in those cases, money that should have gone to authorized
recipients doesn't get there or it goes to unauthorized
recipients. And to the extent that happens, the effectiveness
of the program and the execution of Congress' intent in
creating that program is not met, so that is a key concern.
We have done audit work on Treasury's Improper Payment
Program, and we have determined that at least with respect to
the bureaus other than the IRS, the Department is in compliance
with those rules. BFS' Do Not Pay Program reduces the amount of
improper payments because it is a forum by which people can
find out if a recipient is entitled. It can be made more
effective if it has greater access to all of the relevant
information. We have done some work on that. One of the big
concerns is the access it has to the Social Security
Administration's Master Death File, and there have been some
efforts to improve that. There was actually legislation that
will go into effect later this year which will increase the
availability of that Social Security information to the Do Not
Pay Program.
Moving on to the specific programs for which we have
oversight, the Air Carrier Payroll Support Program_there are
actually three of them, one under each of the statutes_gives
payments to air carriers, passenger and cargo, and affiliated
businesses that were impacted by the decline in air traffic. We
have a mandatory audit requirement for a subset of those
eligible carriers and contractors. Generally, it is the smaller
ones. What we found was that there was a systemic problem in
the amounts that they were paid because of misinterpretation of
the rules, and have addressed those concerns. One of the big
problems is self-certification versus actually going out and
checking.
Under the Coronavirus Relief Program, and the work we did,
we set up a portal by which all the recipients could report
what they had done with the money. And I see I am running out
of time, so let me skip the Emergency Rental Assistance
Program. There are actually a couple of those. We are getting a
lot of complaints about how that works, and we have set up a
specialized team to process those complaints, and get caught up
with the problems that are being reported to us about that. And
we will look at those as appropriate.
Lastly, I just wanted to mention the FinCEN work that we
are doing. We have a series of related audits dealing with how
FinCEN manages its bulk data provision program, and we see
issues with the memorandums of understanding (MOUs). We see
issues with the controls on how that information is used, and
we have a series of reports that are going to be coming out
starting in the spring and throughout the year.
[The prepared statement of Acting Inspector General Delmar
can be found on page 44 of the appendix.]
Chairman Huizenga. I will look forward to that. The
gentleman's time has expired. Ms. Sharek, you are recognized
for 5 minutes for your oral testimony.

STATEMENT OF REBECCA L. SHAREK, DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR
AUDITS, EVALUATIONS, AND SPECIAL PROJECTS, OFFICE OF INSPECTOR
GENERAL, U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)

Ms. Sharek. Chairman Huizenga, Ranking Member Waters,
Ranking Member Green, and members of the subcommittee, thank
you for inviting me to testify about the efforts of the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission Office's of Inspector
General (OIG) to report on the management and performance
challenges at the SEC and some of the OIG's recently completed
audits and evaluations. In my testimony, I am representing the
OIG, and the views I express are those of my office and myself,
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Commission or
any Commissioners.
The core mission of the SEC is to protect investors,
maintain fair, orderly, and efficient markets, and facilitate
capital formation. The OIG is an independent office within the
SEC that conducts audits, evaluations, and investigations of
the SEC's programs and operations to detect and deter fraud,
waste, and abuse, and to promote integrity, efficiency, and
effectiveness. In doing so, the OIG plays a critical role in
helping the SEC achieve its mission.
The OIG Office of Audits, which I manage, provides
essential accountability and transparency, and, where
appropriate, makes recommendations for corrective action. Since
January 2021, the Office of Audits has issued 13 audit and
evaluation reports that made 83 recommendations to SEC
management, all of which were agreed to by management, and more
than half of which are closed as of this date.
Among other things, our recommendations have sought to aid
the Division of Enforcement in improving communication of its
capabilities and resources that may expedite investigations,
help further increase efficiencies in the SEC's Whistleblower
Program, improve strategic planning and performance management
related to the SEC's investor education and outreach, and
further strengthen the SEC's contract management, information
security, Investment Advisor/Investment Company Examination
Program, and the Tips, Complaints, and Referrals Program, and
controls over hiring actions.
The Reports Consolidation Act of 2000 requires OIGs to
identify and report annually on the most-serious management and
performance challenges facing agencies. In deciding whether to
identify an area as a challenge, the SEC OIG considers its
significance in relation to the SEC's mission, its
susceptibility to fraud, waste, and abuse, and the SEC's
progress in addressing the challenge. We provide a draft of
each year's report to SEC officials, and we consider all
comments received when finalizing the report.
Last October, we issued our latest report on management
performance challenges, and we identified four broad areas
where the SEC faces challenges. The first area is meeting
regulatory oversight responsibilities. In this section, our
report described the challenges of managing resources while
meeting the SEC's regulatory agenda, keeping pace with changing
markets and innovations, and leveraging technology and
analytics to meet mission requirements and respond to
significant developments and trends. In part, we discussed
opportunities to further strengthen cross-functional
collaboration and communication during a period of increased
rulemaking activities, and in light of changes in the
workforce, including due to attrition.
The second area, protecting SEC systems and data, noted
opportunities to evaluate and address the underlying causes and
impact of a material weakness related to insufficient user
controls, strengthening the Agency's cybersecurity posture, and
continuing to mature its information security program.
Third, improving contract management is the next challenge
noted in our report. As we described, a growing majority of the
SEC's contract support by dollars obligated is concentrated in
information technology services, and management of information
technology, acquisitions, and operations is recognized as a
high-risk area across the Executive Branch. Additionally, as in
prior years, we reported on the SEC's use of time and material
contracts, noting that such contracts are considered riskier
than fixed-price contracts because contractors bill the
government by the hour and, therefore, may lack incentives for
cost control.
The fourth, and final, challenge discussed in our report is
ensuring human capital management. In this section, we provide
data that demonstrates recent increases in attrition. We also
discussed uncertainties that exist surrounding the plans for
return to office and the potential for expanded telework, as
well as an audit we completed that identified opportunities to
further strengthen controls over the SEC's hiring actions.
In conclusion, the SEC OIG remains committed to examining
important aspects of the SEC's programs and operations. For
example, we are currently assessing controls over public
comments submitted online, and Agency actions taken in response
to a technological error in the public comment process that was
disclosed last year. We look forward to continuing our
cooperative working relationship with SEC management and the
subcommittee. Thank you for the subcommittee's support for our
mission, and for the opportunity to testify. I will be pleased
to answer any questions you have.
[The prepared statement of Deputy Inspector General Sharek
can be found on page 57 of the appendix.]
Chairman Huizenga. Thank you.
We are going to now turn to Member questions, and the Chair
will recognize himself for 5 minutes.
I will note my colleague was going on in his comments about
this focusing only on the Biden Administration. Well, we are 2
years in, halfway through the Biden Administration, so yes, I
will note that Jay Clayton, as head of the SEC, had an active
schedule in front of this committee, under both Republicans and
Democrats as well, while he served until 2020. So I want to
thank our witnesses again, and I am going to jump right into my
questions.
Ms. Sharek, my first question is for you. I am concerned
about transparency at the SEC. The SEC is one of the wealthiest
independent agencies in our Federal Government, based on how it
collects the fines and uses that to fund itself. The Agency has
many employees and resources, yet it appears not to allocate
them to respond to congressional inquiries or requests, or
requests made under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), to
ensure that citizens, and the media, and others can provide a
check on the government and hold the Federal Government
accountable to its statutory duties.
I understand that you worked on the top management
challenges report of 2022. Considering the major workforce
challenges that were highlighted in that report, attrition and
some other things, do you plan to evaluate resource allocation
with respect to the different offices at the Agency,
specifically the General Counsel's Office, who responds to
Congress, and the Office of FOIA services?
Ms. Sharek. Yes, I did work on the Management and
Performance Challenge Report in question. We are beginning the
work to produce this year's report, and we will certainly be
following up on some of the workforce challenges that we
identified. We have not planned an audit specifically of the
allocations of the different offices and divisions, but as we
develop our Fiscal Year 2024 plan, we are certainly interested
in continuing to discuss with you your concerns.
Chairman Huizenga. Consider this a suggestion.
Ms. Sharek. Yes.
Chairman Huizenga. Yes. I think we have seen a tremendous
delay in responses to, frankly, Members on both sides of the
aisle as well as the media and others when it comes to FOIA. As
you know, the committee initiated an investigation into FTX
under the leadership of, at the time, Chair Waters, that has
been continued with Chair McHenry. We also formally requested
an investigation from your office. Will your office commit to
investigating the SEC's role and involvement with FTX?
Ms. Sharek. I am aware of the letter in question and have
participated in some preliminary conversations amongst our
leadership team. I have not been involved in all of those
discussions. In my role of as the head of the Office of Audit,
I think any questions about what our office may or may not do
would probably be best addressed to our acting Inspector
General.
Chairman Huizenga. At a different time?
Ms. Sharek. I am sure our office can reach out to you and
your staff. I am not prepared, in my role as the head of the
Office of Audit, to speak for our acting Inspector General.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. My next question is for you, Mr.
Delmar. Standing up the Emergency Rental Assistance (ERA)
Program was particularly challenging, no doubt. Complaints
about those programs are not new and continue to come through
as ERA2 funds continue through 2027. Mr. Delmar, is it true
that your office has received thousands of pandemic-related
complaints through your hotline, with most of them related to
the ERA?
Mr. Delmar. Yes, sir. We have on the order of over 2,000 at
this point. It grows by the day, and that is why we have set up
the cross-functional team to specifically work on processing
those.
Chairman Huizenga. Why is that? Why do you speculate? What
are you hearing from the folks who are registering these
complaints?
Mr. Delmar. I think it is probably fair to say that it is
more of a retail distribution operation, just more
opportunities for people to see either real or perceived
inequities, or people getting the funds that, for whatever
reason, should not. And what we have to do is isolate those
things, and if that is something that we can look at, we will.
If it is something that somebody else ought to be looking at,
we will do our best to refer it to where it should go.
Chairman Huizenga. Mr. Bialek, I have just a few minutes
left. You oversee a very busy CFPB. In the Board's OIG work
plan, there is a plan to, ``review the Board's approach to
climate risk supervision at financial institutions within the
first quarter of 2023.'' My concern is that the Fed may be
acting outside of the supervisory role when it comes to climate
policies. Can you tell me more about the goal of this review,
as well as the status of the review, and what Board activity
has encouraged your office to add this to your work plan? I am
going to let you answer very quickly, and then I am going to
submit a couple of other questions to you in writing.
Mr. Bialek. Certainly. We do have a team looking at climate
risk issues in the supervision arena. They are going to be
drafting a White Paper that will be setting forth the
activities of the Board as it looks at establishing and
implementing a climate risk activity and initiative. We are
going to compare that to other agencies, and departments, and
central banks to see and check their missions and their
authorities to see how that compares to the Board's efforts,
and maybe have some best practices laid out so we can put the
pieces of the puzzle together as the Board continues to pursue
this matter.
Chairman Huizenga. My time has expired, so we are going to
have to continue this later, and maybe one of my colleagues can
pick that up.
Mr. Bialek. Okay.
Chairman Huizenga. I appreciate it. At the request of the
ranking member, we are going to go to the gentleman from
Nevada, Mr. Horsford, next.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and to the
ranking member for holding this necessary hearing. And thank
you to our Inspectors General for appearing before the
subcommittee today. There can be no doubt that it is necessary
at times to take a step back and retrospectively analyze the
efficacy of our work, both here in Congress as well as the
Administration's implementation of the laws that we passed. I
want to say that I am proud of the votes that I took to deliver
for the American people during the hardest days of the
pandemic, and I don't need to remind my colleagues of the depth
of the pain that all of our constituents felt at times.
However, despite the challenging circumstances we found
ourselves in, we were able to deliver relief to families and
the small businesses who are struggling to simply keep their
heads above water. We were able to ensure 6.5 million working
families could keep a roof over their heads with the emergency
rental assistance that we provided. We were able to protect the
payrolls of small businesses across the country with the
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) so that they could keep their
doors open and keep approximately 90 million people on the
payroll. When State and local governments faced historic
shortfalls, we were able to make them whole and to preserve the
services that our constituents rely on every day. That includes
public safety, healthcare workers, first responders, police,
and fire, all that are essential to our quality of life.
So, I am happy to take a look back at the challenges that
we faced as long as we, as you said, Mr. Chairman, keep in mind
that there were successes, and I hope that we don't forget
that. These programs were vital lifelines to Americans at a
time when uncertainty and fear dominated their lives. And I
want to commend my colleagues for following up on our efforts
from the last Congress and taking time today to ensure that
these programs are working as Congress intended. Of course,
there are lessons to be learned, and I am eager to be educated
on how we can better prepare for whatever may come next.
Now, I have been sounding the alarm for years on the
fraudsters and the thieves who have been ripping off American
taxpayers and blocking honest applicants from accessing the
support they need. When we saw issues with the unemployment
insurance system, I introduced the Guaranteeing Unemployment
Assistance and Reducing Deception (GUARD) Act to guarantee our
State unemployment insurance programs can fight back against
these literal criminal cartels, most of whom are foreign. No
individual should be allowed to take advantage of individuals
desperately in need of these emergency benefits. It should be
no different in the programs overseen by our witnesses today.
These criminals should and will be held accountable, but in
order to do so, we must have accurate data on the funds that
were dispersed.
Mr. Delmar, I understand that multiple programs under
Treasury's jurisdiction, including the Emergency Rental
Assistance Program, have had various reporting and compliance
delays that have impeded monitoring and audit activities. Would
you please speak to how these delays may inhibit the
Department's ability to identify and eliminate fraud?
Mr. Delmar. Generally speaking, Congressman, a lot of the
problem was delays by the Department in setting up how the
programs were actually going to be operated, and putting
together the guidance so that people who were applying had a
clearer idea of what was eligible and what was not. The
combination of delays in standing up the program, having the
guidance, and being able to get the reports input, just means
that you have less of a thorough view of what is going on. And
anytime there is a lack of guidance, the opportunities for
ineligibles to get benefited increases.
Mr. Horsford. Okay. I am going to follow up with this last
question. I would like to ask you to respond in writing. I am
concerned about the implementation of the community development
financial institutions (CDFIs) and the minority depository
institutions (MDIs), and the funds that we need to ensure are
getting to the marginalized and underserved communities. Could
you please respond in writing to the question that I will
submit for the record? And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman yields back. With that, we
are going to the gentlewoman from Missouri, the former Chair of
this subcommittee and former ranking member, as well, Mrs.
Wagner, who is also the Chair of our Subcommittee on Capital
Markets. She is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Chairman Huizenga. Ms. Sharek, the
SEC Inspector General's report on the SEC's management and
performance challenges from last October_I know you were the
first IG and you worked on this particular report. I think it
was released under a second IG, but I know that you were
working on it as you were the first one appointed as acting.
And it highlights the concerns of many managers across the SEC
about increased risks, specifically, and difficulties managing
mission-related work. The report is very clear that these
concerns are driven by the, ``increase in the SEC's rulemaking
activities that are being rushed with shortened timelines
during the drafting process.'' That is taken directly from the
report.
The Inspector General is not only the only one urging the
SEC to slow down. Last April, several members of this
subcommittee joined a group of 47 bipartisan Members in a
letter to Chair Gensler asking for longer comment periods,
particularly for significant rulemakings, and on September
12th, Democratic Senators sent a similar letter. Yet, since the
IG report was released, the SEC has not_underscore, ``not''_
reduced its quantity or slowed down its speed of rulemaking. By
the end of 2022, the SEC had introduced 34 new rule proposals,
an increase of 143 percent compared to the annual average over
the preceding 5 years of 14 proposals. The October report made
it clear that the volume and pace of rulemaking under Chair
Gensler are threatening what the Inspector General exists to
promote, and this is what you worked on and helped draft, ``the
integrity, efficiency, and effectiveness of the critical
programs and operations of the SEC.''
Ms. Sharek, with such short comment periods, are managers
concerned that the Commission is not getting the data they need
from all stakeholders?
Ms. Sharek. Some of the folks that we met with and some of
the rulemaking divisions did express that there may be some
increased risk there. And we felt, given the role of the
individuals that we met with and their experience, that it
warranted inclusion in the major management performance
challenges.
Mrs. Wagner. Increased risk? I agree. What other tools does
the Inspector General have to address the management problems
stemming from the SEC's regulatory agenda?
Ms. Sharek. Certainly, we will revisit these issues, and we
are starting to work on and gather our staff together. This
month was typically when we will begin efforts to draft this
year's report, so we will be following up on each of the issues
that we addressed. And certainly, we have audits and
evaluations that my office performs, and investigations from
the Office of Investigations as well.
Mrs. Wagner. Can you please provide additional details on
these risks that are being created by the mission-related work
that is being neglected because of the increase in rulemaking
activities, as well as the causes and impacts of the,
``coordination and communication challenges in the rulemaking
process,'' particularly given potential overlaps in
jurisdiction and differences in opinions?
Ms. Sharek. I don't have any specific risks to any specific
activity that I can offer to you. The conversations that we had
with knowledgeable individuals were broad. They broadly
described, as you mentioned, the volume and the urgency, so I
don't have anything more specific.
Mrs. Wagner. It did say, though, that mission-related work
was being neglected. Is that correct?
Ms. Sharek. I don't know that we used the word,
``neglect.''
Mrs. Wagner. Yes, you said mission-related work that was
causing risks.
Ms. Sharek. Generally, as I said, we did not have any
specific details that were provided to us.
Mrs. Wagner. Do you anticipate that the IG will be
following up on these issues, given that they impact the
Commission's ability to meet its mission, including protecting
investors?
Ms. Sharek. That the IGs office will follow up? Yes,
absolutely.
Mrs. Wagner. Great. Thank you. And, Mr. Chairman, before I
yield back, I would submit to the record the fact that
Secretary Gensler has not appointed a permanent IG after over 2
years in the job. I would like it entered in the record that
what he is doing is putting in a new acting IG every 180 days.
I think this is a way to thwart Congress and our oversight, so
that we can't actually talk to an IG who is permanent.
Chairman Huizenga. Yes.
Mrs. Wagner. I would like that to be placed in the record.
Thank you.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlelady's time has expired. That
has been noted, and the letter requesting that Chair Gensler
appoint a permanent IG has been sent as well.
With that, the Chair now recognizes the ranking member of
the Full Committee, the gentlewoman from California, Ms.
Waters, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. I have been trying to
quickly understand the role and responsibility of all of the
Inspectors General related to the CARES Act and the American
Rescue Plan. I want to know if you were involved at all with
the Defense Production Act, any of you, in planning or in
management concerns, anything about the Defense Production Act,
please. Each of you, please, yes or no?
Ms. Sharek. No, ma'am.
Ms. Waters. No?
Ms. Sharek. No.
Ms. Waters. No?
Mr. Delmar. No, ma'am.
Ms. Waters. No?
Mr. Bialek. No.
Ms. Waters. How were you involved with the PPP program? Do
any of you know anything about the PPP program?
Mr. Bialek. It is not within Treasury OIG's oversight
jurisdiction.
Ms. Waters. But you had the responsibility for basically
planning, as I understand, what were you planning. I am reading
your description of what you had the responsibility for.
Mr. Delmar. Our oversight responsibilities are for the
original Coronavirus Relief Fund, the Emergency Rental
Assistance Programs, the Air Carrier Programs, the State and
Local Fiscal Recovery Funds, the CDFI Rapid Response Program,
the Emergency Capital Improvement Program, the Community
Emergency Response Team (CERT) Program, which deals with other
transportation entities, and an extension of the old State
Small Business Credit Initiative (SSBCI) Program.
Ms. Waters. So, you are not familiar with PPP and all of
what happened in the first year of the PPP program under Trump,
when the big companies and corporations were in the panels
created by the banks as their concierge clients? They got
funded, and some of them even felt guilty and gave the money
back. Are you familiar with that?
Mr. Delmar. I would like to add to what I said previously.
Through our involvement in the PPP program, we have helped,
along with many other IGs, including the the Small Business
Administration (SBA) OIG, and the Pandemic Response
Accountability Committee (PRAC), in conducting investigations
into abuses in the PPP program.
Ms. Waters. Okay. Was this during the first year of the PPP
program?
Mr. Delmar. That we got involved?
Ms. Waters. That you got involved, that you were involved
in helping the SBA.
Mr. Delmar. I don't recall exactly when we and other IGs
were recruited to help the SBA OIG, but pretty early on, yes,
ma'am.
Ms. Waters. Okay. Were you responsible for helping to
identify these major corporations who got PPP money that the
PPP program was not intended to give money to? Are you familiar
with that?
Mr. Delmar. I am certainly familiar with it, but we don't
have primary responsibility for that. We have been, as I said,
with other IGs, helping the SBA OIG, which has a tremendous_
Ms. Waters. Do you know who was responsible? Who is
responsible for looking at fraud, waste, and abuse in PPP?
Mr. Delmar. The SBA OIG and the PRAC are involved in that
as well.
Ms. Waters. So, you worked with the SBA OIG, but had
nothing to do with PPP?
Mr. Delmar. Each IG is independent, ma'am, and we help each
other, as I said.
Ms. Waters. Well, when you help each other, do you talk to
each other?
Mr. Delmar. Yes, we do.
Ms. Waters. So, did you all talk about PPP and what was
going on?
Mr. Delmar. Sure. In the PRAC, and in the Council of
Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency, it is a big
issue, and it was one of the ones that was so big that more
than just Inspector General Ware's shop at SBA OIG got involved
in it. It was to help him carry out his responsibilities as the
person responsible for oversight of the SBA.
Ms. Waters. So, while we are looking at fraud, waste, and
abuse, and the way that you have described what your
responsibility was, can you say that in an investigation, part
of your responsibility was to discover or find or investigate
fraud, waste, and abuse in anything that you were doing?
Mr. Delmar. I'm sorry, ma'am, I didn't hear the end of
that. Could you repeat it?
Ms. Waters. Did you have the responsibility for
investigating fraud, waste, and abuse in any of your
responsibilities?
Mr. Delmar. Yes. Under the IG Act, each IG is responsible
for looking at fraud and waste in the programs and operations
of that department, which, in the case of my office, would be
Treasury programs, except not the IRS, and not the Troubled
Assets Relief Program (TARP).
Ms. Waters. Did you find_
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlelady yields back. With that,
the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Rose,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Huizenga and Ranking Member
Green, for holding this hearing, and thanks to our witnesses
for taking the time to be here today and for your insights.
I want to start with Deputy IG Sharek. Your report shows
that Chair Gensler's aggressive rulemaking agenda has been
limiting the time available for staff research and analysis,
which could potentially make cost-benefit analysis
exponentially more difficult and less accurate. Almost every
one of his 60-plus rulemakings, including on private funds,
dealer definitions, Form PF, equity, market structure, climate
disclosures, and now the custody proposal, has significant
consequences for the numerous industries targeted by these
rules.
So, Deputy IG Sharek, is it true that the report found that
each of the major rulemaking divisions at the Commission has
stated that they do not have enough time to properly write all
of these rules?
Ms. Sharek. No, I cannot support that statement. We
certainly collected information that there is a challenge, an
ongoing challenge, again, related to the folks that we met with
who shared that in certain cases, the volume and the urgency of
the rulemaking activity is presenting a challenge. We didn't
speak to them about specific rules or the substance of specific
rules. It was more geared towards the workload and the
challenge that it was presenting to the managers with whom we
met.
Mr. Rose. Is it true that they had to pull one rule back
and reopen the comment period because there was a failure to
properly catalogue all of the comments that had been submitted?
Ms. Sharek. I am not sure which rule you are referring to;
they reopened the comment period for a number of rules that
related to a technological error that was publicly disclosed,
so I am aware of that. I am not sure if that is the rule to
which you are referring.
Mr. Rose. Would you surmise that that technological error,
the failure to observe that might have been a result of the
rushed or frantic pace of rulemaking?
Ms. Sharek. My office is looking into the technological
error, and we plan to hopefully be able to provide a public
report on that by the end of this month. So, I don't want to
get out ahead of the work that is still ongoing, but I think we
will have an answer to that question as soon as our work
concludes.
Mr. Rose. We look forward to hearing that answer. Secondly,
Deputy IG Sharek, is it true that the Division of Economic and
Risk Analysis has warned that they do not have enough time to
conduct proper cost-benefit analysis for all of these rules?
Ms. Sharek. I am not aware of that specific warning.
Mr. Rose. Has the Agency shown any attempt or awareness
with regard to perhaps slowing down or reassessing the process
based on the IGs recommendations? In other words, do they seem
to be listening to the report that you have put forward?
Ms. Sharek. As has already been stated in this hearing, the
numbers continued to increase throughout the remainder of last
year. We will certainly continue engaging with the Agency to
determine what they may have done with respect to our
management performance challenge, unlike an audit report where
we have an actionable recommendation that we ask them to
respond to, and then we assess their performance. This report
was informational to them to take further action deemed
necessary, so, again, we will be continuing to follow up to see
exactly what they may have done.
Mr. Rose. Sounds sort of like a, ``damn the torpedoes, full
speed ahead,'' policy there.
IG Bialek, earlier this morning, I asked Chair Powell about
the Fed's oversight of the CFPB budget request, and he told me
that you would have the answer, so I hope that you have the
answer, or I guess I will have to go back to him. The question
is, does the Federal Reserve Board perform any due diligence of
the CFPB's claims about its budget or any verification of the
budget requests and whether they comply with the statute?
Mr. Bialek. Congressman, we conducted a review actually
based on a request from Congressman Barr back in 2019, I
believe it was. We issued a report in 2019 where we looked at
exactly what the legal responsibilities were of the Board and
the Bureau when it comes to processing requests from the
Bureau, the CFPB, for their quarterly budget. We looked at both
the CFPB's responsibilities to provide information to the
Board, and we looked at the Board's responsibilities under the
law for what it is they were required to do in processing those
requests. We determined that they both abided by those
statutory requirements that were in the Dodd-Frank Act for that
purpose. We did find there was some failure to report to
Congress some information about those budget requests, I think,
for 2 or 3 years. They fixed that and started reporting them as
they were required to do, but other than that, they both were
upholding their legal responsibilities on the statute.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired. The
Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Garcia,
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
of the witnesses who are joining us today.
Before I get to my questions, I would like to just point
out as a point of personal privilege that this title is just
really a misnomer and a misrepresentation of the insensible
pandemic and economic relief dollars that the Biden
Administration has provided to the American public: ``wasteful
spending.'' It really was about saving lives, and that is what
we should really be looking at. In Texas alone, $3.3 billion
helped nearly 736,000 households pay their rent, and PPP
funding helped over 209,000 businesses in Houston alone while a
deadly pandemic ravaged our nation.
With that context, I also want to remind everyone that all
of these programs were passed and signed somewhere between
April and May of 2020, and our President was not inaugurated
until January 20, 2021. So, in fact, most of these programs
were signed into law by the former twice-impeached President,
and, more importantly, they were implemented by him. I remember
more than one occasion when we had Treasury Secretary Mnuchin
talking about the PPP program. We had HUD Secretary Carson
talking about the housing assistance. So, this whole misnomer,
misinformation that it is all President Biden and all his
fault, frankly, is just what we would call in Texas, well, I
bet I shouldn't say that word; I will just say, ``bunk.'' It is
just bunk.
Mr. Delmar, I am going to start with you. I am just trying,
frankly, to get my head around, what is it you really do? You
first said in response to one of my colleague's questions that
you really didn't have any authority or do anything with the
PPP program, but then, when the ranking member of our committee
asked you a question, you said, well, yes, we do because we
went in there and helped. So, did you or did you not work on
anything having to do with the PPP program, and do you agree
with me that when you say that there was a problem with setting
it up, it wasn't President Biden who set it up. That was set up
back when it first got passed in the year before.
Mr. Delmar. Let me clarify, Congresswoman.
Ms. Garcia. Please do.
Mr. Delmar. Okay. We do not have primary oversight.
Ms. Garcia. Oh, I understand the word, ``primary,'' sir,
but you later said that you did, because you went in there to
help the SBA OIG.
Mr. Delmar. We, along with_
Ms. Garcia. Did you or did you not review or audit any PPP
loans?
Mr. Delmar. No, we were assisting more on the investigative
side of individual cases involving instances of PPP fraud.
Ms. Garcia. So, you did look at cases involving PPP fraud.
Do you recall if those cases were before or after January 2021?
Mr. Delmar. I don't recall when our assistance started.
Ms. Garcia. No, I mean when the cases were involving loans
between January 2021, before or after.
Mr. Delmar. I can get you an answer for that, ma'am. I
don't want to give you incomplete or erroneous information now,
so I will have to check our records.
Ms. Garcia. Okay. So, you are not familiar with any fraud
or abuse of any of the PPP loans at all?
Mr. Delmar. Not in specific detail of specific cases. I can
tell you generally.
Ms. Garcia. I don't want specifics. I just want to know
whether you did or you didn't do any of it, because you are
here testifying, and I am trying to figure out who is supposed
to talk about these things.
Mr. Delmar. Okay.
Ms. Garcia. But that is okay, sir.
I will move on to Ms. Sharek. Ms. Sharek, two management
challenges identified in the SEC OIG October 22nd memo are
mentioned as being managing resources while meeting the
regulatory agenda, and implementing a program to effectively
retain and recruit qualified staff to replace personnel loss
due to attrition. Is it the case that the SEC OIG reviews and
audits have established that there is a causal relationship
between these two?
Ms. Sharek. No.
Ms. Garcia. There is not, or does this report state that
the SEC faces two separate problems_an increased regulatory
workload, and an increase in loss of personnel_that combined,
increase the management and performance challenges confronting
the SEC?
Ms. Sharek. It is true. We did not establish a causal
relationship between those. We didn't attempt to, and we did
not. Our view, as expressed in the report, is that there were
two things occurring at the same time. There may be a
relationship. We didn't look at that. We will review that in
our Fiscal Year 2023 work, but we did not establish a causal
relationship.
Ms. Garcia. So, you did not. You just see it as two
separate problems?
Ms. Sharek. Yes.
Ms. Garcia. Okay. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Ogles, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Ogles. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses.
Mr. Delmar, I would like to address some troubling
information regarding the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
(FinCEN). FinCEN is the primary regulator of the Bank Secrecy
Act and is charged with maintaining government-wide data, and
your written testimony, based on audits from your office,
highlights significant concerns with four aspects of FinCEN:
suppression; user access; MOUs; and monitoring. Regarding
suppression processes, are the processes being used by FinCEN
sufficient to protect data?
Mr. Delmar. Not completely, sir. With many other
situations, there isn't the regime of internal controls and
follow-up that would be ideal, and that is, as I said, in one
of our reports which will be issued later this year. We will
address the specifics of that.
Mr. Ogles. Okay. We don't have enough time to go into the
details, but any recommendations that you or our other
witnesses might have to improve suppression processes, if you
could submit those to the committee, I think that would be
ideal. Mr. Chairman, I do believe you had a couple of
additional questions, so I yield to you the balance of my time,
sir.
Chairman Huizenga. Thank you. I appreciate that. Mr.
Bialek, at the very end of my questioning, you were starting to
say something. We were kind of on a roll about the Fed's Pilot
Climate Analysis Program. Does your office intend to review the
nature of this?
Mr. Bialek. What we are doing is we are reviewing the
Board's process as it exists today to develop and eventually
presumably implement some activity regarding climate risks. We
will be laying out in our White Paper what those activities
are, what progress there has been, and how they have gone about
doing it. And I think I was mentioning that we are going to be
doing some benchmarking with other departments, and agencies,
and central banks, and comparing what others have done in the
space to what the Board has done, and make any kind of key
considerations available to the Board as they continue to
pursue this.
I don't want to pre-judge or predetermine the outcome of
that White Paper because it is in process right now, but that
is the game plan. And I will say we decided to do this White
Paper because obviously, this is a hot-button, controversial
topic. We thought we are uniquely positioned to be able to kind
of lay out the status of it, put the pieces of the puzzle
together to explain to the public. It will be a public report
about what has been going on and what the game plan is, and
then also position ourselves to possibly do some further audit
or evaluation work in this space depending on how that program
evolves.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. Very quickly, in the remaining
time, because I need to get to Ms. Sharek as well, you are
aware of the ongoing current case pending before the Supreme
Court regarding the funding mechanisms for the CFPB. I noticed
in your most recent Inspector General report on management
challenges that they are even looking into the potential impact
on the Court's decision as to constitutionality, and they
aren't even subject to the lawsuit. Is your office looking into
this as well, and if so, what steps have you taken?
Mr. Bialek. Because the matter is going to be presented and
will be pending before the Supreme Court, we have not gone
ahead and done any assessment of the potential impact of a
decision from the Supreme Court on the CFPB's funding because
it depends a lot on the rationale, obviously which way they
decide, but also on the rationale for any decision.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay.
Mr. Bialek. Once we have that, we will be in a better
position to make that assessment.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. You might want to start thinking
about it.
Ms. Sharek, last week, we learned that SEC employees will
officially return to the office at the end of the month.
According to reports, they will be required to be in the office
2 days per pay period. That is twice a month as per the pay
period, so basically an average of 1 day a week. We also know
that the SEC plans to move into a new 1.2-million-square-foot
headquarters in Washington, D.C., which can accommodate 4,500
employees at one time. Given these new developments, will your
office be reviewing the SEC's lease agreement as part of your
audit plan?
Ms. Sharek. We will certainly take that into consideration.
We did not have that on our plan, but I take your point.
Chairman Huizenga. It would seem, having a background in
real estate and construction, that that is very valuable real
estate in downtown D.C., and there is going to be a pretty
penny paid, and if we aren't even filling that with the
employees, that is a problem.
The gentlewoman from Georgia, Ms. Williams, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to all of the witnesses who are here with us today. The
programs that the institutions represented here today oversee,
audit, and investigate, supported Americans in every
congressional district, including people of color, working
families, and many minority business owners during the
pandemic. Congressional Democrats, putting people over
politics, created these lifesaving programs that were critical
to uplifting communities and supporting the most marginalized.
As we continue to move towards a strong recovery, we need to
keep a watchful eye on these programs to make sure that they
are supporting the people that they were intended to support.
The resources that these programs offered put children back in
school, kept businesses open, kept people employed, and kept
families in their homes.
We have all seen the data that shows how communities of
color were disproportionately impacted by the pandemic, leading
to a greater need for resources. My hometown of Atlanta,
unfortunately, felt this more severely than any other city in
America, as we lead the nation in the racial wealth gap. Under
Democratic leadership, this committee strongly supported CDFIs
and MDIs, recognizing the importance of diverse and mission-
driven community financial institutions for marginalized
communities. In recent years, the number of CDFIs in Atlanta
and across Georgia have multiplied rapidly, offering a lifeline
for many business owners, homeowners, and others seeking
capital in our communities.
But we have heard concerns that some firms were receiving
certifications but were not truly focused on providing
financial access to underserved communities. In response, the
CDFI Fund took steps to overhaul the certification process. We
can't allow firms to receive assistance meant for true CDFIs if
they are not going to do the work.
Mr. Delmar, your office is overseeing these efforts. What
are your office's plans to examine CDFI and MDI programs that
are intended to strengthen these institutions and ensure that
funds are going to underserved communities, including
communities of color, that traditional financial institutions
often ignore?
Mr. Delmar. We have a number of audits that have either
been accomplished or are underway. We have specific
responsibility for looking at the CDFI Rapid Response Program,
and we are certainly open to additional targeted work. After
this hearing, I can send you a fuller description of the work
that we have done and are doing. You are one of our
stakeholders, so if you have particular concerns that you think
warrant our review, we want to take that into account, and to
the extent that we have the bandwidth to do it, we can.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Delmar.
Also, your office oversees the State Small Business Credit
Initiative (SSBCI), which Congress renewed and expanded in the
American Jobs Recovery Act in 2020. This committee sought to
ensure that the sole proprietors and other small businesses had
access to the technical assistance they needed to apply for
SSBCI and other forms of loans and investments, allowing them
to use that financing to grow their businesses. Georgia uses
SSBCI funds to support five crucial programs for startups and
other small businesses, but I am concerned that this capital is
not reaching the business owners who need it the most.
Mr. Delmar, how does your office plan to examine Treasury
and the jurisdictions receiving funds to guarantee that SSBCI
is administered consistent with congressional intent to ensure
that the smallest and most-underserved small businesses get the
support and financing they need? And can you provide any
insight on how States have worked to ensure that SSBCI
financing reaches marginalized communities?
Mr. Delmar. As a baseline, certainly our oversight of any
of these programs is to make sure that they are actually
executing what Congress' intent was in the organic legislation.
Again, as I said in response to your last question, if you will
give me the opportunity to pull together some information on
what we have done and what we expect to be doing, and again,
any input that you or any other member of the committee has on
specific concerns, we will take that into account.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you. I will look forward to
that follow-up.
Also, during the pandemic, the Fed stood up the Main Street
Lending Program to provide support for midsized companies that
may not have qualified for PPP loans, even though there is
still demand for small businesses to get medium- to longer-term
financing once their PPP funds ran dry. As you may recall,
Chairwoman Waters and others repeatedly asked the Fed to modify
the qualifications to remove unnecessary barriers to access for
small businesses.
Mr. Bialek, what has your office found when looking at how
a similar program could be better-designed to ensure that
smaller businesses have access to financing in future
emergencies? And you might have to send me this in writing,
since I am out of time.
Mr. Bialek. I would be happy to.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you so much. I yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Huizenga. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Meuser, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you very much to our witnesses for being here.
Ms. Sharek, as the Deputy Inspector General at the SEC,
would the SEC enforce ESG mandates which require investment
banks or banks to renege on their fiduciary responsibility to
their investors?
Ms. Sharek. That is not an issue that my office has
reviewed, so unfortunately, I cannot answer that question.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. Can we follow up on it? Thank you.
Ms. Sharek. Yes.
Mr. Meuser. Also, Ms. Sharek, in the February 15th report
from the Office of Audits about the timeliness of enforcement
actions, the report found that timeliness had improved from
2016 to 2021. It is a little concerning related to special
purpose acquisition companies (SPACs) because I am hearing from
many retail investors and special purpose acquisition companies
that they are very concerned with the length of time that their
investments are being held in limbo because of prolonged SEC
enforcement actions. It has been reported to me that the SEC
barely communicates, but does not communicate at all about the
status of this enforcement. Has your office conducted any
audits related to the SEC's treatment of SPACs?
Ms. Sharek. No, we have not.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. Is that something we can provide you
information on and perhaps you could?
Ms. Sharek. Yes, we would be happy to discuss your concerns
with you.
Mr. Meuser. Great. And again, I am receiving information
that the approval process at the SEC has taken quite a bit
longer for this than the average case. And in many cases, the
SEC deals with many high-profile deals, which we hear about,
including those that may have a political partisan-ness to them
and are somewhat subjective and/or controversial. Are you aware
of any unusually-lengthy applications under the review and
communications that are currently pending before the SEC?
Ms. Sharek. No, I don't have the information on those
issues.
Mr. Meuser. I see. Okay. Well, there is data from industry
groups specialized in the S-4 filing process. They have
reported that the average time for the SEC to process this form
was 82 days in 2020, and up to 134 days last year. Yet, I have
reports that there is one particular case in which the SEC has
not made a determination for over 500 days, with no
explanation. Can you try to explain that?
Ms. Sharek. Again, these are not issues that my office has
reviewed, but we would be happy to get back with you on any
information that we may have in other components of our office.
It is just not something that I am prepared to speak on today.
Mr. Meuser. Sure.
Ms. Sharek. My office hasn't looked at those issues.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. So, we can submit to your office this
specific case and ask for you to conduct an oversight and
response?
Ms. Sharek. Again, yes. That is not something that my
office has looked at, so I don't have any information.
Mr. Meuser. Okay.
Ms. Sharek. We are happy to continue discussing with you
and your staff what your concerns are, and if there is a way
that we can produce some meaningful work in that area, we will
take that into consideration.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. I am going to yield to my colleague, Mr.
Ogles, my remaining minute-and-a-half.
Mr. Ogles. Mr. Delmar, in 2018, the BPI conducted a
comprehensive study to help determine if the resources that
banks put towards anti-money laundering compliance were
providing law enforcement with useful data. BPI found that
participating banks meant roughly $2.4 billion and employed
roughly 14,000 individuals for AML regulatory compliance.
Despite those high costs, BPI found that only 4 percent of
suspicious activity reports and 0.44 percent of currency
transactions warranted law enforcement follow-up. FinCEN has
about 470 memorandums of understanding with law enforcement and
intelligence components. Once an agency has been approved, what
are the issues that you see with MOUs and continued compliance,
and, of course, the financial burdens therein?
Mr. Delmar. The issues we see specifically with the MOUs is
that many of them are very, very old. They need to be updated.
It needs to be clear what the actual rights and
responsibilities are of the participants in the MOUs. Overall,
sir, the problem is that FinCEN doesn't have as much control
over what gets done with the BSA information once it is
distributed, what further uses it gets put to. And that is the
nature of the findings that we have put together, that we have
shared with FinCEN management, and that will be coming out in
the reports later this year.
Mr. Ogles. Thank you, Mr. Delmar. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired. At
this time, the ranking member of the subcommittee, the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the witnesses
for appearing today, and I would like to, if I may, take a
moment to talk just a bit about what occurred with the
pandemic. In 2022, we surpassed 1 million deaths to the
pandemic. I traversed the streets in Houston, Texas. There were
very few vehicles on the street. Businesses were closed, not
all, but a good many. People were concerned about paying the
rent. They were concerned about paying their mortgages. People
were afraid. It was a pandemic, a global shutdown.
My assumption is that you are not here today to tell us
that we shouldn't have provided money directly to people to
assist with rent, and mortgages, and food on the table, and
keeping their homes, and avoiding eviction. You are not here to
tell us that we shouldn't have done that, are you? If you are
here to tell us this, raise your hand.
[No response.]
Mr. Green. Let the record reflect that no hands are up. You
are not here to tell us that we shouldn't have spent some
$792.6 billion to support small businesses, are you? If so
raise your hand.
[No response.]
Mr. Green. Let the record reflect that no one has raised a
hand. And surely, you are not here to tell us that we should
not have spent the $29.6 billion in emergency rental
assistance, assisting 6.5 million households, keeping people in
their homes, with a roof over their heads. You are not here to
tell us that we shouldn't have done that, are you?
[No response.]
Mr. Green. My suspicion is that the pandemic was something
that we had to fight by spending money. I say, my suspicion,
but it is a fact. We did. We spent $47.8 billion testing,
performing contact tracing, and mitigation. You are not here to
tell us that that was a bad idea, are you? If so, raise your
hand.
[No response.]
Mr. Green. Let the record reflect that no one has raised a
hand. Here is my point. I am not going to allow the perfect to
become the enemy of the good. There were many good things done,
many good things, and many of us have been criticized, as
Democrats, for doing these good things to protect the American
people when we had a global pandemic. How on earth could we
have had the people of this country believe that their
government was doing what it was supposed to do without
providing assistance? People expect the government to step in
and be of assistance when they can't work because we told them
not to go to work, when they couldn't pay the mortgage payments
because we required that they stay home. This is what people
expect from the government, that we will do these things. So, I
am exceedingly proud of the way my Democratic colleagues and I
were the adults in the room and decided that we would do what
was right for the American people.
Yes, there were some mistakes made along the way, but if
you are going to talk about mistakes made along the way and you
are going to develop best practices, you ought to look at the
entirety of the picture and all of the mistakes if you are
going to have best practices, and that is what we should look
for here in Congress. So, I thank you for appearing, and I
yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from West Virginia, Mr. Mooney, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Mooney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Bialek, your
office has no small task. You oversee two independent agencies,
the Federal Reserve and the CFPB. Typically, I understand your
time is split 60-40 in favor of the Federal Reserve, but most
recently, maybe more like 70-30, following the pandemic lending
programs that were mentioned. The CFPB, however, has a unique,
and frankly, I believe, unconstitutional funding structure,
taking funds from the Federal Reserve rather than through the
annual appropriations process from Congress. This insulates the
CFPB from, really, congressional oversight.
In Fiscal Year 2022, the CFPB requested $642 million from
the Federal Reserve for operating expenses, a record high, yet
the CFPB's unobligated funds or leftover funds have only
increased over the past several years, more than doubling from
2018, now $228 million. In fact, the only time the CFPB spent
down any of its unobligated funds was under Acting Director
Mick Mulvaney, who wisely decided to use those funds instead of
requesting more when it was not needed.
So, Mr. Bialek, can you explain why the CFPB keeps
requesting record transfers from the Federal Reserve, while the
amount of leftover funds continues to grow?
Mr. Bialek. We haven't done a deep dive into, for example,
financial statement analysis of how they handle their funds. If
there are some concerns about them having violated any
statutory provision or regulation, that is something we would
be interested in hearing about, and we would follow up on.
Mr. Mooney. Okay. Thank you. I would encourage you to look
into that. Now, let us turn to some kind of a slush fund or a
witch hunt organization under Director Chopra, and let us,
frankly, hope that the Supreme Court does the right thing by
concluding that their funding structure is unconstitutional,
and we can bring real accountability through Congress to that
Bureau as well. But, Mr. Bialek, 20 agencies with similar or
smaller operating budgets than the CFPB have a dedicated
Inspector General for each agency, not shared with other
agencies, so I would like some assurance, how are you ensuring
that the CFPB has proper oversight?
Mr. Bialek. We take a look at our management challenges
that we have identified for the CFPB, and we look at kind of a
risk analysis of the programs and operations of the CFPB. We
look at financial risk, we look at reputational risk,
operational risk, and match that with the management challenges
that we have already determined are the areas which, if they
don't satisfactorily address them, they are in jeopardy of not
being able to successfully carry out their mission.
We will be adding more work to our CFPB work plan in terms
of audits and evaluations now that we see the pandemic work
lessening, and I fully suspect that the ratio between the work
we do with the Board and the Bureau will come closer to the
same percentage. As always, I encourage any member of this
subcommittee to get ahold of us and let us know if there are
some risk areas as you see them that we should take into
consideration as we do our work plan for the coming year. We
would welcome those conversations.
Mr. Mooney. Okay. Great. Thank you for that response, and
you might be hearing from me on some specifics. My last
question would be, let me first say the CFPB, in my opinion,
has rightfully been criticized, based on our first discussion,
about going outside their rulemaking, outside their authority.
They have rightfully been criticized for regulating through
press releases, blog posts, and changes to its examination
manual, clearly violating the CFPB statutory authority, and
notice-and-comment requirements for rulemaking. So, is your
office reviewing how the CFPB is using every possible avenue to
circumvent the traditional rulemaking process?
Mr. Bialek. Congressman, the IG community is prohibited
from delving into or weighing into policy disputes, policy
differences of view. If we do engage in that, it throws up a
roadblock in terms of our ability to be viewed as objective,
and going in and auditing or evaluating the programs and
operations which evolved from that policy. So, we have to make
a distinction between what are policy-based issues versus what
is fraud, waste, abuse, and illegality in terms of how an
agency is conducting itself. That would be my kind of high-
level answer to your question.
And also, some of those policy issues I think you are
alluding to are matters that are in litigation, and that is
another area that IGs are mindful not to wade into. We are not
judges or juries in terms of interpreting the law. So with
those provisos, I would say that any other types of concerns
you have, we would be happy to discuss with.
Mr. Mooney. Okay. I think my time has expired.
Chairman Huizenga. I would like to thank the witnesses for
their testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
And with that, I appreciate the participation from all of
my colleagues, and certainly, we appreciate the participation
of our witnesses.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:51 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

March 8, 2023

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
