- CONNECTING COMMUNITIES: BUILDING INNOVATION ECOSYSTEMS ACROSS AMERICA

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CONNECTING COMMUNITIES: BUILDING
INNOVATION ECOSYSTEMS ACROSS AMERICA

=======================================================================

FIELD HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL ASSETS,
FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY,
AND INCLUSION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

DECEMBER 8, 2023
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-62

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-206 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                   Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                           JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL ASSETS,
FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY, AND INCLUSION

FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts,
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                   Ranking Member
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio, Vice          BILL FOSTER, Illinois
Chairman                           JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 RITCHIE TORRES, New York
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               BRAD SHERMAN, California
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AL GREEN, Texas
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
December 8, 2023.............................................     1
Appendix:
December 8, 2023.............................................    27

WITNESSES

Friday, December 8, 2023

Loganathan, Ravi, Head, Financial Institution Service, Sardine;
and President, SardineX........................................     9
Marshall, Susannah, Bank Commissioner, Arkansas State Bank
Department; and Securities Commissioner, Arkansas Securities
Department.....................................................     4
Orduna, Arthur, Executive Director, The Venture Center...........     6
Wheelis, Joel, Senior Vice President, Products and Services for
Banking, FIS...................................................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Loganathan, Ravi.............................................    28
Marshall, Susannah...........................................    34
Orduna, Arthur...............................................    43
Wheelis, Joel................................................    47

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Hill, Hon. French:
Written statement of Bakkt Holdings, Inc.....................    52

CONNECTING COMMUNITIES: BUILDING
INNOVATION ECOSYSTEMS ACROSS AMERICA

----------

Friday, December 8, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Digital Assets,
Financial Technology,
and Inclusion,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9 a.m., at The
Venture Center, 417 Main Street, Little Rock, Arkansas, Hon.
French Hill [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Hill, Flood, and Nickel.
Chairman Hill. The Subcommittee on Digital Assets,
Financial Technology, and Inclusion will come to order.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here, and I
want to thank my colleagues for coming to Little Rock for this
great opportunity.
I now recognize myself for 4 minutes for an opening
statement.
In the House today, in the Financial Services Committee,
this is a big day, not only because we are having a hearing
here in Arkansas, my home State, but it is also the first field
hearing of this Congress for the Financial Services Committee.
In my view, there is no better way to start the committee's
field work than by examining the benefits that financial
technology is bringing to communities and Americans across our
country.
As history has shown, financial innovation is the lifeblood
of the United States and has been, certainly, for the past 75
years. As fintech continues to expand and develop, we have
reached a critical inflection point where it is embedded in
communities across the United States, including right here in
Little Rock. In Arkansas alone, companies raised a record $201
million in venture capital in 2022, an 87 percent jump from
$107 million in 2021.
Here at The Venture Center, 40 percent of the companies
that participated in FIS's Fintech Accelerator in 2022 were run
by women. This growth is impressive, and we would be remiss not
to give credit to the efforts of all of the witnesses sitting
before us today.
Because of Commissioner Marshall, Arkansas banks of all
sizes are able to safely and successfully integrate fintech
products and services into their offerings for customers.
Because of Arthur and Joel's collaboration, up-and-coming
fintech companies like our guests' are able to build and
develop in an environment that wants them to succeed and is
willing to provide the necessary guidance and resources to
ensure that success.
And last, but most certainly not least, because of Mr.
Loganathan and those like him, the benefits of fintech know no
boundaries here in the United States.
With our deep roots in fintech, including the founding of
Systematics over 5 decades ago, I am proud of the fintech hub
that Little Rock has become, and I am eager to share my State's
progress with my great friends and colleagues who are with me
today; Mike Flood from Nebraska; and Wiley Nickel from North
Carolina. Also, I want to say greetings to my friend, Stephen
Lynch, who is the ranking member of this subcommittee, and is
from Boston. He is hosting a Cabinet Member in Boston today so
he could not be with us.
With that, I thank my friends for being with us, and I look
forward to the testimony of the witnesses. And I now recognize
Mr. Nickel for 5 minutes for his opening statement.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you so much, Chairman Hill, for convening
our subcommittee here in Little Rock. It is a wonderful
pleasure and an amazing honor to be here in Little Rock for
this field hearing.
Our focus today is on innovation, and I am very proud of my
State, North Carolina. It is something that we do very well. My
district benefits heavily from North Carolina's Research
Triangle Park. It is a prominent, high-tech research and
development center renowned for its concentration of innovative
companies and academic collaborations.
Thanks to Chairman Hill, I have learned that Little Rock is
emerging as a significant innovation hub for fintech companies,
attracting a diverse range of both startups and established
firms with its supportive business environment and growing
technology ecosystem. Much of this is thanks to our host today,
The Venture Center of Little Rock. I am very much looking
forward to hearing more about the work you do here.
Fintech companies are vital in driving economic growth by
introducing innovative financial services and technologies that
enhance efficiency and accessibility in the financial sector.
Their emphasis on digital solutions democratizes financial
services, allowing underserved and unbanked populations to
access banking loans and investment opportunities, thus
promoting financial inclusion.
Furthermore, fintechs stimulate job creation and foster a
competitive environment that encourages traditional financial
institutions to innovate and improve their services,
contributing to overall economic development. As members of the
Financial Services Committee, it is our responsibility to
foster an environment where fintechs can thrive while never
losing sight of consumer protection.
I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Flood, you
are now recognized for 1 minute.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to start by
commending the Chair for having a field hearing here in Little
Rock. It is nice to get out of Washington, D.C., and actually
see where the rubber meets the road.
This City, as I understand it, is steeped in history, a
cultural melting pot, and is the perfect example of the kind of
community that punches above its weight when it comes to its
spirit of economic innovation.
I was at your museum last night, your arts center, and it
was unbelievable. We walked through the collection. We had a
wonderful dinner. At the time I was there, there were different
events going on. There was a Young President's Organization
(YPO) group, there was a concert, there was our dinner, and
there were others, and people were mixing and enjoying life. I
do think that having a vibrant arts culture, with public art,
and the effort to bring density into your downtown, are some of
the key hallmarks of a community that wants to grow in this
space.
We are here today because towns like Little Rock, Arkansas,
should get every single opportunity to partake in the
innovation economy. Innovation should not just happen in
Austin, Boston, and San Jose; it belongs in every single State
in America. In fact, if we do not get into innovation, we will
be left behind. So, the efforts of our chairman here, your
community leadership and businesses, and most importantly,
entrepreneurs, are very important.
Today, too many young people are taught not to take a risk.
We have them in sports from 6 in the morning until 10 at night,
and they know what they are told to do by the time they are 19-
years-old. They do not ever think about taking risks. And the
reality is that 8 to 8\1/2\ out of 10 startups fail, and we
need to remind people in America that there is merit in
failure. It means you tried, it means you learned something,
and you can use those failures to become successful down the
road.
Projects like this make a big difference, and if you are a
smart kid growing up in Arkansas or Nebraska, we need towns
like this to take those smart kids who come off the farm or
from a rural area and bring them to a town like Little Rock and
let them thrive.
I always tell people in Nebraska that we raise the gold
that the rest of America wants to hire as a CEO. You do the
same here in Arkansas. You raise these young people with
integrity, you raise them with honesty, and you teach them so
well in your schools that in towns like Little Rock, or maybe
in their hometown, they can start a business and they can
thrive. We just need to make sure that the young people of
Arkansas, like Nebraska, know that there are opportunities for
them in a place like this.
I will close by again thanking the chairman. He came to
Lincoln, Nebraska, to headline my Flyover Fintech event in
August at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, and he gave a
dynamic speech. I think, underpinned by what he has seen here
in Little Rock, it was right on par for what we were looking
for. And I am excited to be in Little Rock. I love this.
The other thing I would say is that this does not happen
because you followed some checklist. This is very hard to
create, and there is no roadmap for this. You have to invest in
entrepreneurs, you have to find the capital for at-risk
business ventures, you have to put all the people in the same
room, and ultimately, the entrepreneurs have to run it. And I
am hopeful that today--and I am sure I will--I will learn all
about how you have accomplished this and learn what it is
producing for the good people of Arkansas.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
Today, we welcome the testimony of; Commissioner Susannah
Marshall, the 22nd Commissioner of the Arkansas State Bank
Department, and the 19th Arkansas Securities Commissioner; Mr.
Arthur Orduna, the executive director of The Venture Center
here in Little Rock, which is an organization dedicated to
helping entrepreneurs and startups become high-growth
businesses, and is our gracious host today; Mr. Joel Wheelis,
the senior vice president and head of products and services for
banking at FIS Global--he has his FIS green tie on today--a
leading provider of fintech software solutions for banks and
payments and investments, and also partners with The Venture
Center, and is the host of our FIS Fintech Accelerator Program
here in Little Rock; and Mr. Ravi Loganathan, the head of
financial institution services at Sardine, and the president of
the SardineX Consortium, a real-time fraud database that brings
together a variety of entities in the financial services space
to combat and share data about fraud on platforms--his
companies are also graduates of the Fintech Accelerator, so
that is to be congratulated.
We thank each of you for taking the time to be with us
today. Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony, and without objection,
each of your written statements will be made a part of the
record.
We are honored to kick it off with my friend, the
Commissioner. Commissioner Marshall, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT  OF   SUSANNAH   MARSHALL,  BANK  COMMIS-
SIONER, ARKANSAS STATE BANK DEPARTMENT; AND SECU-
RITIES COMMISSIONER,  ARKANSAS SECURITIES DEPART-
MENT

Ms. Marshall. Thank you, and good morning. Chairman Hill,
Representative Flood, and Representative Nickels, it is my
sincere privilege to speak with you today. I would like to
thank the House Financial Services Committee's Subcommittee on
Digital Assets, Financial Technology, and Inclusion for
convening this important hearing.
My name is Susannah Marshall, and I serve as the Bank
Commissioner for the Arkansas State Bank Department, and the
Securities Commissioner for the Arkansas Securities Department.
I appreciate the opportunity to share how States, particularly
Arkansas, are actively engaged with all stakeholders in the
financial technology landscape.
As a State regulator, I have a unique vantage point to both
the bank and nonbank industries. In Arkansas, we continue to
develop and enhance our existing relationships with these
industries in order to gain further awareness around innovation
technology within the financial services arena. We foster
opportunities for outreach and partnership with discussions on
fintech firms and third-party providers. And lastly, we strive
to work collaboratively within the regulatory industry to
achieve consistency and provide resources to create thoughtful
and appropriate oversight for the future of financial
technology. Creating an environment of responsible innovation
enhances local economic development, market competition, and
safety for consumers.
My agency has made financial innovation in our institutions
a topic of discussion. We believe it is important to encourage
our regulated entities to explore and adopt innovative
technology in a strategic, safe, and thoughtful manner. State
regulators understand the significant role technology plays in
banks' abilities to provide excellent products and services and
meet the needs and demands of all customers, including both
businesses and individuals.
The State Bank Department, at the request of our banks, has
joined in direct conversations with banks and fintech firms,
which the bank is evaluating for business opportunities and
partnerships. We wholly believe these introductory
conversations are impactful and yield positive results for all
parties, and we actively support this engagement.
Across the country, other State regulators are holding tech
sprint events, where interested parties collaborate on ways to
develop a longstanding relationship with firms such as The
Venture Center, and other partnerships such as the FIS Fintech
Accelerator, hosted here in Little Rock, as well as in other
cities and States in this country. I, along with other key
members from the State Bank Department, have participated in
The Venture Center's Fintech Summit, which has spotlighted the
great work and success happening within the fintech sector.
In terms of regulatory collaboration, I have had the
pleasure of joining other regulators as participants in The
Venture Center's early audiences, availing all of us with the
opportunity to learn more about the program and its
participants and affording us the ability to offer critical
feedback and thoughtful suggestions on how these products and
services may ultimately become part of an institution's
portfolio.
As incubators of innovation, States have experience with
developing regulatory approaches for emerging financial
services. For example, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors
(CSBS) formed several advisory and working groups involving
fintech industry representatives to enhance State regulator
coordination and focus on risks, while minimizing regulatory
burden.
Since 2019, I have served on the CSBS Fintech and
Innovation Steering Group (FISG) with State bank regulators
from across the country. These group members meet regularly to
discuss fintech and other financial services innovations and
how best to help shape potential bank and nonbank regulation.
In June of this year, the Federal bank regulators issued
joint interagency guidance for banks managing the risk of
third-party relationships, including those with fintechs. This
guidance is aimed at eliminating unnecessary confusion by
harmonizing supervisory views on relationships with third-party
vendors. State regulators are well-positioned to marry the
consumer benefit of new technologies with consumer protection,
and we must not be impediments to safe, sound, and thoughtful
implementation and adoption of financial technology by the
industry. With the majority of customer-facing technology being
outsourced to third-party vendors, this work is more important
than ever.
In closing, the financial services industry has been and
should continue to be the foundation for innovation.
Technological innovations can increase a bank's ability to
reach and serve the needs of unbanked or underbanked consumers
and communities. And as we witnessed in the recent pandemic,
there was an accelerated utilization of technology for
increased access to financial services.
I am very proud of the important work that is happening
here in Arkansas, specifically at The Venture Center, and how
it serves as a model for financial services innovation across
the country. With a rich history in entrepreneurship and
economic development, a legacy of innovation and financial
technology, a favorable business environment, and a thriving
banking community, it is no surprise that Arkansas is home to
its own Fintech Accelerator.
On behalf of the State regulatory and financial services
systems, I want to thank you for the invitation to speak, and I
look forward to answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Commissioner Marshall can be
found on page 34 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you, Commissioner.
Mr. Orduna, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF ARTHUR ORDUNA, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
THE VENTURE CENTER

Mr. Orduna. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Hill,
Representative Flood, Representative Nickel, and members of the
subcommittee. My name is Arthur Orduna. It is my privilege as
executive director of The Venture Center to give this statement
on the importance of building and supporting innovation and
entrepreneurship ecosystems at the local, State, and regional
levels in America, with Arkansas and the work of The Venture
Center and its partners as an example of public-private
collaboration and initiatives that generate meaningful and
measurable economic benefits to communities and businesses. I
would like to give a shout-out to my teammates who have made
this hearing possible today, and thank them for all of their
hard work.
The Venture Center is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) Entrepreneur
Support Organization (ESO) based in Little Rock, Arkansas. We
were founded 10 years ago with the mission of accelerating
success for startup founders, small business owners, and
corporate innovators through entrepreneurship programs,
platforms, and partnerships. Our vision is to help raise
Arkansas to regional, national, and global leadership in
entrepreneurship and economic prosperity.
Over the last 10 years, early-stage and growth companies
which have gone through our startup and business-driven
accelerator programs--especially through our Fintech
Accelerators which are done in partnership with FIS and
community, State, regional, and national banks--have raised
more than $2.5 billion of private capital, with an average
funding raise of $17 million. Despite capital market
challenges, more than 85 percent of those companies are still
in operation or have been acquired by entities still operating
today. I welcome four of them here today as well.
Our programs and their participants have generated more
than $30 million in documented economic benefit to the State of
Arkansas, including more than $1 million in tourism for central
Arkansas and Little Rock. We have helped with the launch and
relocation of technology-based companies in Arkansas, including
10 in the fintech sector. This has led to the creation of more
than 180 new, high-wage technology jobs in the State. Just this
past year, we have congratulated two of our program alumni
companies which were recently purchased by private equity for
$30 million, and $300 million, respectively. As a result of our
programs and activities, we have created a network of more than
16,000 individuals, agencies, and companies who continue to
support us.
This last point is paramount: We could not execute our
mission without partnerships from multiple sources. Critical
support to help achieve these results has come from the
corporate sector, as exemplified by our partnership with Little
Rock-founded FIS, and banks such as Simmons Bank and Arvest
Bank; from the municipal level, as exemplified by our
partnerships with the City of Little Rock, the Mayor's Office,
and the Chamber of Commerce; and the State level, as
exemplified by our partnership with the Department of Commerce,
and especially the Arkansas Economic Development Commission.
Welcome to all members here today.
We are also grateful for the support of our Federal
officials and elected Representatives serving the people and
communities of Arkansas, including the encouragement and
support of Chairman Hill, a former Arkansas banker.
I respectfully offer the following recommendations based on
the experiences and challenges we have lived through here at
The Venture Center. First, to other ESOs around the country,
take a portfolio and business-driven approach to fostering
innovation at the community level. In our view, a healthy
community ecosystem comprises a pipeline across all of these.
This has been a key reason for the success of our Fintech
Accelerators.
Next, to other State, county, and municipal governments and
agencies, improve the level of innovation and entrepreneurship
by improving our communities' quality of life. Great
communities attract and grow great people. It is simple and it
is true. My wife and I are from Des Moines, Iowa, and we
strongly believe that the strong economic performance in
central Iowa over the last several decades is based on the fact
that it is a really good place to live and grow. The same is
true of Little Rock, and Arkansas in general.
Finally, to Federal Government legislators and agencies,
work proactively and collaboratively to think through how to
help at your level, with a commitment of multiyear funding to
nonprofit Entrepreneur Support Organizations (ESOs). While this
is a self-serving recommendation, my request encompasses all of
the ESOs that share our mission in Arkansas, such as The
Innovation Hub, Startup Junkie, Conductor, and others, as well
as ESOs in the other 49 States. I suggest as a starting point,
perhaps with this subcommittee in a leading role, to begin a
dialogue with the ESOs and their key partners in your
respective constituencies on identifying actionable initiative
that may already be in flight.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Orduna can be found on page
43 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you.
Mr. Wheelis, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF JOEL WHEELIS, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES FOR BANKING, FIS

Mr. Wheelis. Chairman Hill and members of the subcommittee,
my name is Joel Wheelis, and it is my privilege as senior vice
president of products and services for banking at FIS to
testify before you today to highlight the importance of
building financial innovation ecosystems throughout the United
States.
Based in Jacksonville, Florida, with a significant
footprint here in Little Rock, FIS is one of the world's
largest and oldest financial technology companies, facilitating
commerce across the global financial system. We enable 95
percent of the world's largest banks, move over $10 trillion of
payments annually over 1.3 billion payment cards, and process
1.5 times the U.S. GDP on our asset management technology.
By providing a range of services to participants across the
financial services value chain, we have a uniquely
comprehensive position in the market and a keen interest in
fostering a vibrant startup ecosystem. In particular, FIS
prides itself on its Fintech Accelerator Program, which
identifies and advances startup fintech firms with high
potential.
The growth of the fintech sector--like any industry--
depends on supporting an ecosystem that connects capital,
talent, infrastructure, and a conducive regulatory environment.
Along with local partners like The Venture Center and the
Arkansas State and local government, FIS supported the
development of a world-class innovation ecosystem here in
Little Rock.
In 2016, FIS established the Accelerator to bridge the gap
between our traditional financial institution clients and new,
innovative fintech startups. We recognized that we could not
possibly think of every solution to make our clients'
experience better. Therefore, we sought to strategically invest
in and support high-potential startups that facilitate product
diversification and help our clients stay on the cutting edge
of new technologies. Our community banking clients, in
particular, have benefitted from the Accelerator ever since.
Each year, we help select 10 innovative technology
companies to advise, connect, and showcase their products and
services to the financial industry leaders, potential
investors, and successful engineers, as well as FIS financial
institution clients.
Since the Accelerator began, it has graduated 80 alumnus,
90 percent of whom are still active or have been acquired. This
includes companies such as BOND.AI, a company headquartered in
Arkansas, and Trust Stamp, a company that recently completed an
initial public offering (IPO). Their success not only benefits
the local economy, but it also helps move the entire industry
forward.
Accelerators are critical for growing new fintech
companies. However, successfully developing products and
services that meet the evolving needs of consumers also
requires active participation from government leaders. By
engaging with lawmakers and regulators early, new fintech
companies can quickly iterate and develop products to
accurately reflect regulatory requirements and keep consumers
safe.
A principal way that regulators can participate in
accelerating emerging technologies is by creating innovation
sandboxes. A sandbox allows fintechs to develop and test
products on a limited basis, without fear of regulatory
reprisal, before going directly to the market, reducing the
uncertainty of what may or may not be a feasible path forward.
It also helps regulators build knowledge of new technologies
and assess the potential application of existing law and
regulation.
FIS also encourages Federal, State, and local lawmakers to
consider additional tools to reduce barriers and incentivize
innovation. First, a clear legislative and regulatory framework
must be in place to facilitate the ability of financial
institutions to partner with and benefit from innovative
fintech solutions. Second, talent development grant programs
must receive investment and implementation guidance to support
the growth of a strong local talent pipeline.
And third, incentives such as tax breaks and grant programs
should be considered to make cities and regions more attractive
to investors, large corporations, and entrepreneurs. Venture
capital funds are looking for high-quality, innovative
companies with strong potential, irrespective of location. So,
incentivizing development of local ecosystems like the one in
Little Rock is a first step in raising awareness about
investment opportunities.
The public-private partnership in Little Rock demonstrates
how financial institutions, startups, and regulatory bodies can
cooperate to build a successful local ecosystem. The results
have been more than impressive, leading to numerous benefits to
FIS, our clients, the startups, and the economies of Little
Rock and wider Arkansas. Over the past 8 years, FIS Accelerator
alumni have raised more than $1.5 billion in capital.
It is our hope that other State and local governments and
convener organizations such as incubators can replicate this
partnership model and generate economic growth and jobs, and
attract talent transplants from around the world.
Thank you again for the opportunity. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wheelis can be found on page
47 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you very much.
Mr. Loganathan, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for
your oral presentation.

STATEMENT OF RAVI LOGANATHAN, HEAD, FINANCIAL INSTI-
TUTION SERVICE,  SARDINE; AND PRESIDENT,  SARDINEX
CONSORTIUM

Mr. Loganathan. Thank you, Chairman Hill, and members of
the subcommittee. I am Ravi Loganathan. I head up our financial
institution business line at Sardine. I also head up our
SardineX Consortium that brings together banks and fintechs to
fight fraud. It is a privilege to be here today to discuss the
crucial interplay between the traditional banking sector and
the rapidly-evolving fintech industry, and the critical role of
fostering innovative ecosystems across America.
Sardine, in the fintech landscape, is making contributions
to behavioral-based fraud detection compliance and risk
management. Our mission is to revolutionize the way financial
transactions are secured online, protecting all participants.
Our diverse team, comprising industry veterans from
institutions like Revolut, Coinbase, Zelle, PayPal, and Bank of
America, brings a wealth of experience, enabling us to navigate
the complex challenges in today's financial services sector.
Our comprehensive suite of solutions are designed to
address the nuanced demands of modern risk management. This
includes our flagship offering in behavior-based fraud
prevention, which utilizes a blend of device intelligence and
behavioral biometrics to outsmart and preempt emerging threats.
With over 200 clients across the globe, including fintechs and
traditional financial institutions, Sardine monitors
transactions with over $150 billion in transaction volume.
In today's testimony, I aim to shed light on how risk
management plays a critical role in facilitating collaboration.
Additionally, I will highlight how regulators and accelerator
programs are instrumental in bridging the gap between banks and
fintechs, and facilitating collaboration.
I will start on the risk management side by highlighting
two solutions Sardine currently has in the marketplace:
SardineX, which is the consortium that is helping bring
together banks and fintechs; and our SponsorOS solution that is
enabling community banks and credit unions to scale their
Banking-as-a-Service (BaaS) offering.
SardineX is pivotal in managing real-time counterparty
risks, especially as the U.S. now moves to real-time payment
and instant settlement with systems like FedNow, and Clearing
House RTP. The utility allows parties and financial services to
inquire about the entities conducting the transaction. Upon
inquiry, Sardine provides signals under the framework of the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act for fraud information sharing, and
Section 314(b) of the USA PATRIOT Act for detecting money
laundering activities. These insights are crucial for
institutions to make informed decisions in real time, enhancing
transaction security.
Furthermore, Sardine is a member-run organization
representing a diverse group of financial institutions and
fintechs. Its operating rules and governance structure are
ratified by its members, ensuring a collaborative approach to
managing this critical utility.
Now, I will turn to SponsorOS, which is tailored for
Banking-as-a-Service. It is vital for helping regional and
community banks scale programs, while effectively managing
regulatory and reputational risks. It provides a uniform
platform for fraud protection, compliance service, and risk
management, indispensable for banks in automating control
mechanisms for their fintech partners.
SponsorOS also enables banks to proactively monitor fintech
partner performance and mitigate compliance and regulatory
risk, simultaneously empowers fintechs to comply with banks'
program standards by implementing robust fraud detection and
compliance systems. This two-fold approach not only streamlines
operations but also ensures that both banks and fintechs adhere
to higher standards of security and regulatory compliance,
fostering a mutually-beneficial risk-aware partnership.
The emerging threat of AI-enabled fraud, including
generated phishing, deepfake identity theft, and automated
social engineering, underscores the importance of our work. A
united front with banks and fintech companies collaborating and
sharing data is essential to counter these sophisticated
threats that are emerging in the financial space.
Regulators play an important role in setting the framework
for collaboration and innovation, shaping how financial
institutions and fintechs can work together effectively, while
ensuring consumer protection and market stability. Enhancing
the U.S. regulatory framework, perhaps through coordinated
relief for the regulatory sandbox participants and universal
standards, could foster a more innovation-friendly environment.
Such regulatory enhancements would not only stimulate fintech
innovation but also ensure a balanced ecosystem where risk
management and consumer safety are paramount. The approach
could draw inspiration from international models, especially in
the U.K. and Singapore.
Finally, the accelerator programs such as the one offered
by FIS and The Venture Center are critical in building out the
innovation ecosystem. Our experience in participating in this
program last year was invaluable, providing Sardine with
critical market insights, access to subject matter experts, and
strategic connections with future customers. These programs are
instrumental in propelling fintech startups and offering them
resources to navigate the financial sector's complexities.
To conclude, the dynamic financial sector necessitates a
stronger partnership between banks and fintechs, with an
emphasis on robust risk management. Such collaborations are
essential for addressing challenges like AI-enabled fraud, and
for leveraging technological advancements. By joining forces,
we can forge a financial ecosystem that is innovative,
inclusive, and secure.
I look forward to this discussion and to your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Loganathan can be found on
page 28 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you so much. We are now going to turn
to Member questions, and as a warning to my colleagues, we will
have multiple rounds. We will go until you run dry, Wiley. And
I will start out and yield myself 5 minutes for questions.
I will start with you, Commissioner Marshall. First, thanks
for your leadership in the State. We are so grateful for your
decades of service to our financial institutions here, and
thanks for stepping up to be Securities Commissioner, too. That
is no small task. I am proud of that.
We had a hearing earlier this week on this issue of
innovation in the regulatory agencies and the sandbox issue,
because I think there has been a really mixed signal sent by
the Biden Administration on that, vis-a-vis the Trump
Administration when they were first getting started. So, we had
all the agencies present. We had their heads of innovation
there, the first time they had ever been invited to Congress to
testify.
And I thought it was pretty productive. The give-and-take
was good. I think the most important thing was that we
discussed oversight over this innovation sandbox arena at the
regulatory agencies, and demonstrated what a mixed bag it is--
nothing really to brag about, I would say, but some baby steps.
We asked them, ``Do you coordinate together? Do you have
innovation together? Do you have a council that meets, not on a
global basis, but just among yourselves,'' for example.
But Commissioner, in August, the Federal Reserve
established the Novel Activities Supervision Program, and sent
out a very short, one-page memo to every financial institution
and all of the State Commissioners. And in my view, it was
meant to be targeting digital assets, crypto, and being
cautious about that, really asking institutions to come get
pre-approval to do something.
As a long-time banker, I am not really used to pre-approval
on routine matters. Do you think this Novel Activities Rule
could create confusion, and do you think it has also challenged
bankers, in that it goes beyond digital assets and crypto into
just fintech, more generally?
Ms. Marshall. Thank you, Congressman. I did follow the
hearing earlier this week, and was proud to also see my
counterparts across the regulatory system speak to what they
are doing.
Specifically to your question, the financial technology
industry is moving so quickly, and will continue to move at a
rapid pace. I believe the guidance and the requirement for
things to be called a novel banking activity could perhaps lead
to some confusion, but I think it is important that the banks
and the regulatory industry are all at least ensuring that we
are talking to each other. Because, as I said in my testimony,
I think when fintech can be successful is when you have those
early conversations. And maybe the prior approval part is not
necessarily aligned with most community banks and their normal
activities. Certainly, I think a traditional fintech activity,
product and service--banks have been doing that for many, many
years, and are doing it very well and very successfully.
I think that is outside of the novelty idea, and I do not
think that needs to be a pre-approval type of activity, because
that is normal business operations, and I think we need to
continue to foster that.
There are some areas that may be certainly groundbreaking,
areas which we have not seen as part of our financial services
industry. So, I am hopeful that guidance, or the direction from
the Federal regulators sheds some light on that, and we can
come together to try to make sure we are all on the same page--
that is critical, as we have all said today--but not make that
an area where we just clamp down on the opportunities for banks
to advance, but ensure that they do so in a safe and sound
environment.
Chairman Hill. Have you seen a particular example over the
past 5 years in your leadership where fintech really has
allowed a community bank to thrive and expand safely and
soundly [inaudible] or even improve their compliance
operations?
Ms. Marshall. Yes, sir. Arkansas banks come in a variety of
sizes. I have banks that are right at $30 billion, and I have
banks that are right at $30 million. And I believe that
fintechs should not be categorized for one asset size or the
other; they should be able to serve every type of institution,
whether it is a rural bank in southeast Arkansas or a bank here
in central Arkansas that has operations in 12 other States.
I believe that all banks can be successful utilizing
fintech. I believe it is also an opportunity for a small
community bank, in a cost-effective and managed way, to reach
new markets, or perhaps continue to serve markets where they
previously felt they were unable to meet their consumers'
needs.
I have seen where fintech, and maybe it is a basic form of
fintech, but when an institution that could not staff a full-
service branch in rural Bradley County, maybe they have an
interactive teller machine or deploy the next generation of a
financial banking app to reach those customers. I have seen
that work firsthand, and I am very proud that our banks are
adopting advances in technology.
Chairman Hill. Thank you. Those are good examples. My time
has expired. The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Nickel, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you. Mr. Orduna, given your expertise at
The Venture Center, how do you see fintech startups
specifically contributing to economic growth, and what areas of
financial innovation hold the most promise for future
development?
Mr. Orduna. Thank you for the question. I will start with
the fintech sector and not looking at the past but looking
ahead.
My teammates and I are starting to work with members of the
Arkansas Bankers Association, beginning in the community banks
and in the rural areas, to try to identify the priorities and
the problems of two types of customers: one is obviously the
borrowers that they are serving; and the other is their
internal customers. How can they be more efficient? How can
they deal with new technologies? And I have to tell you, for
example, when talking to Brad Chambless and his folks down at
Farmers & Merchants, the word, ``fintech,'' is scary.
And thinking about technology in general, we need to
actually translate that into prioritized problems and
opportunities that begin with the communities. I know those are
nice words, but that is what we take, working with banks and
with financial institutions and providers to actually identify
who are the right kind of technology providers, whether it is
Sardine, BOND.AI, Securitech, or BankLabs, to come in and work
directly with those community banks, and for them and their
customers.
And so, Mr. Nickel, that actually translates directly not
just into a good funding round for the startups, which is
great, but it actually translates straight into new products
and new services that are going to help folks, hopefully like
Brad and his team, to provide more growth to that community.
That is the end game.
Mr. Nickel. And that is a good transition to my next
question. As we go back to Washington, what are the things we
should be doing to help encourage more accelerator and
incubator programs like yours here, nationwide?
Mr. Orduna. That's a great question. I have been in the
corporate world more than I have been on the side of light and
goodness--just kidding--so I saw the wave, more than a decade
ago, of some real excitement about providing entrepreneurship
support into the center of the country. Steve Case did a great
job of getting things started. I know we have seen a bump in
some capital investment in some of these areas, but is not
enough. And it has not been sustainable.
Mr. Nickel, I suggest that we start a dialogue, and I think
what I would strongly suggest to those folks in D.C. is to
begin that dialogue with exactly what is happening here. Begin
it at home. Because there are a lot of initiatives and a lot of
ideas of the folks who are sitting here that need your level of
support.
Now, that support could be just recognition that there is
some programming already, or funding that is in flight, that is
applicable, or it could be something novel and new. But I
believe that having these kinds of issues--Representative Hill
had a town hall here earlier in the year. We would like to
replicate that and actually bring in a bit more of the
opportunities.
I believe it begins with your constituency, quite frankly.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much. I am going to come back to more
specific stuff in the next round of questioning and talk with
you about accredited investors.
But Commissioner Marshall, I really enjoyed speaking with
you earlier and wanted to dig in on another issue here. From a
regulatory perspective, what are the key challenges and
opportunities that you are seeing in overseeing fintech
companies?
Ms. Marshall. Overseeing institutions that are working
with----
Mr. Nickel. Yes.
Ms. Marshall. Thank you, sir. Yes, sir. As we are visiting
with our institutions, I do not want to make it sound like the
list of obstacles is longer than the list of opportunities, but
maybe that is what we hear the most.
Mr. Nickel. We get those complaints a lot.
Ms. Marshall. We certainly hear conversations about, how
are these products and services going to integrate with our
core service providers, which is a critical piece to every
financial institution, and becoming more so every day. Is the
adoption, is the acceptance going to be supported by staff as
well as the customer base, on a larger scale? Do the banks have
the necessary staff to really engage in participating with
certain fintech firms? What are the compliance risks? What is
the cost, the onboarding cost, and the maintenance cost? Do we
have a potential risk for cyber or other IT-related issues? And
then, of course, do we have the management structure to
continue to maintain it?
But the opportunities they see are reaching new sectors,
new communities, and new markets. They may have an opportunity
to experiment with a different product or service on a smaller
scale that is more cost-efficient, actually, and then make the
determination to exit that strategy, if need be. And, of
course, reaching individuals who may not be able to access
products and services in a timely fashion.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Flood, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am going to hold
my questions about The Venture Center to my next round, but to
Mr. Wheelis and Mr. Loganathan, I want you each to react to two
different topics that came up during your testimony. The first
one is, I want to talk about cyber tech, cybersecurity, and I
want you to react to the idea of biometrics being fooled by
deepfake AI. I can turn my phone on by having it look at my
face. I also do that to get into my bank account, and into my
Marriott Bonvoy account. Is innovation happening in that space,
and if so, what is happening?
And the second topic I would like to hear from you both on
is decentralized finance (DeFi). When I engage on Twitter with
younger folks in my district and all over the nation, they
continue try and bring the conversation back to this concept of
self-custody, DeFi. These are two very different topics, but I
would like to give you each 2 minutes to react to the
cybersecurity, AI deepfakes, and then, what do you think about
DeFi, where is it going, is it real, and is this something we
are going to deal with in this decade?
We will start with Mr. Wheelis.
Mr. Wheelis. Yes. As far as cyber and deepfake, that is
absolutely a point that we must all stay on top of as we
innovate and move forward. FIS invested a tremendous amount of
money, obviously, to try to protect--as we mentioned earlier,
we have seen hacking attempts. We have seen successful hacks in
certain areas. We know that is going to be where the industry
goes, and we know that we are barely on the front edge of it
right now. So, I think the investment is paramount.
I think that you will see more sophisticated attacks,
obviously, with generative AI. It is going to make it easier
for the bad actors to implement their threats. As far as cyber
moving forward, it is just going to be one of our primary
focuses. There is no doubt about it.
Mr. Flood. Okay. Mr. Loganathan?
Mr. Loganathan. Yes. Thank you, Congressman, for the
question. Let me answer your first part of the question around
emerging threats, particularly with cyber, AI-driven threats.
Particularly with the advent of AI, what is going to happen in
terms of fraud vectors is that it is going to be automated at a
scale much higher than what you see today. So, if you look at
all the data breaches we had over many years, that data is now
available on the Dark Web. And now, with AI, those AI can be
trained on that information to create synthetic identities, and
hence, you are now able to attack institutions at a much faster
pace. So, that is a significant threat.
The AI tools are being enabled not only by individual
actors but by organized crime, and, as you also know, there are
state actors now involved who are beginning to challenge our
critical infrastructure, not only in banking but in health care
and utilities, for example. The last 2 weeks are a pretty good
example with which I think you all are very familiar.
This is why, as we think about risk management moving
forward, not only in banking but across other sectors, we have
to fundamentally reimagine our detection capability. Our
detection capability today, the majority of these financial
institutions are backward-looking risk models. That is no
longer sufficient. You need real-time risk assessment that
brings in your device, your behavioral biometrics, your cross-
bank transaction data, third-party signals to, in real time,
risk-assess that transaction.
And what I fear is that many of our institutions are not
ready for what is coming, and what AI is doing is simply
accelerating that threat, because now the fraud attacks and
fraud vectors can be done on a much larger scale.
Mr. Flood. I appreciate that answer. DeFi?
Mr. Loganathan. And on the DeFi side, DeFi is here to stay.
I think as we evolve and work through the kinks, from a risk
management standpoint--and the regulatory agencies have done a
great job in addressing those risks, and you have seen some of
those events in the last year-and-a-half to 2 years--DeFi,
digital wallets is here to stay. Digital currencies are here to
stay, and it is going to be a mechanism by which the next
generation is going to transact. I think we all need to be
prepared in terms of how we are going to address that from a
risk management standpoint, and I think that is the work that
needs to be done.
Mr. Flood. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back. We will now start
our second round of questioning, and I yield myself 5 minutes.
Let me pick up where we left off there. When you think
about the current environment, I have argued consistently since
I have been on the Financial Services Committee, and certainly
in my role on our Fintech Task Force several years ago, and now
as Chair of our Digital Assets Subcommittee, that if we want to
move from an analog financial services sector to a fully
digital one, we have to abandon username and password, we have
to have data ownership by individuals, not big companies, and
we have to have a really strict view about cyber protection and
fraud protection. And you are on the front line of basically
all three of those components.
Do you see your products and services easily translating
over to a blockchain tokenized payment regime where you are
accomplishing the same mission you are doing now in the real-
time payment arena?
Mr. Loganathan. Very much so. Where we started in terms of
developing our solutions was helping fintechs shore up their
progress and compliance capability. We learned a lot from that,
and now we are bringing that capability into traditional
finance.
As you now are looking at DeFi and digital wallets coming
into play, you still need a mechanism to move money from your
fiat side of the house into a digital wallet, hence, you still
need that risk management capability to go through the same due
diligence you do on the fiat side. And this is where we are
making headway in providing that risk management between
financial institutions and the digital wallets and providing
that same risk management capability.
So, it is very much translatable and exactly what we are
doing right now. Because we are basically taking our risk
management capability and offering a solution on the payment
side, effectively an onramp to move funds from fiat to the
digital wallets, and we are deploying the same risk management
capability. And in that framework, again, the same critical
aspects come into play, the need for multiple signals to assess
risk, in real time. You need to bring in your device, your
behavioral biometrics, cross-bank transaction information,
device information to, in real time, risk assess, because money
and those digital assets are moving in real time.
Chairman Hill. Is it your view that in a stablecoin,
tokenized payment environment on a blockchain, self-custody
wallet or not, that the Anti-Money Laundering/Bank Secrecy Act
(AML/BSA) rules of the U.S. can be adequately enforced?
Mr. Loganathan. Absolutely, and I think----
Chairman Hill. I raise this because this is a very key
understanding that happens at our committee right now. And we
have a real gap in the Senate on this right now. The
presumption is, ipso facto, it is not possible, and therefore,
they are zeroing in on something, but I think they are missing
the forest because of the trees on this issue. Testimony like
this is very helpful, I think, to the three of us.
Mr. Loganathan. No, absolutely, and I think we have to kind
of start in stages, and I feel like the first stage here is you
still need to move fiat into digital wallets. In that
transition phase this is where we can put in robust risk
management capability to detect two things: the funds moving
from fiat accounts, bank accounts, into a digital wallet, risk
assess that fiat account; and then, as the funds are moving
into a digital wallet, risk assess that digital wallet. We have
those capabilities today----
Chairman Hill. Yes. But also, you could extend that to say
that someone performing a digital asset exchange function could
do that as well.
Mr. Loganathan. Indeed.
Chairman Hill. And this issue that, yes, there are broad
accounts on those exchanges that are effectively, in street
name, to use a securities analysis view, but they could know
that and have that implemented in that crypto exchange
environment as well, looking at wallet verification. They are
not telling you whose wallet it is, but they are verifying that
they know who it is.
Mr. Loganathan. Indeed, and I believe the same Know Your
Customer (KYC) standards that are being applied in traditional
finance today could be applied, and should be applied, and
should be enforced on those exchanges. And I think we have made
some great headway in the past year, where we are weeding out
those who are not complying and reinforcing those exchanges
that are complying with the standards.
Chairman Hill. Right. It is certainly a focus of the
committee. Senator Lummis and I sent a letter to the
regulators, particularly on Binance, for example, but we will
talk more about that.
My time has expired. I yield to Mr. Nickel for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Okay. The second round. Thanks again to our
witnesses for being here.
Just piggybacking on that a little bit, Mr. Loganathan, one
of the things we have done in this committee, in a bipartisan
way, is to move forward with a digital asset market structure
bill, and whether you love crypto or hate crypto, you should be
in favor of regulation. So, that is something that we are going
to be tackling as a Congress, hopefully in the coming months.
But I wanted to talk about a bill that is one of those
good, rare bipartisan bills that we moved in a very positive
way, the Equal Opportunity for All Investors Act, our bill that
I am the Democratic lead on with Mike Flood, my Congressman
colleague from the great State of Nebraska.
Unfortunately, most startup capital is concentrated in
cities like San Francisco, New York, and Boston, rather than
cities like Raleigh, Little Rock, and Lincoln. Our bipartisan
bill cuts through government red tape to improve choices for
investors, regardless of their net worth. This will result in
greater access to capital for minorities, veterans, and women,
and spur economic growth in places like North Carolina's
Research Triangle Park, and right here in Little Rock. It is
certainly very good for startups.
Under the current system, only millionaires can be
accredited investors, and that does not include your house. So,
when you are talking about whether you have a million bucks to
be an accredited investor, you cannot even include your home.
We want to open up lucrative private security investments
to individuals with the financial knowledge to understand the
risks they are taking, but again, are not necessarily
millionaires. Our bill does just that by expanding the,
``accredited investor,'' definition to allow people to invest
in private securities and to include individuals who are
certified, through a robust exam established by the SEC and
administered by FINRA. If you pass a test, you should be able
to be an accredited investor, and understand the risks.
And I understand, while I have not seen anything on this,
that there is talk that SEC Chair Gary Gensler wants to move
that number up to $5 million, which would price out so many
more people.
My goal is that I want to move money into startups. I want
to encourage that innovation. North Carolina's Research
Triangle Park is home to many small biotech companies with
critical life-changing technologies. Many of those companies
rely on accredited investors for capital, so a larger pool of
investors would improve their access to funding, thereby
spurring growth and bringing good jobs to working families in
North Carolina's 13th Congressional District and around the
country, in places like Little Rock.
Additionally, according to the Brookings Institution, the
average net worth of a typical White family is nearly 10 times
greater than that of a Black family. This bill will enable more
diverse investors to participate in this asset class by
allowing individuals to become accredited investors, regardless
of their net worth. Underrepresented entrepreneurs often
struggle to access capital and they would greatly benefit from
a larger pool of more diverse investors, who look like them.
Mr. Orduna, the first question is to you. Does The Venture
Center work with accredited investors?
Mr. Orduna. Yes. We work with accredited investors. We are
part of the Ark Angel Alliance, which is an angel investment
network here, and obviously, we are strongly allied and
partnered with local investors and investment management firms
such as Circumference Group.
Mr. Nickel. Have you encountered any roadblocks with this
definition for folks who want to get in on these investments?
Mr. Orduna. You are touching on one of the most important
topics that occupies literally my time and our time a lot,
which is getting these promising businesses access to capital
for growth. From what you have said, and how you have described
this bipartisan bill: first, I am not surprised it is
bipartisan; and second, I would personally support being able
to open and broaden the definition of an accredited investor,
as long as they are aware of the risk of investing into an
early-stage venture.
But what we have seen here, and what I think is equally
important--I am not sure if the bill addresses this--is we work
with a lot of small businesses that are already generating some
degree of revenue, and they are also worthy of trying to
identify other pools of capital.
We are working with the Small Business Administration (SBA)
here in Arkansas and we just launched a veteran-owned small
business accelerator. Nine servicemen and servicewomen have now
started businesses here in Arkansas, and they are generating
revenue this year. And as we went through our curation process,
Mr. Nickel, the first and foremost need that they have is still
access to capital.
I think that, just circling back, absolutely, we would
support the ability to bring in more investors to look at
early-stage venture, to look at pre-seed and seed, but we would
strongly encourage more initiatives as well to go across the
portfolio of innovators and entrepreneurs who may already have
opened a storefront, here or in El Dorado or elsewhere in the
State.
Mr. Nickel. My time has expired, but I want to come back to
Mr. Wheelis. I saw you nodding your head, and giving everyone
else here a chance to weigh in on the rules for accredited
investors. It is also worth noting that 383 Members of the
House voted to move this bill over to the Senate, so the Senate
has the bill, and I am hopeful this is going to be one of the
rare standalone bills that we can move on to the President's
desk.
I yield back.
Chairman Hill. Another bill sent to the Senate to rest.
[laughter]
Chairman Hill. The gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Flood, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A couple of tough
statistics, by 2030, automation is going to take a lot of jobs
that we know of right now in the United States. It is going to
affect Arkansas. It is going to affect Nebraska. Another one
from the National Venture Capital Association is that
California, by itself, receives 59 percent of the total venture
deal flow in the United States.
I am pleased to hear that over $200 million is flowing here
in the State of Arkansas, much of it through this enterprise.
Mr. Orduna, you made some really good comments in your
opening statement. I would add that my favorite book is called,
``The Startup Community Way: Evolving an Entrepreneurial
Ecosystem,'' and it talks about Boulder, Colorado. You have
done that here, and it is ever-evolving.
While I represent Lincoln, I live in a town of 25,000 in
northeast Nebraska. It would maybe be more similar to Jonesboro
or El Dorado, Arkansas. We have to have innovation there too.
How are we, how are you, how is the State of Arkansas
connecting with these communities that could be completely left
out of the innovation economy, understanding that their success
is as vital to Arkansas as Little Rock or Fort Smith or what
you have going in northwest Arkansas?
Mr. Orduna. Yes, I think that is an ongoing challenge. And
I am relatively new to Arkansas, over the last 2\1/2\ years, so
I bring a little bit of objectivity and a fresh eye. I think it
begins with the fact that at the State level, we have some
committed folks and agencies that are really looking to bring
not just information but actual resources and innovation
programs like ours and others to all corners of the State, and
to diverse entrepreneurs and innovators in rural areas. And
working with the Arkansas Development Commission (AEDC) here,
for example, and then reaching out directly to municipalities,
I think is key.
But I think we need to be innovative about how we do this,
and it has to be a mixture of being on the ground as well as
taking advantage of new digital platforms, so that folks in
Jonesboro or folks in Magnolia have as much access to the same
level of resources as someone in Menlo Park or someone in
Brooklyn. I have worked in both areas before coming here, and
there is no reason that we cannot generate, not necessarily the
same volume, but we generate the same quality of innovation and
entrepreneurs and the same quality of businesses here as in
Silicon Valley or Media Gulch.
Mr. Flood. Can you also, while we are on this topic,
describe some of the work The Venture Center does with Arkansas
students through the Student Entrepreneur Education Collective?
Mr. Orduna. Yes. We are really proud of that work. Some of
the things that we have been doing are specific events and
programs. We have something called JOLT--I do not believe that
is an acronym; I think it actually means a burst of
inspiration--where we work with students basically on
hackathons and games. And we have been working directly with
some of our fellow ESOs. I do not want to just focus on us.
Errin Stanger, over in North Little Rock, with Innovation Hub,
does a fantastic job working with elementary school as well as
junior high and high school innovators and entrepreneurs. But
obviously, Mr. Flood, we have to begin as early as possible.
The last thing that I will say is that we held a pitch
contest earlier this year at the Discovery Center, where we had
10 or 11, 10- to 12-year-old students come up and pitch. And I
will tell you, they were as polished as you could ever hear.
So, I think our future is pretty bright, as long as we can make
sure that their ideas get air, oxygen, and capital.
Mr. Flood. I want to highlight one thing that you said in
your early recommendations in your initial testimony. You said,
``What can government do?'' And I was very pleased to hear you
say that government should not be the catalyst for these
innovations, but it should lead the way in quality of life.
Mr. Orduna. Absolutely.
Mr. Flood. And that can happen in any community, of any
size. The investment I saw in the arts yesterday--and I am not
somebody who would have maybe voted for the arts when I was
speaker of our legislature 15 years ago--but I see now the
direct connection between investment in public arts and crafts,
and building an entrepreneurial community, and I see that on
display here in Little Rock. I think it is outstanding that you
highlight that as the appropriate role for the government.
With that, I thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Hill. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. We
will start our third round of questions, and we can do more,
but I intend this to be the last one unless people want to do
more. I am open to that. We have the time to do it.
This is a good adult conversation, but this afternoon I get
to go over to the Innovation Hub, to Errin Stanger's
outstanding operation, something I am always excited about, and
we will unveil the winners of the App Challenge. Congress
sponsors a technology challenge every fall for all 435
districts around the country, and we ask high school students
to come up with their best ideas for an app. And tonight, we
will unveil the top apps from the 2nd Congressional District
over at the Innovation Hub.
I think, on that comment that Mike made, and Arthur engaged
in, this is something to put a real premium on, and the
Kauffman Foundation has done that nationwide, and they have
been very active here. And we have seen that effort with things
like the Innovation Hub, in partnership with the Rockefeller
Foundation and others, and the Kauffman Foundation in their
accelerator programs, and at UCA and Conway and up at Startup
Junkie in Fayetteville. These are good things. We need more of
those. We need those in essentially all of the areas in order
to fulfill Steve Case's goal of the Rise of the Rest.
Arthur, you talked about investing in centers like this
accelerator, and I would like you to sort of compare and
contrast for us--obviously, the Federal Government spends quite
a bit of money through the SBA and through the Small Business
Development Centers, now Small Business Development and
Technology Centers, I think is the acronym. Can you tell me how
you collaborate with them here? We have one on the University
of Arkansas at Little Rock campus.
Mr. Orduna. Yes. We have been collaborating strongly with
them, and I am proud to say this again, that the most recent
collaboration, Representative Hill, is a new veteran-owned
small business accelerator program. We have worked with the
SBDTC, and this was really begun with folks like Jerry Talbert
at the SBA here, working with Daniel Schutte here at The
Venture Center, talking to their friends who are servicepeople
and veterans. And I think that what we have been doing is
identifying not just that particular group of folks, but also
identifying where else could we work, and who else could we
work with , from an acceleration and innovation,
entrepreneurship perspective.
The other areas that we have been talking with them about
include, for example, rural innovation and rural innovators,
and doing it in partnership--while it begins with that
discussion with the Small Business Administration (SBA) and
with the Arkansas Small Business and Technology Center
(ASBTDC), it also brings in other partners, and that is the
other thing I stressed, I think, in our written testimony. For
example, looking at Socially and Economically Disadvantaged
Individuals (SEDI) and rural communities, we have started to
work with the University of Arkansas Medical Sciences (UAMS) to
do an accelerator for SEDI innovators, and SEDI owners and
innovators beginning actually in rural Arkansas. So, that is
absolutely critical as well.
And then, obviously, we are focused heavily on diversity,
on businesses and business owners of color, and we really
welcome, as well, additional corporate as well as government
participation. What you have all said before I completely agree
with, that government support at the municipal, State, and
Federal level is absolutely critical, but the catalyst begins
here, at the community level and in the individual sites.
Chairman Hill. Thank you. I Chair the Congressional
Entrepreneurship Caucus, and we look for ways to collaborate on
all of the things that we have talked about today.
Mr. Orduna. We have a lot of ideas. We would love to----
Chairman Hill. Yes, that is right, and that is why I did
the town hall with you last year, mostly on blockchain and the
regulatory future for digital assets, and the U.S. Venture
Capital Association, run by an Arkansan, a University of
Arkansas graduate, and the Kauffman Foundation are both very
active in that. So, we are distilling those good ideas from the
grassroots up to the Congress.
I will close in my final comments in this round by thanking
Wylie Nickel for his work on accredited investors, and by
thanking Mike Flood. All of us have been doing that. Several of
us in this room, Mr. Hendron, Mr. Montgomery, and I, have spent
a lot of our careers raising money for other people and doing
Reg D private placements, and we have come across this
accredited investor challenge for decades. And SEC Chair Gary
Gensler, who is a fountain of occasionally below-average ideas,
if he is promoting what you say to raise it to $5 million, that
is the below-average idea.
The bill I support is to make it talent-based, because what
I found at UAMS or in the technology space is that you will
have a young innovator who knows everything about the
technology, but they do not have the net worth. So, I think
making it professional qualifications or talent-based is a way
to also do that.
Let me yield now to Mr. Flood for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Marshall, you and I
spoke briefly. You said you had 79 State-chartered banks, I
believe?
Ms. Marshall. Seventy-three.
Mr. Flood. Seventy-three. Okay. One of the bills that is
under the subcommittee chairman's purview right now, and he has
been a big water carrier on it, is the Digital Assets Market
Structure bill. And we think about stablecoins, and we think
about custody of digital assets by State-chartered banks.
One of the big questions right now, one of our struggles
with the White House and some on the Democratic side in the
Senate, especially--it is more bipartisan in the House--is that
the White House or the Treasury think there should only be a
Federal regulator overseeing the regulation of the digital
custody of assets, stablecoins. I completely resist that. I
think there has to be a State pathway so that we protect our
dual-tier banking system, which is one of the benefits of
having such a diverse banking system in the United States as
opposed to maybe Europe or the European Union.
Talk to us about how important it is that we preserve the
State pathway, and is that a hill worth dying on as members of
our committee? How important is that to you?
Ms. Marshall. It is of utmost and absolute importance, and
that is not self-serving in my role as a State regulator. That
is certainly critical to the success of our ongoing industry,
and quite frankly, the foundation of the duel banking system.
As I said in my remarks, our firsthand knowledge of what is
going on in our communities and with our institutions will not
be seen or heard if there is not a State pathway in future
regulation and guidance and legislation in and around financial
services. It will not come from D.C.; it will come from the
boots on the ground that the State systems and the State
regulators and my counterparts across the country provide.
So, it is of utmost importance, and we appreciate and
applaud any and all efforts to ensure that any future
legislation, whether it is around stablecoins or other digital
innovations and digital assets, must include that State
pathway.
Mr. Flood. And I should add that I do support the Federal
Government having a role, just like the FDIC might have a role,
or obviously, the Federal Reserve has a role in any State-
chartered bank. The FDIC is in there inspecting and examining
your State-chartered banks.
Ms. Marshall. Yes, sir.
Mr. Flood. You conduct your own examination. But you need
to know, and I am sure you already know this because you have
such a good Representative here, that there are a lot of folks
in Washington who do not think that the State should have this
ability to regulate, especially State-chartered financial
institutions, as it relates to the custody of digital assets.
And I have every reason to believe that as we go into this
negotiation, you are going to see a push by the Executive
Branch to make us relent on this idea of a dual pathway for
financial institutions' custody of digital assets.
As you work with your counterparts in other States, is this
something that State banking directors are talking about? Is
your Association of State Banking Directors focused on this?
And if so, what are you hearing from your counterparts in other
States?
Ms. Marshall. We are absolutely focused on it. It is a core
of the discussions, as we center around thoughts about proposed
legislation, and as we work with our membership. As Congressman
Hill said, many times we have a deep relationship of knowing
each other and working with each other. My counterparts have
the same as with your offices and Mr. Nickel's office. And we
are all full court press, if you will, on ensuring that message
is heard loud and clear.
We are also working with the industry, because the
industry, I think, is important. Certainly, I do not want to
speak for it as a whole, but I believe the industry would tell
you, in large part, that they are always conscious and making
sure that the State regulators have a part. Because the ability
to have the charter of choice, whether it is a State charter or
a national bank charter, is significant and important, and the
industry will continue to voice that, in my opinion.
Mr. Flood. And I will tell you, most of the banks in
Nebraska that were OCC-regulated have given up their national
charters and they have opted for the State charter in the last
10 years. It is amazing, because the OCC has not demonstrated a
real willingness to want to regulate a bunch of rural banks and
community banks in Nebraska.
With that, I will say this is a very impressive community.
You have a very impressive Member of Congress who represents
you. I wish I could recreate this in Lincoln, Nebraska,
tomorrow, because this is the kind of conversation that shows
me your community is going in a direction where you are going
to build wealth and provide opportunities to the people who
grew up here, and I hope it all stays in Arkansas so that this
blossoms into something that looks really, really, really,
really healthy in 20 or 30 years.
With that, thank you, Mr. Chairman. It was good to see you,
Mr. Nickel. And it was a pleasure being here.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back. Do either of you
have another question? We are good on time, right? Do you want
to do a final round now, a wrap-up round? You just wrapped up.
That was very impressive. But we will let you reopen.
Mr. Nickel. Yes, I just have some cleanup.
Chairman Hill. Why don't we say I will yield you 2 minutes,
and we will see if there is a wrap-up. I yield to my friend
from North Carolina.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you. I want to first of all associate
myself with your comments about the Senate. One of our
colleagues famously observed it takes the Senate 6 months to
sneeze, so we are trying to do all we can to be patient on
their process on this accredited investor bill.
Just as a wrap-up, I saw some agreement. I want to just
open it up to the witnesses, if you have anything you want to
chime in on about the challenges you are facing with the
current accredited investor rules and definitions.
Mr. Wheelis, I'll start with you.
Mr. Wheelis. Yes. I think you are in a very friendly
audience for this, because we all understand how important it
really is and how to drive that investment level down. Because
we know that there are a lot of people who would actively
support innovation in its highest form if they were granted the
opportunity. So yes, we applaud your bill very much.
Mr. Nickel. Would anyone else like to jump in here as we
close out?
Mr. Loganathan. Yes. I just wanted to add that any of the
early startup concepts are actually funded by individual angel
investors, before any of the venture capital firms come into
play. I fully support where you are going with this, because I
think we need to expand that entry point for individuals to
come in and support those initial founders who do not have the
backing of large venture capital firms, particularly in the
seed phase, which is going to be absolutely important.
Mr. Nickel. That $50,000 or $100,000 that someone has could
be the difference in some amazing new technology, and right
now, if you do not have a million bucks, you cannot even get in
at that level.
Just wrapping up, Commissioner Marshall, I enjoyed talking
with you again about our excellent Commissioner of Banks,
Katherine Bosken, in North Carolina. You are both close. From
your experience working with fintechs, what is the advice I
should bring back to Commissioner Bosken?
Ms. Marshall. For my counterparts across the country, if
they are not already doing it, I encourage them, through your
leadership and that of other Members of Congress, to help
cultivate this type of engagement, and to ensure that they do
not feel that it is maybe inappropriate to engage in those
conversations. I believe that it is wholly appropriate and
important for the future of it that we are in those
conversations early on. So, the regulatory agencies, working
with the industry, working with the entrepreneur companies,
working with Members of Congress, if we are all collectively
engaging in discussion, we are going to come out on a very
strong footing going forward, and leave the financial services
industry to the next generation, it is critical that we
continue to do so, and I encourage them to seek opportunities
to engage as well.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Flood is
recognized for 2 minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. I would say that
when I was in Nebraska, before I ended up in Congress, I was at
a nonprofit called Invest Nebraska, which receives up to $16
million a year in State funds. Do you have a similar public-
private kind of nonprofit corporation that provides access to
that risk capital, does some of the vetting, and helps kind of
hold the hands of those young entrepreneurs--well, they are not
young--of any entrepreneur coming in?
Mr. Orduna. Yes, there are several agencies. The one that
probably most clearly fits is Innovate Arkansas, which is a
recipient and also channels funds from the State as well as
private. And that is something that is absolutely critical.
I am very familiar with Innovate Nebraska as well, and some
of the capital partners they have, like Burlington. They do a
great job focusing not just on agricultural technology and
agricultural biotechnology, but I think expanding beyond as
well. We see the same thing in Iowa. In Iowa, there is an
initiative with Debi Durham, the economic development director,
and BioConnect Iowa, which is a nonprofit, and again, is very
focused on one particular sector, which is agricultural
technology.
Here in Arkansas, though, I think our focus is broad, which
I think is important. We have talked about fintech, which is
great. We are the birthplace of fintech because of FIS, I think
we proudly claim. But Representative Flood, I think the focus
hopefully that I want to close on is that we are agnostic and
supportive of all of the different technology sectors,
industries, and areas where innovation and entrepreneurship is
being explored and being cultivated.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Hill. Thank you, Mr. Flood. Let me thank our
witnesses for being here today. And I want to thank everybody
in Little Rock and The Venture Center for hosting today. This
is exactly what this building is for. And we have had such a
success over the first decade here at The Venture Center, we
are really looking forward to the expansion that is going to be
announced shortly, that is going to continue to see The Venture
Center expands its mission.
And this is something I certainly dreamed about when I was
the Chair of the Chamber of Commerce here, that we would have a
more risky outlook for development here in Little Rock. We are
great at logistics. We are great at wholesale. We are great at
transportation. We are great at health care. We are great at
government. We are great at service businesses here. There is
no doubtthat we are a capital city, and that is what it feels
like. So, we do not boom and we do not bust, and we used to
brag about that for 40 years economically here.
But my pitch as Chair was that we need to increase our risk
profile. We need to have a wider beta on the companies that
operate here, because that produces wealth and gain and career
opportunities for people over the long haul, and at a much
faster rate. And I think this has been an exciting first decade
for The Venture Center.
And Mr. Wheelis, we are so grateful to you for your
partnership at FIS, and we hope that the innovation that you
have seen here has helped to expand the portfolio of product
offerings for your global audience at FIS.
With that, if there are no other questions from our
Members, this hearing is adjourned.
And let me just say, in closing, having adjourned the
hearing, we are going to have an opportunity to hear from
BankLabs, BOND.AI, and Securitech, and have a bit of a
demonstration day down the hall for our Members so they get to
hear and ask questions of portfolio companies that have done so
well here at The Venture Center.
I thank everybody for coming out today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
[Whereupon, at 10:23 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

December 8, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
