- THE SEMI-ANNUAL REPORT OF THE BUREAU OF CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE SEMI-ANNUAL REPORT OF
THE BUREAU OF CONSUMER
FINANCIAL PROTECTION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

NOVEMBER 29, 2023
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-59

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-098 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
November 29, 2023............................................     1
Appendix:
November 29, 2023............................................    79

WITNESSES
Wednesday, November 29, 2023

Chopra, Hon. Rohit, Director, Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau (CFPB)..................................................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Chopra, Hon. Rohit...........................................    80

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Barr, Hon. Andy:
``Federal Business Loan Data Collection Election Form''......    83
Fitzgerald, Hon. Scott:
Written statement of the Consumer Bankers Association (CBA)..    84
Sessions, Hon. Pete:
``Remarks of CFPB Director Rohit Chopra at White House
Roundtable on Protecting Americans from Harmful Data Broker
Practices,'' dated August 15, 2023.........................    91
Wall Street Journal editorial, ``The CFPB Targets an
Antiterror Tool,'' dated November 28, 2023.................    95
Chopra, Hon. Rohit:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Barr........................................   108
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Casten......................................   163
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Flood.......................................   160
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Garbarino...................................   107
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Gottheimer..................................   104
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................    98
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Kim.........................................   133
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Lawler......................................   101
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Loudermilk..................................   167
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Luetkemeyer.................................   166
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Norman......................................   157
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nunn........................................   146
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Ogles.......................................   171
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Sherman.....................................   165
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Steil.......................................   144
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Timmons.....................................   142
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Velazquez...................................   170
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Wagner......................................   104
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nikema Williams.............................   155

THE SEMI-ANNUAL REPORT OF
THE BUREAU OF CONSUMER
FINANCIAL PROTECTION

----------

Wednesday, November 29, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick McHenry
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives McHenry, Lucas, Sessions,
Posey, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Wagner, Barr, Williams of Texas,
Hill, Loudermilk, Mooney, Davidson, Rose, Steil, Timmons,
Norman, Meuser, Fitzgerald, Garbarino, Kim, Donalds, Flood,
Lawler, Nunn, De La Cruz, Houchin; Waters, Velazquez, Sherman,
Scott, Lynch, Green, Cleaver, Foster, Beatty, Vargas,
Gottheimer, Gonzalez, Casten, Pressley, Horsford, Tlaib,
Torres, Garcia, Nickel, and Pettersen.
Chairman McHenry. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``The Semi-Annual Report of
the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.''
I now recognize myself for 4 minutes for the purposes of an
opening statement.
Good morning. The public's trust in our financial
regulators is shaken. Earlier this year, a Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau (CFPB) employee made an unauthorized transfer
of records containing personally identifiable information (PII)
and confidential supervisory information. Director Chopra, your
agency subsequently tried to downplay this major data breach.
We recently found out that the Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency (OCC) hired a fraud, who repeatedly lied about his
workplace experience, to lead its Office of Financial
Technology. The OCC also tried to sweep this incident under the
rug.
Finally, we are all aware of the allegations of widespread
and entrenched workplace misconduct at the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC). These allegations directly
implicate Chair Gruenberg and span his almost 20-year tenure as
leader of the agency. Director Chopra, as CFPB Director, you
have a seat on the FDIC Board, where you have made your
presence known, from the ouster of former FDIC Chair
McWilliams, to the March bank failures and the subsequent weeks
of inaction thereafter. In other words, what the heck is going
on at the FDIC?
Director Chopra, this committee is interested in hearing
what you knew about the allegations, when you knew it, and any
actions you have taken to remedy this unacceptable situation.
This string of scandals has left many, including myself,
questioning whether these agencies are up to the task of
protecting consumers and ensuring the safety and soundness of
our financial system.
When you are not dealing with internal mismanagement, the
Biden Administration supposedly has independent financial
regulators that are busy serving as political actors for the
Administration. Director Chopra, your leadership is a glaring
example of this alarming trend of becoming a hyper-partisan
agency doing the bidding of the White House rather than
protecting American consumers. That is much more about
election-year politics than about what is right for consumers.
The ongoing barrage of press releases from the CFPB is
misleading at best. They too often paint with a broad brush to
vilify entire sectors of the financial services industry and
even the U.S. financial system as a whole rather than targeting
independent bad actors. To make matters worse, when the Biden
Administration doesn't have the authority or the votes in
Congress to make a change, the CFPB, under your leadership,
simply forges ahead and works unchecked. One need only look at
your Small Business Data Collection rulemaking, Section 1071 of
the Dodd-Frank Act, which goes well beyond the CFPB's statutory
authority to require the collection and reporting of onerous
amounts of information in an attempt to facilitate the naming
and shaming of lenders whose business activities are
unfavorable to progressive activists. That is why House
Republicans will pass a resolution this week to protect small
businesses' access to affordable credit by rescinding this
burdensome and overly-complex rule.
But I would like to close on an area where I believe we
have found some agreement, which is a good thing, and that is
on your work on the Section 1033 data privacy proposal. We have
talked about this in private. To be clear, I think what you
have proposed is far from perfect, but I believe there is
common ground between your proposal and the Data Privacy Act
that this committee passed earlier this year. We agree on the
core of the issue, that Americans should have greater control
over their sensitive financial data. Consumers should know
where their data is going and how it is used, and should be
able to terminate the collection of their data by certain
firms. To ensure our data privacy policy is not subject to the
whims of any Administration, I believe it is critical that we
make law here, not just regulation, although your regulation is
a good step.
I hope we can work constructively on this issue moving
forward so that Americans' financial data privacy is protected
for the long term.
With that, I yield back, and I recognize the ranking member
of the committee, Ms. Waters, for 4 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning. I would like to welcome Director Rohit Chopra back to
our committee and applaud the excellent work the CFPB has done
under your leadership to protect our nation's consumers. I am
also pleased that this coming Saturday, Director Chopra will
join me in my district in Los Angeles for a town hall meeting
with my constituents to discuss consumer protections and access
to banking products and services. We will also hear from senior
executives from Wells Fargo, PNC Bank, City National Bank, and
local stakeholders.
While the Senate is moving forward with a hearing featuring
Big Bank CEOs next week, I am very disappointed that this
committee is breaking with the tradition I established as
chairwoman to hold the same hearing. Our Members deserve the
same opportunity to conduct oversight of our nation's big
banks. I hope the chairman will reconsider his decision and
convene the CEOs for a hearing as soon as possible.
Now, as the Solicitor General argued before the Supreme
Court in October, the CFPB's funding structure is
constitutional, and gutting the only agency dedicated to
protecting our nation's consumers in the financial marketplace
will harm our economy and communities. The lawsuit before the
Supreme Court is a part of a broader extremist effort by House
Republicans to undermine and defund critical government
agencies and programs, even Social Security and Medicare. To be
clear, every single court that has reviewed CFPB's funding has
reaffirmed its validity, other than the extremist Fifth
Circuit. Committee Democrats urge our nation's justices to
stand with the 82 percent of Americans, including 77 percent of
Republicans, who want the agency to continue doing its job.
It is no mystery why the CFPB has such broad bipartisan
support. It has cracked down on financial institutions that
repeatedly engage in abusive practices, held lenders
accountable for discriminating against borrowers, taken action
to remove medical debt from credit reports, eliminated junk
fees, increased access to capital for small businesses,
particularly businesses of color, and more.
Unfortunately, this week, House Republicans have launched
an effort to harm small businesses and help the Big Banks
continue to price gouge them by overturning the CFPB's Small
Business Lending Rule, which implements Section 1071 of the
Dodd-Frank Act, that I worked on with House Small Business
Committee Ranking Member, Nydia Velazquez. This section
requires lenders to collect and report data on small business
lending similar to what they already do for mortgage lending.
This would help reduce borrowing costs for small businesses by
creating a more transparent, competitive marketplace, and
combat discriminatory lending practices. I am disappointed that
Republicans are moving forward with this anti-small business
effort, and I would remind my colleagues that market
transparency is a fundamental pillar of free market capitalism,
and that is exactly what this rule is focused on.
I look forward to hearing from Director Chopra about the
importance of this rule and the other good work of the CFPB. I
yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, who is also the Chair of our
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Monetary Policy.
Mr. Barr. The CFPB is the most-unaccountable agency in the
entire Federal bureaucracy, and it is not just about Director
Chopra; it is the structure itself. But, Director Chopra, under
your leadership, the agency has acted unilaterally and
arbitrarily outside its statutory mandate, and we have seen
time and time again, the Bureau, under you and your
predecessors, pursue a lawless regulations-without-rules
approach, and attempt to change the law without congressional
authorization and without complying with the Administrative
Procedure Act. This has not only led to a lack of
accountability by the agency and a lack of accountability to
the American people, but it has also harmed the very consumers
that, sir, your agency is supposed to protect. Due to the
CFPB's novel funding mechanism, Congress has no visibility into
the agency, and Congress needs to regain its power of the
purse, subject the Bureau to the congressional appropriations
process, and rein in this regulator.
And you may have noticed that Congress rejected an
amendment to defund the agency. We just need to fund the agency
the right way, the constitutional way, and that is through the
power of the purse so that the agency becomes a professional
nonpartisan regulator, not a partisan regulator that acts
outside of the law. And we will bring light to this today. I
yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the ranking member of our Subcommittee on Financial
Institutions and Monetary Policy, Mr. Foster, for 1 minute.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Director Chopra.
Since we passed the Dodd-Frank Act that created the CFPB back
in 2010, the CFPB has effectively fulfilled its mission to
protect consumers from unfair, deceptive, and abusive practices
in financial markets, despite coming under continual attack.
And despite those attacks, the CFPB has continued its work,
securing over $20 billion in relief for harmed consumers, over
$4 billion in penalties for violations of the law, and millions
of responses to consumer complaints, all while adapting its
supervisory activities to a rapidly-changing financial sector,
and the public understands that.
As the ranking member pointed out, over 82 percent of
Americans and 77 percent of Republicans support the mission of
the CFPB. And as our financial system becomes more digitalized
and complex, so do the scams and abuses and junk fees that
threaten the life savings of the American people. So, I
encourage you to stay vigilant to our new challenges, and thank
you for joining us today. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back.
Today, we welcome the testimony of the Honorable Rohit
Chopra, Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Board--
Bureau, sorry. We wish it was a board. Director Chopra, thank
you for being here. You will have 5 minutes for an oral
presentation of your testimony, and without objection, your
written statement will be made a part of the record. You are
now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ROHIT CHOPRA, DIRECTOR, CONSUMER
FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU (CFPB)

Mr. Chopra. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Waters,
and members of the committee. I appreciate you holding this
hearing today. This is my 25th appearance before Congress in my
career, and I am grateful to many of you on this committee, on
both sides of the aisle, for taking the time to meet with me
and provide advice to the CFPB on how to address the challenges
and opportunities we must all tackle: protecting sensitive
personal financial data; reducing credit reporting errors;
preserving relationship banking; giving consumers more choice;
and so much more.
Since I was here in June, I am pleased to share that the
CFPB has reached milestones on many of these issues, like
accelerating open banking in the U.S. and protecting financial
privacy, while continuing to enforce the law fairly and deliver
results for consumers and law-abiding businesses. Today, I want
to share some observations about household financial stability
and highlight some progress on our areas of work.
As we enter the holiday season after a sustained period of
higher interest rates, the CFPB is sharpening its focus on the
evolving patterns of household debt. And over the past few
years, borrowing has accelerated across many key product
segments. Americans now owe more than $17 trillion in household
debt. Total outstanding credit card debt eclipsed $1 trillion
last year for the first time since the CFPB began tracking it.
Auto loans have grown quickly, to an estimated $1.6 trillion.
The CFPB's analyses have found that rates and fees can
contribute to persistent credit card debt for a growing number
of consumers. Americans paid $130 billion in interest and fees
on credit cards last year, while annual percentage rates rose
far above the cost of offering credit. The CFPB is taking a
number of steps to give consumers the ability to switch and
take advantage of new offers.
The return to repayment for Federal student loans continues
to be an area that we are monitoring, particularly the effect
on other loan obligations like auto, credit card, and others.
Outstanding auto loan debt has grown, particularly given the
higher cost of vehicles during the pandemic and higher interest
rates. These payments are consuming a greater share of income
for many consumers, and we are actively monitoring credit
performance.
Residential mortgage activity has unsurprisingly declined.
The decline has been precipitous, while interest rates, fees,
discount points, and other costs have increased. The result is
that homebuyers have been paying much more. The CFPB is looking
for ways to facilitate more refinancing activity, if and when
prevailing mortgage interest rates subside, to ensure that
borrowers who experience financial distress can navigate
alternatives to foreclosure, and we are looking to streamline
rules and procedures for servicers who are offering loan
modifications.
Since our Semiannual Report, the CFPB has proposed a rule,
as the chairman mentioned, under Section 1033, to accelerate
the shift to what is known as, ``open banking,'' in the United
States. We have also initiated an early part of the process to
improve accuracy in credit reporting, especially for data
brokers. We are also taking steps to address very widespread
inaccuracies on credit reports when it comes to medical bills.
The CFPB's supervision and enforcement program is
protecting both consumers and honest firms who must compete
against those who egregiously violate the law. In the last 2
years, we have obtained orders totaling $8 billion in victim
redress and penalties. We are also tackling the junk fees that
have been creeping across sectors of the economy and
interfering with consumer choice.
The CFPB has even shifted its supervisory resources toward
many of the nonbanks due to the significant role that they play
in financial services today. We have also proposed a rule to
ensure that many of these large nonbank companies adhere to the
same rules that banks, credit unions, and other financial
institutions do.
In August, our complaint database reached 4 million
submissions, and I am proud of the CFPB's work in getting
consumers the resolutions they deserve, often through referrals
from local organizations, your offices, and many others.
Again, Chairman McHenry, I want to thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today. We value all of your
input, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Director Chopra can be found on
page 80 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes for questions.
Director Chopra, as I mentioned in my opening statement, I
think we have some alignment here on updating data privacy
standards and your implementation of Section 1033. You noted
the importance of empowering consumers to exercise their full
data rights without being trapped by powerful incumbents and
without losing control of their data. How does your proposal
ensure that consumers can exercise full control over their
financial data?
Mr. Chopra. Pursuant to the statute, the rule requires that
consumers are able to permission their sensitive personal
financial data, and to prevent it being exploited by other
actors, we have put in some safeguards to ensure that it is
being permissioned only for the purpose of those financial
services. I hope, Chairman McHenry, that you can legislate and
figure out ways to address privacy more broadly. As you
mentioned, this rule is just one piece, but I think a
legislative framework on privacy would be hugely valuable.
Chairman McHenry. Yes, and you allow for an opt-in
provision. You ban the secondary use. There are some really
smart things that you have approached this with, and you have
taken input from a wide variety of people, correct?
Mr. Chopra. Yes, and we looked at the discussions you all
have had, especially where there is agreement. I really want
this to be durable to last. I think it is important to restrict
secondary use. You shouldn't be able to bait someone to get
their sensitive data and then use it for a totally different
purpose.
Chairman McHenry. Is there a way for companies to use
anonymized data that they have captured from consumers in order
to build new products? Do you think that is a viable use?
Mr. Chopra. That is a place where we are specifically
looking for input. One of the challenges that we are dealing
with in today's modern market is that re-identification is
becoming easier to do, particularly with very advanced
artificial intelligence. So, I think that is a challenge we are
going to have to encounter and wrestle with through this
process.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. I look forward to continuing that
conversation. Now, as I have asked other financial regulators,
this summer, you announced that you have had discussions with
the European Commission, and you, ``started a dialogue,'' on
consumer financial protection issues. Under what authority are
you taking those actions for those negotiations?
Mr. Chopra. Just to be clear, I think many of the developed
economies are seeing the growing role of China, Chinese
technology firms, and financial data in the world. We are
seeing that we have many issues in common when it comes to
surveillance, and when it comes to payments. So this, just to
be clear, is a meeting. One of my predecessors, Acting Director
Mulvaney, launched an initiative to join a global financial
innovation network. Again, we see this as a way to understand
what other economies are doing, especially when it comes to----
Chairman McHenry. Along those lines, they actually had
public disclosures about those conversations--Director
Kraninger, and Director Mulvaney. Do you intend to provide
meeting minutes or any sort of public disclosure on what those
conversations----
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We will try and make sure that we provide
transparency as to what is being discussed. I think the purpose
of it, again, is, as we are seeing data being a growing factor,
especially in financial services in the U.K. and Europe, all of
us are dealing with new ways of fraud, especially generative AI
fraud. So, we are really happy to do that.
Chairman McHenry. But from our perspective, what we want to
know is what you are doing in your job and whether or not our
existing rules require disclosures for these international
bodies? And I am asking you this specifically because your
Bureau is doing this just like other financial regulators, and
providing nothing in the way of disclosures around that other
than to announce that you are having the conversations.
Mr. Chopra. Okay.
Chairman McHenry. We would like the transparency.
Mr. Chopra. Okay.
Chairman McHenry. Finally, digital assets. Under your
proposed rulemaking, you interpret the word, ``funds,'' to
include digital assets. Walk me through your thinking on that
proposed rulemaking, but let's start with this: How many firms
do you think you are touching with your notice of proposed
rulemaking?
Mr. Chopra. We put an estimate. We believe it is the
largest tranche, and many of them are going to be known to you.
These are large firms that have nonbank payment apps,
essentially. I think with respect to the definition, we have
seen a number of court decisions that have sought to interpret
the meaning of, ``funds.''
Mr. Chairman, we have taken a very judicious approach to
this to essentially focus on what is really being used as a
consumer payment, not other digital asset uses, especially in
wholesale or trading or anything. We are really talking about a
payment, and I know you all are thinking through stablecoins
and payments. We really welcome the discussion on that as well.
Chairman McHenry. Thank you. I now recognize the ranking
member for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Director
Chopra, as I mentioned in my opening statement, more than a
decade ago I worked closely with Congresswoman Velazquez to
ensure that the Dodd-Frank Act included Section 1071 so that we
could shine a bright light on the small business lending
market. Unfortunately, we have seen time and time again how
some small businesses and their borrowers, especially those
that are minority-owned, women-owned, or in rural areas, have
charged more than they should be charging, if their application
was not denied in the first place.
As you know, I have long been disappointed that the Section
1071 rule took more than a decade to complete. Others were
frustrated, too, including ReShonda Young, a Black woman who
founded Popcorn Heaven, a small business selling gourmet
popcorn in Waterloo, Iowa. In 2014, she joined others to
successfully sue the CFPB during the Trump Administration to
compel the agency to complete the rulemaking. Ms. Young
explained that she was the victim of a discriminatory lending
practice, saying, ``In several instances, there was just
blatant discrimination, and in other cases, I found out about
it later on, and it wasn't just me.''
After the CFPB, then led by a Trump appointee, agreed to a
court-supervised settlement to complete the rulemaking, Ms.
Young said, ``I am just really humbled to be part of the
process. Sometimes, we feel so small, and this is one of those
things that shows that if we are willing to speak up, we
actually can make a difference.'' Ms. Young has since sold her
business and is now working with other investors to open the
first Black-owned bank in Iowa, with the goal of being
certified as a community development financial institution
(CDFI) and offering small business loans in a more-equitable
manner than she was served.
Director Chopra, do you believe Congress should ignore
entrepreneurs like Ms. Young and vote to rescind the CFPB's
small business transparency rule? Specifically, who wins and
who loses if the small business lending market continues to be
opaque?
Mr. Chopra. I think the pandemic showed how important small
businesses were in our economy and to so many entrepreneurs who
struggled to get loans. And I think it is important to have a
small business loan market that is free of discriminatory
practices. We have done this with mortgages, and I think
Congress has told the CFPB, let's do this with small business.
Ms. Waters. And, Director Chopra, would you also briefly
discuss how the final rule minimizes the impact on community
banks and credit unions?
Mr. Chopra. We took a number of steps during the comment
period to reduce many of the questions that are being asked. We
took steps to extend when they would have to comply with it. We
were under a court order. We completed our requirement under
that court order in time. But our goal is to really make sure
there is a lot of support to make sure that the smallest
institutions can comply with this, and we also exempted a
substantial number of them who do not make many small business
loans.
Ms. Waters. Director Chopra, the CFPB issued guidance in
October to implement Section 1034(c) of Dodd-Frank, which
generally prohibits large banks and credit unions from charging
fees to provide basic account information to a consumer about
their own account when they request it. Would you discuss the
type of fees banks are charging consumers to access their own
information and how you would expect this new guidance will
help ensure financial institutions follow the law and do not
impose these types of junk fees on consumers?
Mr. Chopra. If we want consumers to be able to manage their
financial lives, they need to be able to get the basic
information about their accounts, and Congress made clear in
the Act that large institutions cannot throw up big barriers or
create obstacle courses for people to get that information. We
have seen a number of fees that may be unreasonable. We have
even seen a fake paper statement fee where they neither printed
the statement nor mailed it. So, we are trying to make sure the
law is being followed with fidelity.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Director Chopra. You are
doing a fantastic job. I am so pleased that you are there
heading the CFPB, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Arkansas, Mr. Hill,
the Vice Chair of the committee, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Director, it's good to
have you back. I wanted to pick up on a couple of topics that
we started on in June and follow up on Section 1033, and
continue that conversation. And, of course, that rule is rooted
in the statute of Dodd Frank, and I grant that, but we have had
13 years to think about what the right direction is, and I want
to see that we get it right the first time. We have had a
couple of good discussions about that, but I want to continue
that.
When you testified in June, I asked you about the scope
being considered for this proposal, which hasn't changed from
the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act
(SBREFA), Reg E, Reg Z, or the topic, and your focus on
transaction data. But the proposal goes on, as it has now been
released, and says supplemental rulemaking might come out for
other covered persons and consumer financial products or
services. We have had 13 years, and the agency has covered this
and talked about it, and Congress has for 13 years. Why leave
that open-ended perpetual rulemaking potential? What other
covered persons and products or services besides Electronic
Benefits Transfer (EBT) did the CFPB consider but ultimately
decide against including in the proposal?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. I like to follow in some ways the 80-20
rule, which is, what can we get the most benefit for, and
really start seeing it get moving, and what we found was that
transaction data of your bank account or credit card was really
going to power much of open banking in the U.S. And even, let's
say, your auto loan or mortgage loan payment is often typically
still reflected in your transaction account. So when it comes
to mortgage, auto, and other places, that is a lot of other
financial institutions, so we wanted to make sure we studied
that a little bit more to see how much additional data it would
actually provide.
Mr. Hill. Okay.
Mr. Chopra. But I appreciate what you are saying.
Mr. Hill. Yes. The second issue that I raised in June, and
you did not have an answer to, and now we have a proposal, is
data breach liability. Where have you come ashore on who bears
the liability for a data breach?
Mr. Chopra. Generally speaking, when a consumer permissions
their data, they are handing over their data to that new
financial institution. We got some feedback that they wanted
the rule to have some specific regulatory text on liability
generally. I think one challenge is that we can't necessarily
provide liability protection for every single law that exists.
We are trying to figure out under which of our statutes can we
make sure it is absolutely clear that it is the receiving
institution that really is responsible for handling that data.
And in the data-handling section of the rule, we do specify the
requirements that the receiving firm would have.
Mr. Hill. Right.
Mr. Chopra. I don't know if we got it perfectly right. We
definitely want to hear feedback on this.
Mr. Hill. We will look at that, and we may follow up on
that. Let me switch gears. In the last few days, you have
issued a new rule, a large participants proposal by the agency,
and it has new supervisory oversight over nonbanks offering
digital payments and wallets. It is a pretty major step since
you are really an enforcement agency, not a supervisory agency,
I would say, principally. The proposal threshold for this
supervisory oversight is based on the annual volume of consumer
payment transactions, so I am not going to debate that, whether
it is $1 million or $5 million. I am more curious about some
clarity about who is covered. I assume that the six companies
named in October orders are included: Amazon, Apple, Google,
Meta, PayPal, and Square. Is that right?
Mr. Chopra. Again, that is currently a proposal, and let me
just share, Congressman Hill, we devote way more resources to
supervision, and the rule we have proposed----
Mr. Hill. You can send me a written answer to that. You can
comment on that, but let's talk about this question.
Mr. Chopra. Yes. No, I am trying to get to----
Mr. Hill. Yes, but I want to get to it.
Mr. Chopra. The top firms, what we have proposed is a
threshold for which, if they are above that, they would be
subject to supervision.
Mr. Hill. Who is left, besides the ones that were named in
October? Are big retailers covered on that?
Mr. Chopra. Again, it is not always a matter of public
record how many transactions or customers they have. What we
are trying to do is get comments on the threshold, and we would
then be able to determine who is above that. But if I were to
speculate, and I am just speculating, the most popular nonbank
payment apps would be covered.
Mr. Hill. Okay. I look forward to following up with you on
this.
Mr. Chopra. Of course.
Mr. Hill. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The
gentlewoman from New York, Ms. Velazquez, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters. Welcome to the committee, Director Chopra, it is really
good to see you, and I just want to say that I really
appreciate the CFPB's work protecting consumers, including
servicemembers, older adults, and my constituents. And I want
to join with Ranking Member Waters in our disappointment of the
Republicans' attempt to overturn the Section 1071 rule. Let me
state for the record that as the ranking member of the House
Small Business Committee, I strongly support the Section 1071
rule.
Mr. Chopra, I was very pleased to see the joint statement
on immigration status that the CFPB and the Department of
Justice issued. Is this based on new information?
Mr. Chopra. No. This is longstanding law from the Justice
Department and the CFPB.
Ms. Velazquez. To be clear, does the joint statement tell
banks they have to make loans to immigrants?
Mr. Chopra. No. At the CFPB, and the DOJ, we do not tell
anyone to make a loan to a particular person.
Ms. Velazquez. And can banks still consider an applicant's
immigration status?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. The guidance makes it very clear that a
creditor may consider immigration status when making a lending
decision.
Ms. Velazquez. So, why did the CFPB issue this joint
statement now?
Mr. Chopra. It was clear, based on feedback from lenders,
that there were court decisions and adjudications that raised
some questions about the use of immigration status. We affirmed
that you can use immigration status, but at the same time, we
wanted to make sure that it was clear that national origin
discrimination is completely prohibited.
Ms. Velazquez. I want to thank you for issuing guidance. As
the ranking member of the House Small Business Committee, I
know that smaller institutions often cannot afford an army of
lobbyists and big law firms, so more guidance is especially
helpful for them. I also know that discrimination on the basis
of race, national origin, or immigration status, unfortunately,
is still very much present today, and I take it very seriously.
I know what it is like to be judged by your name and
stereotyped as a member of an ethnicity.
I understand you recently took an enforcement action
involving a blatant, intentional, egregious discrimination case
against a population group that is prominently represented in
New York City. As a proud member of the caucus that championed
them, along with about 100 of my bipartisan colleagues, can you
please tell me about Citi's discrimination against Armenian
Americans?
Mr. Chopra. We recently finalized an enforcement action
that addressed intentional discrimination against Armenian
Americans in Citibank's credit card business. They had a policy
of essentially disqualifying anyone whose name has a suffix of,
``Y-A-N,'' or, ``I-A-N.'' That is extremely common with
Armenian Americans, and in many cases, Citibank provided false
records about why those borrowers were denied and made up other
reasons for it. And again, I think our guidance tries to make
clear you can use immigration status, but you can't engage in
national origin discrimination.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Lucas,
is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Director Chopra. As
you know, the House will vote this week on a Congressional
Review Act resolution of disapproval to the CFPB's rule on
small business lending, led by my colleague, Chairman Roger
Williams. The Senate has already passed this resolution, which
required a bipartisan vote, and while Congress is working to
rescind the final rule, it seems this may be decided ultimately
by the courts.
In the meantime, I would like to focus on one aspect of the
final rule on which I would appreciate clarification. The
Paperwork Reduction Act requires agencies to determine the
total paperwork burden by hours of major rulemakings. This
measures the time required to generate and provide the
requested information of the rule. CFPB estimated the total
annual burden hours imposed by this final rule to be 8,302,000,
which is the equivalent of 947 years. Director Chopra, would
you discuss how the CFPB balances the compliance burden with
the value of the paperwork being produced, because 8 million
hours is a lot of time.
Mr. Chopra. We try and analyze various ways to reduce the
burden, and in the rule, we actually provided different
flexibilities. They don't have to use a particular form, but in
this case, Congressman, we were under a court order to complete
the rule. It was a statutory mandate, so we knew we had to do
it, and we tried to look at various ways that firms could be
able to use industry associations to help them collect it. So,
we always are looking at analyzing what kind of burden there is
when thinking about how we ultimately implement it.
Mr. Lucas. But broadly speaking, Director, how can the CFPB
best maximize the utility and the quality of information
received while minimizing, to the extent possible, the
paperwork burden imposed on the American public?
Mr. Chopra. We put a lot of thought into this, and I had a
discussion with a few of you. One of the reasons why these
rules can often create a lot of burden is when they are
excessively complex. And I think, overall, we need to continue
to shift to rules that are very bright line, that they are in
or out, so that we can reduce the amount of overall kind of
thinking about how to actually deal with it. In some cases, it
is hard. Congress may specify certain aspects that need to be
done, but we are looking at simplification wherever we can.
Mr. Lucas. I am, by training, a director and an
agricultural economist, and our main focus is on making sure
that we have enough food and fiber to meet our needs in this
country and in this world, and economics, by its nature, is,
how do you allocate those finite resources and unlimited
demands to maximize the return? Is there a volume of reporting
that outweighs the cost, I guess is what I am asking? Just
asking for every conceivable bit of information doesn't
necessarily add to the quality of the result. Do you have
economists, do you have people who work on those calculations
as opposed to just, how much information can we squeeze out of
people, but the value of it, again, the volume when it
outweighs the cost?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We have an Office of Research where we
have economists who help to look at all of this, and under the
regulatory flexibility analysis that we are required to do, we
talk through that. I will share, though, in terms of putting
value on the benefits, it also can sometimes be hard to give a
benefit and a number to not being illegally discriminated
against or put in a loan that was unlawful. We try our best,
and I won't say that it is always the easiest thing, but we put
a lot of rigor into what we are doing.
Mr. Lucas. We would suggest, Director, that with the vote
in the United States Senate and the efforts of Chairman
Williams here in the House, Congress is going to send a very
clear signal to you about how to address these issues, and I
hope that the agency will be responsive. But we shouldn't make
the best job guarantee in the history of the world being a
compliance officer at some financial institution, and that
appears to be what we have done is provided job security for
the folks who deal with these 8 million hours of paperwork, and
I am not sure that adds to the quality of life of my
constituents. And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from California, Mr. Sherman, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Director, I want to join with the ranking
member and others in commending you for an outstanding job. You
have dealt with 4 million consumer complaints, and returned
$17.5 billion to consumers with just your rule on overdraft
protection, saving consumers $5 billion. And that is just the
tip of the iceberg because when you take action, you not only
return money to wronged consumers, you deter bad practices
through the whole industry so the consumers don't get ripped
off in the first place. I want to commend your efforts on junk
fees. Because of my focus on capital markets, I digress a
little bit and mention that, unfortunately, the SEC is thinking
of adding a junk fee to mutual fund investors or many of them,
but that is not the focus of this hearing.
I also want to say that I am relatively confident the
Supreme Court will uphold your structure. It is so necessary to
make sure that you have the independence you need to do the
good work that you have been doing. I am also pleased that you
issued proposed rules dealing with Property Assessed Clean
Energy (PACE) loans. These loans seem to have perhaps a well-
intentioned purpose but are used by those who are predatory. My
home State of California took action in 2017. Your rule builds
on that work in California, providing not only the Truth in
Lending Act protection, but especially those ability to repay
determinations. Can I count on you not to weaken the rule as we
get from proposed to final?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. It is currently under process, but let me
just say the ability to pay rules are very, very important to
make sure that rulemaking meets its intended purposes. I
completely share your view that there are a lot of well-
intentioned elements of PACE lending, but it can also lead to a
lot of abuse.
Mr. Sherman. We have these debt settlement companies that
claim that they will have you pay off your debt without having
to pay the amount you owe. Your website says that dealing with
these companies can be risky. Some of these companies are
discouraging consumers from making payments, causing them to
default, and even encouraging them to take on additional debt.
What can you do about those who are advising people not to pay
what they owe and to even incur more debt they can't afford to
repay?
Mr. Chopra. Certainly, we have seen a number of issues
where consumers are seeking help, but, instead, they become
worse off. We recently finalized an order--we went to court to
get it--against one of the largest debt repair conglomerates
and obtained a judgment close to $3 billion. So, we continue to
try and monitor what are the vectors in which people are being
defrauded. We understand that there may be an uptick soon
because TikTok will be allowing more ads on this business, so
we are very much monitoring the situation.
Mr. Sherman. Just another reason to be wary of TikTok. We
have a real concern about Know Your Customer/Anti-Money
Laundering (KYC/AML), with 1.1 million reports of identity
theft. There is a thing called the credit header data, which is
just the name and address and Social Security number, nothing
else in the credit report. These are being used by financial
institutions in order to verify identity and to prevent
identity theft and to comply with the Know Your Customer laws.
There is some discussion in your agency to qualify just this
name, address, Social Security report as a consumer report.
Will this adversely affect the ability to prevent identity
theft and compliance with Know Your Customer laws?
Mr. Chopra. No, I appreciate the question, and we have not
proposed anything on this. We do not want to do anything that
would jeopardize a financial institution's ability to really
crack down on identity theft. I think certainly, though, we
know that this data is being used outside of financial
institutions, including to steal people's identity. So, I think
that is what we are looking at with respect to data brokers and
how we might handle some of this, but, again, we have not
proposed anything on this front.
Mr. Sherman. And finally, I hope you will make sure that
you have protection for privacy as you move forward with these
Section 1071 rules. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. We will
now go to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sessions, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Director
Chopra, it's good to see you. I must applaud you for your
glibness and your ability to effectively take questions from
both sides of this committee and to respectfully offer back
your viewpoint. I want to offer that to you, because I
appreciate your forthrightness.
Mr. Chopra. I appreciate that.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Director, as you know, The Wall Street
Journal yesterday or the day before put an article out, ``The
CFPB Targets an Antiterror Tool,'' and, essentially, it is
talking about selling credit header data to law enforcement.
But also, they had written another article, and been more
specific also about credit information that would be available
about what might be criminal history, that people who are going
to lend money would have that opportunity to buy this data and
information as they chose at the time they are going to give
someone money, offer a loan. If you could please address both
of those circumstances, because it seems like you are on the
wrong side, at least in my opinion, of this issue.
Mr. Chopra. Yes. And to be clear, we have not proposed
anything. We are a law enforcement agency as well. We need to
be able to identify bad actors. It has been nearly 4 years
since then-Attorney General Barr indicted three members of the
Chinese Communist Party's (CCP's) People's Liberation Army
(PLA) with respect to Equifax. There is no question that
sensitive data about each of us cannot just be used to steal
identities, but also for use by state and nonstate actors. I
think we want to make sure that data is being used in ways that
is appropriate here in the United States. There is not an
effort to stop law enforcement or, as Congressman Sherman
mentioned, to help financial institutions detect money
launderers, but we also need to think----
Mr. Sessions. How about other criminal history?
Mr. Chopra. On criminal history, I actually haven't heard a
reference to anything we have been doing on criminal history.
Generally speaking, for any sort of background report,
including a credit report, a tenant screening report, or an
employment background check, the only requirement that
currently exists right now is that that data be accurate. If it
is a consumer reporting agency, there are rights to dispute. I
am happy to talk about it with you separately, but I am not
familiar with the restrictions.
Mr. Sessions. Good. I will just do it right here. I am
going to ask unanimous consent to put into the record, Mr.
Chairman, two articles: number one, ``The CFPB Targets an
Antiterror Tool,'' that appeared in The Wall Street Journal;
and number two, ``Remarks of CFPB Director Rohit Chopra at
White House Roundtable on Protecting Americans from Harmful
Data Broker Practices'' from the CFPB website on August 15,
2023.
Chairman McHenry. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Director, I think that the reason why we get specific about
these items on both sides of the aisle is that we find that
there is happy-talk conversation between us, and then something
different appears, as in what might be the 1071 debacle that
our colleague, my baseball coach, Roger Williams, Chair of the
House Small Business Committee, headed up yesterday at the
Rules Committee. Great discussion, great dialogue, but we are
going to vote on it today. It received five Democratic votes in
the United States Senate, I think, earlier in October.
My point is that I would like to have, and I think you have
offered this to me, a conversation about these pending matters.
And while I do say that you offered that to me--sometimes in
our haste, we do it here--but I would like to have a
conversation about this because I think it would be in
everyone's best interest, including the CFPB, that we see these
rollouts of ideas closer to the same way.
Mr. Chopra. I want to do that, and I think the chairman
also mentioned this also relates to privacy, the Fourth
Amendment. There are all sorts of issues. It's always the best
thing when you can legislate on it----
Mr. Sessions. Yes.
Mr. Chopra. We are very happy to do that because the truth
is, once you legislate on it, it is----
Mr. Sessions. The Fourth Amendment is about privacy, but it
is also about somebody not taking your data and information----
Mr. Chopra. That is correct.
Mr. Sessions. ----without a court order.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much, Mr. Director. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, is
now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Director Chopra, I want
to begin by expressing my strong support to you and to your
staff at the CFPB for ensuring that Americans' data is accurate
and secure. You are doing a great job.
In March of this year, the CFPB issued a request for
information (RFI) on data broker practices, and you asked for
information about how this market works and what consumers'
experiences are with the data brokers. And I understand you
received over 7,000 comments, and, overwhelmingly, comments
from consumers expressed frustration with the lack of control
over who has access to their data, who uses their data, and who
is sharing their data, and comments over the difficulty
consumers have with opting out of having their data shared.
Even when they can identify data brokers, concerns were also
raised that data broker practices result in large amounts of
unwanted spam, marketing calls, emails, and, worst of all,
leave people vulnerable to identity theft and data breaches.
I know there has been some confusion about the Bureau's
work in relationship to data brokers from some of my Republican
friends. Can you explain how the comments received in the
requests for information is going forward?
Mr. Chopra. I appreciate that, and let me just say that I
think it is becoming increasingly scary about the types of
dossiers about us online--geolocation, religious attendance--
very sensitive data being compiled and often sold. The Fair
Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) is our core statute for ensuring
that those dossiers have some degree of transparency, that they
are accurate, and that people can dispute it.
So, we are trying to figure out what is the right way to
make sure in the modern data broker industry that there is some
evenhanded consumer protection. We have a lot of firms who
follow that clearly. And we want to make sure that we are
providing the appropriate clarity so we don't have an out-of-
control system. And I will share that a lot of these are being
used and purchased by people overseas, and it is a huge vector
for stealing identities and scamming people.
Mr. Scott. Let me ask you this question that is important
to all of us, and that is, we are all concerned about the
extent to which data brokers are collecting and selling
children's data--which is a big thing going on--and allowing
the children's data to be used for marketing, targeting, and
worse. One recent study found that 67 percent of phone
applications used by very young children collected highly-
sensitive data and then transmitted this data to third parties.
Tell us about this?
Mr. Chopra. Many years ago, Congress passed the Children's
Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA), and with the advent of
more data brokers, I think kids and seniors are going to be
very important for us to think about as to how we safeguard
their sensitive data. There is work on this committee that I
think you can all do. We are happy to really work with you to
figure out what are all the solutions we can get, because
collecting all of this kids' data, too, when they are an adult
can just be another way to defraud people.
Mr. Scott. We really have to look out for our young people,
our future generations, and make sure they are educated
properly and that their interests are protected when it comes
to this new technology. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, is
now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Many of the
omnipresent defenders of the nonexistent problems of the people
talk about all the junk fees you have eliminated. So, would you
tell us what a junk fee is?
Mr. Chopra. Junk fees are ones that are typically not
subject to the competitive process. You have to click through
the screen. You find them at the end. Sometimes, they are for a
service that doesn't even really exist. Sometimes, they are
just completely hidden and random, so there are lots of
different ones. We have really tried to focus----
Mr. Posey. Okay. Can you give me a couple of examples of
those?
Mr. Chopra. For example, I mentioned to one of your
colleagues that we identified in one of our examinations and
similar other places a paper statement fee that was charged on
a recurring basis where the financial institution did not even
print out a piece of paper, nor did they mail it.
Mr. Posey. Yes. That just sounds like a fraud. Is there a
statutory definition? Have you put in the statute somewhere a
definition of a, ``junk fee,'' so we know exactly what we are
talking about?
Mr. Chopra. No, but we have tried to really articulate
through the various laws that we enforce where certain fees may
not be permitted under existing law.
Mr. Posey. Don't you think you should articulate those more
clearly or put them in writing so everyone knows what it really
is?
Mr. Chopra. We are trying to. We are trying to take the
feedback of where we should be issuing guidance on this.
Overall, I would say the market has really moved in many ways
and is being more clear about how fees are being assessed. That
is very, very good progress. But inasmuch that there are
particular places you think we need to issue more guidance, we
are very, very open to it. We have published some information
where we give examples of what we have uncovered in enforcement
and exams, that in some ways have been pretty egregious
violations.
Mr. Posey. How do you assess the impact of your regulations
on the cost of access to credit?
Mr. Chopra. Big picture or as it relates to fees or----
Mr. Posey. Big picture.
Mr. Chopra. Big picture, I think, as I mentioned to your
colleague, we try and really look and have fidelity to the
competitive market. We really want people to be able to compete
for business and that it is clear the product they are getting
and the price they are getting.
Mr. Posey. Does that involve assessing the cumulative
impact on the entire system of regulations?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. One of the places of feedback that, in all
my meetings with industry and that you all have given, is we
all need to be thinking about all of the issues together. The
CFPB is not the only one----
Mr. Posey. Would you describe your process for considering
the cumulative impact of your regulations on the access to
credit?
Mr. Chopra. We have a requirement under the statute, I
believe it is the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA). We have to
conduct an analysis about the impact of regulations and, of
course, we have to look at that in the context of other ones
that are current or are being implemented. In our proposed
rules, we tend to outline that, and we include some data and
estimates. We get comments on it and try and be able to refine
based on that input.
Mr. Posey. How do you use your cost-benefit analysis? Do
you do cost-benefit analysis if any of your regulations rise to
that level?
Mr. Chopra. Sorry. I just couldn't hear a little bit.
Mr. Posey. I said, have you done any cost-benefit analyses?
Have any of your regulations risen to that level?
Mr. Chopra. Risen to that level?
Mr. Posey. Yes, the standard. The government says you can
write a ridiculous rule, but if it doesn't harm people to the
tune of over $100 million----
Mr. Chopra. Right. The path we follow is really what is
spelled out in the statute. As I mentioned, in the proposed
rule, we have to spell out the cost. We articulate what the
benefits are, and we follow exactly what is in the statute. We
even collect comments on the analysis as well.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Illinois, Mr. Foster, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Director Chopra. I
was very encouraged to hear my Republican colleagues' support
for your mission, and that they agree with roughly 80 percent
of Americans that you are doing something useful here, and I
find that especially reassuring in light of the fact that
earlier this month, Republicans voted 140-78 to completely
defund the CFPB. I will just leave that there.
However, we have also heard a lot about the number of hours
that have to be spent on compliance as a real cost here. Do you
also track the number of hours that consumers lose, for
example, through ID fraud when they have to spend all afternoon
on hold replacing all of their credit cards?
Mr. Chopra. It can be very hard, but we know there have
been some reports that show the enormous amount of cost to
consumers, not even counting their time, of dealing with
identity theft, credit reporting errors, going back and forth
about inaccuracies. It is an enormous amount of time.
Mr. Foster. That is right, but quantifying it in the number
of hours, if you could make an attempt to quantify the number
of consumer hours that are sort of on the other side of the
scale here, that would be----
Mr. Chopra. We do know that there are millions of disputes
filed on credit reporting-related issues which does involve a
multi-step process.
Mr. Foster. Right, so you multiply that by the average time
the consumer wastes with a mistake on their credit file. We
have to balance everything, and that is an important weight to
put on the other side. I have been really encouraged to see
that you have raised the alarm over artificial intelligence
(AI) and where that is taking the whole thing. The leading edge
of this is probably AI-enabled deepfake impersonations, which
is going to have to result in our really raising the bar on
secure digital identity and proving you are who you say you
are. Where do you see that going and the role of----
Mr. Chopra. Let me just say that I strongly support any
efforts you all can make when it comes to getting better
digital identity verification. The amount that we would save
businesses and consumers in fraud would be enormous. I don't
know how to do it necessarily, but using just publicly-
available information about someone to authenticate, and when
we add in generative AI, we do have firms that allow you to
authenticate into their system with your voice. You as public
officials, it is becoming very easy to clone all of your voices
because once it is in the public domain, there is a data set to
be able to duplicate it. So, we have to make sure that we are
not opening up even more fraud with some of this.
Mr. Foster. Yes. In your conversations with other countries
that have been sort of looked at skeptically at this hearing,
have you taken a look at how they are dealing with it, because
some countries are doing a much better job, frankly, of a
secure, safe, privacy-preserving digital identity? And they did
not, for example, have hundreds of billions of dollars for
COVID benefit identity fraud, and it is a real decrease in the
amount of what the fraudsters can get away with to have a
secured digital ID.
Mr. Chopra. A stronger digital authentication layer would
have so many benefits, including other obligations that banks
have. It could reduce their cost on anti-money laundering
detection and really, overall, in our commercial economy.
Mr. Foster. Yes. McKinsey has estimated, I think, between 2
and 3 percent GDP loss from not having a high-quality digital
identity. Other countries are doing a better job, so I think
that is an area where you should pay attention to other
countries.
Okay. Now, there are other aspects of artificial
intelligence that are going to be huge. During the last years
when I was chairing the AI Task Force that we had set up on
this committee, we were wrestling with sort of bias-type
problems that happen when you just take a credit history and
you put it into a neural net that is incomprehensible, and out
comes an answer. And we are now going to be facing really even
more complex ones where the next generation of AIs learn from
their experience.
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Foster. So, it is like a child. You raise your child
perfectly, you make sure it is behaving properly, then you send
it off into the world with no guarantee that it won't come in
contact with things that make it become evil. How do you view
the increased surveillance you are going to need on AI after it
has been released in the wild?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. I think there are a lot of questions you
all have to answer. We have taken the view that it is important
that existing law not be sidestepped on this, because at the
end of the day, if there is generative AI making
representations, communicating with consumers, that has to be
truthful. When it comes to all sorts of uses, the existing law
still applies, but there is a lot we have to do on this.
Mr. Foster. Yes. When you figure it out, please let me
know.
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Foster. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My good friend,
Mr. Williams, often starts some of the discussions by asking
whether you are a capitalist or a socialist.
Mr. Chopra. As I mentioned, I think I have appeared before
Congress 25 times and have mentioned every time that I am very
much a capitalist.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I appreciate that, but I was curious--I
would assume that you believe the banking industry should be a
for-profit industry?
Mr. Chopra. Yes, and I think the banking industry is just
as essential as our communications infrastructure, and as our
electric grid.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Chopra, your actions are completely
different, though, than what you say. During your tenure at the
Bureau, the Administration has spoken of or taken actions on
banks' operating expenses, the fees institutions can charge,
interest rate caps on credit, increased capital requirements,
and, of course, interchange fees, and contracts between private
entities, just to name a few. You even sought to increase your
control over the credit reporting agencies and, therefore, who
can get a loan.
Taken together, we are looking at massive losses of
revenue, and loan and other credit losses, as well as very
large additional costs of compliance. All of this results in
higher costs and fewer banking services for customers and fewer
financial institutions to provide those services, all the while
giving the government more control over our personal finances.
And it begs the question, at what point can we just publicly
recognize that you and the Administration believe that
financial services should be a utility provided to the public
by the government?
Mr. Chopra. Nothing we have said has suggested that. We
want a lot of competing financial firms----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Chopra, you say----
Mr. Chopra. And if you look at the profitability of the----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Excuse me.
Mr. Chopra. Do you mind if finish this? If you look at the
profitability of the finance industry, we have actually seen a
way in which they have been able to be robust and create new
products and new revenue streams.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Director Chopra, what is happening is that
the regulation is running downhill and choking the small
institutions. You sit on the FDIC Board, do you not?
Mr. Chopra. I do.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. You see the mergers and the continued
consolidation of the industry, do you not?
Mr. Chopra. We do see it. We do review merger applications.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I just had a meeting this morning with Fed
Chairman Powell. He talked about the consolidation. It is
there. It begs the question then, if you see this, what are you
doing about it?
Mr. Chopra. We should have a discussion actually about
consolidation, because there are a few places where I think it
has driven, and one of the ways some institutions get preferred
cost of funding advantages because of perceptions about that.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. So, you recognize the problem. Have
you taken any actions whatsoever to relieve the regulatory
burden on small banks?
Mr. Chopra. One of the things we have done is we have tried
to make sure we are making our supervision fit for the actual
risks. We have shifted much of our supervisory resources to
larger players----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. You sit on the Financial Stability
Oversight Council (FSOC), too, do you not?
Mr. Chopra. I do.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Basel III is coming along. That is a
detriment to all of the small businesses, small banks, and
everybody else. It is going to hugely increase the costs. Can
we get your support of trying to minimize the impact of that
regulation on small banks?
Mr. Chopra. Just to be clear, as I understand it, the rule
that the agencies have proposed applies to banks with $100
billion or more in assets.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Director, I just got done talking to some
banks, and they were telling me the regulators are saying,
look, we know it starts at $100 billion and up, but get ready,
it is going to roll downhill. The banks are looking at it from
the standpoint that if they don't comply with it, there is a
wink and a nod going on here with the regulators that we have
to be able to live with as well. And what happens is you are
chasing consumers away from banks because banks are
constricting services to the online lenders, offshore stuff
where it is not regulated.
I want to quickly get to one more question I have here for
you with regards to a letter that I sent to you and the
Department of Justice with regards to warning the creditors
that unnecessary and overboard consideration of credit
applicants' permanent residency status could violate the Equal
Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA), despite consideration that the
criteria being expressly permitted under ECOA's Regulation B.
And I am concerned that by what you are doing, you are adding a
lot of confusion to the situation here. I know you addressed
some of this a while ago, but I am very concerned about the
confusion here. We haven't gotten a response to our letter yet,
and, to me, it looks like you are in direct violation of the
Know Your Customer law. Can you explain your position on that,
so it is not in violation, and there is no confusion for the--
--
Mr. Chopra. Mr. Chairman, may I answer this? I am out of
time, but----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. You have 4 seconds.
Mr. Chopra. Yes. May I answer?
Chairman McHenry. You did for everybody else. Go for it.
Mr. Chopra. Okay. I was going to say that, of course, the
Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements absolutely are the
initial part of the process.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. It is the law.
Mr. Chopra. The Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) requires, for a non-
U.S. person, to collect certain documentation. There should be
nothing that is in conflict of it. The guidance that was issued
explicitly allows the consideration of immigration status, but
I take your point if there is confusion, and we will respond to
your----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. If there is confusion, the law should take
precedence, which is KYC, not your joint----
Mr. Chopra. Oh, KYC, of course, has to be----
Chairman McHenry. And you will respond for the record.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. We will now go to the gentlewoman from
Ohio, Mrs. Beatty.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters. And good morning and thank you, Director Chopra, for
being here, and thank you for taking your time to testify today
and for all the work that you do at the CFPB to protect our
consumers. And let me join others in thanking you for traveling
and listening, attending town halls, and going far beyond, and
certainly, I have benefited from that. I'm very proud that a
few months ago, you were in my district in Columbus, Ohio,
meeting with consumers, and small business owners, and not only
did you come, you stayed and I think almost missed your flight
to answer all of those questions. And I really appreciate that
because we had a very productive roundtable, and I appreciate
you taking your work so seriously.
I am going to try to get through two questions quickly.
Director, we know that the CFPB's recently-proposed Section
1033 rulemaking invites public input on the question of whether
the rule should cover EBT accounts. And certainly, as you are
no doubt aware, and more so for some of my colleagues and the
public, EBT account holders, Americans who rely on programs
like the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) to
put food on their tables each month, constantly struggle with
access to their account information electronically in a
marketplace that is highly uncompetitive. My understanding is
that the Section 1033 rule aims to improve competition and
ensure consumers have reliable access to their own financial
data. Given these goals, it seems to me that it is critically
important that financially at-risk consumers and their EBT
accounts be included.
In addition, the proposed rule gives accountholders
legally-enforceable rights to access their data and creates
new, strong protections for data covered under the proposal.
Now, we have seen a massive increase in theft from EBT
accounts, and increased data access could help EBT
accountholders detect and report fraud. I know that is a lot.
Here's the question: Shouldn't the CFPB use this
opportunity to give financially-vulnerable customers control
over their financial data so they can protect themselves?
Mr. Chopra. Let me just say I totally agree that those who
are receiving EBT benefits and the transaction data they have,
that is very valuable. We are collecting comments on that. I
will share with you, and maybe we can talk offline--we are
trying to figure out with the USDA and State and local
governments, who really are the issuers of this, how it would
work because there is a slightly different way compared to bank
accounts. But we are trying to work through it, and it has
opened up some other issues about, do EBT recipients have
access to even knowing their balance? So, there are a whole
bunch of things that I want to look at there.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Maybe we can talk offline on that. Let
me kind of switch topics here and now go to the Section 1071
small business lending rulemaking. For decades before coming to
Congress, I was a very successful small business owner, and I
know we have colleagues on both sides of the aisle who will
always say, ``I am a small business owner.'' I think it is
critical to have a small business lending transparency rule
that will help root out discrimination and ensure that small
businesses have access to credit, especially those that are
owned by females, women like myself, or people of color. And I
believe that some of my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle who claim to be advocates for small businesses, claim
that this rule is too onerous for small lenders and are
advancing legislation to actually rescind this. I want to give
you my last minute to explain to us what provisions have been
built into the rule to accommodate small lenders, and to set
the record straight on how onerous the reporting requirements
are. Tell us about the resources to make us a little more
comfortable?
Mr. Chopra. Based on the comments we received, we increased
the threshold pretty substantially. It exempts a number of
small lenders. We reduced some of the collection requirements.
We are providing support and implementation guidance on how to
make it work. We are giving smaller lenders much more time to
comply. We are starting with the very largest banks. We really
did our best to implement this law with fidelity, and I hope
that we can really see the benefits of it over time.
Mrs. Beatty. I know my time is up, but let me just say some
of those questions came from Democrat and Republican small
business owners. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlewoman from Missouri, Mrs.
Wagner, is now recognized.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Director Chopra, the
CFPB's credit card late fees proposed rule attempts to help a
small number of credit card customers at the expense of a vast
majority of others. Cardholders who never pay late, which the
CFPB's own data and report indicates is 74 percent of all
Americans with credit cards, will not benefit from the reduced
fees, and according to the proposed rule, they could
experience, ``higher maintenance fees and lower rewards.'' The
Dodd-Frank Act requires the CFPB to consider the cost of its
rules. How does a rule that, by the CFPB's own admission, would
help only a small number of consumers while increasing costs
for cardholders across-the-board, survive a cost-benefit
analysis?
Mr. Chopra. Respectfully, I think the analysis suggests a
number of different permutations, but in the Credit Card
Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009 (CARD
Act), there is a statutory prohibition on fees that are not
reasonable and proportional. What we are doing is we are
evaluating the Federal Reserve's----
Mrs. Wagner. Did you do a cost-benefit analysis?
Mr. Chopra. Just if I could, we are evaluating the first 12
years of that rule, and what we are trying to do is to make
sure that those firms are able to recover their costs, are able
to really collect the fees they can, but not necessarily----
Mrs. Wagner. Why should responsible cardholders, who pay
their bills on time and typically never pay late fees, be
forced to subsidize frequent late payers?
Mr. Chopra. If you look at actually the profit and revenue
models of the card issuers, I don't think you will see that
subsidy occur.
Mrs. Wagner. It absolutely does by virtue of the rule.
Director Chopra, if this credit card late fee----
Mr. Chopra. No. Actually, I would just respectfully say
that----
Mrs. Wagner. It is my time, respectfully. Director Chopra,
if this credit card late fee proposal goes into effect, costs
for consumers will increase, not because card issuers want to
increase costs, but because they are required to do so. The
prudential regulators require banks to manage and offset their
credit risks, which banks would be required to do by taking
actions such as raising APRs, eliminating rewards, reducing the
amount of credit extended, or even restricting to whom it is
extended. How has the CFPB accounted for actions that credit
card issuers will be forced to take to properly manage credit
risk and other prudential regulatory requirements?
Mr. Chopra. This is a good question. With respect to the
proposed rule on late fees, we do know that credit card issuers
engage in risk-based pricing. That is the vast majority of the
market. In other words, they develop a price that is specific
to a person; they don't just have one price for everyone. So
inasmuch that someone is engaged in not paying, they can
substantially raise their rate. They can take all sorts of
actions, lowering their credit----
Mrs. Wagner. They will have to by virtue of the rule and by
virtue of what the prudential regulators are doing in terms of
safety and soundness. Did the CFPB engage with the prudential
regulators when preparing this proposed rule to ensure that
card issuers remain able to meet their safety and soundness
obligations?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. As part of how we think about----
Mrs. Wagner. You did? You are telling me that you engaged
with the prudential regulators on this?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. I am saying, yes.
Mrs. Wagner. Okay.
Mr. Chopra. Yes, we do.
Mrs. Wagner. Then, I don't understand. Let me get to my
question then. If you engaged with them, how can the agency
justify proposing a rule that would implicate these safety and
soundness obligations? I don't know how you justify it.
Mr. Chopra. Again, as I just mentioned, the way credit card
issuers originate, they can engage in risk-based pricing, so
they are able to raise rates for customers who are risky and
lower them for those who are less risky. They use a lot of data
in order to predict that. They have complex scoring models. We
certainly try and look at all the factors that are driving
pricing. What we do find right now in the credit card market is
actually that rates have increased beyond what interest rates
have been, so we are looking at all of those dynamics all the
time, and I am truly happy to talk through this.
Mrs. Wagner. You are taking responsible cardholders who pay
their bills, sir, on time and typically never pay late fees,
and you are forcing them to subsidize frequent late payers, and
I see no cost-benefit analysis that says otherwise in this.
This proposal is yet another example of the Biden
Administration seeking to score political points rather than
protecting American consumers. And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back
the balance of my time.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from California, Mr.
Vargas, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you and the ranking member for holding this important
hearing, and see if I can move over a little bit, Director, so
you can see me, not that that makes a difference. Again, I want
to thank you for testifying today, and I thank you for the
great work that you and your Bureau do to protect the consumers
of my district and across the country.
Since 2011, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has
protected consumers from unfair, deceptive, and abusive
business practices. To date, the CFPB has returned over $20
billion to 205,000,000 consumers. The Bureau is delivering
results for students, veterans, and many other Americans across
the country, and I appreciate that, and so do the polls.
Notably, according to a recent nonpartisan poll, over 82
percent of Americans support the CFPB and its mission to
protect consumers in the financial marketplace, and I have to
tell you, from my district, that seems to be correct. I get so
many compliments for the work that you have done and your
Bureau has done. I know it is tough. I know it is tough
sometimes up here not being able to answer all the questions
because you don't get time, but I appreciate the work you have
done.
Now, in the last question, you didn't have enough time to
answer. Is there a subsidy then from the people who pay their
credit cards on time and those who don't?
Mr. Chopra. No. There is no forced subsidy from one group
to another. We are trying to follow the law and be able to
implement that faithfully, and you must understand that
underwriting is increasingly individualized. It is not one
price that anyone pays. It is risk-based.
Mr. Vargas. The same thing happens in insurance, as you
know.
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Vargas. Absolutely, so I appreciate that. Now, in fact,
one of the things I do want to talk about a little bit, and it
has been talked about here, is cost-benefit analysis. How do
you determine that? For example, discrimination against women,
how would you weigh that? How many hours or what price is it
against the discrimination that a woman feels, the humiliation,
the opportunities that are missed? How do you weigh that,
because that has been brought up here and hasn't been
explained, as if a woman who is discriminated against, all of a
sudden because she lost a thousand dollars, you have a thousand
dollars' worth of time over here, it is an equivalent. I don't
believe that personally, but how do you weigh that?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. When there were widespread illegal
mortgage foreclosures and there was an attempt at cost-benefit
analysis, I believe one of the takeaways was that the children
in the home of an illegal foreclosure actually lost three grade
levels--I may not have that exactly right. You are right that
it is very hard to put a price on that, and we did a rule to
implement legislation you all passed on survivors of human
trafficking and repairing their life. It is very, very hard to
put a price on that, but, again, we do try our best to make
sure we are limiting costs, but sometimes the benefits, when it
comes to getting your life back, are extraordinary.
Mr. Vargas. And I hope you keep that in mind, because I
know there is a lot of pressure to just do a simple cost-
benefit analysis, dollars and cents, which doesn't take into
account the family, the humiliation, the standard of living,
really, that we all have, the belief and faith that we have in
the government, and maybe a lot of us in God and other things,
because you have to have right and wrong. I believe still there
is right and there is wrong, and sometimes to do right costs a
lot. I hope that you keep taking that into account instead of
just some crude cost-benefit analysis.
I do want to talk a little bit about AI. It is something
that scares me, to be honest with you. Maybe I have seen too
many darn movies about it, but it does seem like something
that, as Mr. Foster said, unleashed into humanity could do
great damage, especially to our financial system. Could you
comment on that?
Mr. Chopra. I certainly think the financial system,
especially when it is highly automated, which it is, when you
introduce very-opaque algorithms into it, I think there are
some worries about systemic risk of that, the extent to which
tremors could turn into earthquakes. I hope that you all can be
thinking about all the various ways that there could be risk
created. Now, AI, in some ways, in financial services, has been
used forever----
Mr. Vargas. For sure.
Mr. Chopra. ----for credit scores, and other things. We
have to make sure some of the existing laws on the books are
being followed, and that is really what has been our focus. It
is a much longer discussion about how we deal with generative
AI and fraud, the lending algorithms, but we are trying to make
sure we are beefing up our technology core so that we really
understand what is going on before it is too late.
Mr. Vargas. My time is up. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
Director Chopra, let me start with your policy statement
defining, ``abusive practices.'' Do you believe that financial
services companies should be held liable for not complying with
novel guidance or regulations that you have only recently
published on a retroactive basis?
Mr. Chopra. No, and, in fact, the abusive policy statement
really was an attempt to try and avoid situations where people
didn't know.
Mr. Barr. I appreciate that, and you have said that before
in this committee. I do appreciate that. So, can I take it from
your testimony that your policy statement will only apply
prospectively?
Mr. Chopra. The issue is that the statute has always
existed, but----
Mr. Barr. Okay. Fair enough. Reclaiming my time, I am
generally glad to hear what you just said, because I don't
think it is fair to punish companies for operating within the
boundaries of the law at the time the company was engaged in an
act or practice that was lawful at the time, even under the
preexisting statute. I do, however, plan to introduce a bill
which ensures that the Bureau does just that and does not try
to retroactively apply new requirements onto activities that
occurred in the past. And I would appreciate your input on that
and your working with me on that legislation to make sure that
we are achieving our mutual goal.
Mr. Chopra. And I want this to be durable and not ping pong
and not----
Mr. Barr. Right. Great.
Mr. Chopra. Sorry.
Mr. Barr. Great. Director Chopra, if a small business
begins a loan application process, can a lender under your
Section 1071 proposal disclose to them that they are required
to collect information under the direction of the Federal
Government?
Mr. Chopra. I need to look at the specific regulation, but
my understanding is that even the model form makes very clear
that this is a government requirement.
Mr. Barr. Okay. Does a small business loan applicant have
the right to refuse to provide this data under your proposal?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. It is actually not under the proposal. It
is in the statute.
Mr. Barr. Great. I agree, it is in the statute. So, under
1071 and under the statute, small businesses are not legally
obligated to provide data in connection with any application of
credit, but do you believe a small business owner should know
why an institution, before any underwriting occurs, is
collecting demographic information about them?
Mr. Chopra. If I understand your question, I think, yes,
that is right, and in the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA),
I believe there is a similar type of framework.
Mr. Barr. Okay.
Mr. Chopra. I would need to check.
Mr. Barr. Do you recognize that if a small business owner
fails to understand why the data is being collected, it could
lead to confusion and misunderstanding and potential liability
for a financial institution? In other words, if they are asked
to disclose their race or their ethnicity or their LGBT status
before underwriting occurs, then that loan application is
denied, that could lead to confusion as to the basis for the
denial of the application? You do understand that?
Mr. Chopra. I understand that.
Mr. Barr. Yes. And based on your response, I believe you
would agree with me that providing a simple document to
consumers or small business owners explaining all of this would
help clear up confusion in the small business lending space.
As chairman, I am asking myself for unanimous consent to
submit for the record a potential questionnaire crafted by the
Kentucky Bankers Association that would do just that.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
Director Chopra, my constituents who provide small business
loans in my district in Kentucky tell me that your 1071 rule
would force them to exit small business lending and will,
therefore, decrease availability and increase the cost of
credit for small Main Street borrowers. I believe this
questionnaire could help clarify the need for, or the lack of
any need for, this data collection effort and reduce incentives
for firms to exit the market because of fear of legal
repercussions.
Mr. Chopra. By the way, I am very open to that.
Mr. Barr. Okay. I will share it with you, and I appreciate
your feedback. My final question is about funding and the
Supreme Court and what the Supreme Court is about ready to do.
Did you see that the Fiscal Year 2024 Financial Services and
General Government Appropriations bill that we just took up in
the Congress, that the Congress funded the CFPB in that bill at
current levels? Did you notice that?
Mr. Chopra. I did.
Mr. Barr. And did you notice that Republicans, the
Republican Majority, with Democrats, voted down an amendment
that zeroed out the CFPB's funding?
Mr. Chopra. I didn't catch that, but your colleague
mentioned it, yes.
Mr. Barr. Yes. Clearly, some Republicans voted to zero it
out, but that amendment failed. I want you to take notice of
that, and I want the Supreme Court to take notice of that
because it demonstrates that the Congress is not about
eliminating consumer protection or the Bureau. It is about
upholding the Constitution and the separation of powers, and if
our bill were enacted, the agency would continue to operate.
The only difference would be that Congress would oversee the
agency spending in the same way it does for most other consumer
protection agencies, and I believe it is time for Congress to
regain its most important oversight tool, and that is the power
of the purse.
And with that, I will recognize the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Casten.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Barr. Director Chopra, it's
great to see you again. I want to follow up on the conversation
we had last June. We talked at that time about the 2022
complaint bulletin that had been issued looking at complaints
on digital assets that, I think, specifically said fraud,
theft, hacks, and scams are a significant problem in the crypto
asset markets, and it appears to be getting worse. I am just
curious, in the last 5 months, are things getting better, are
things getting worse, or are they about the same?
Mr. Chopra. I don't have a great answer on this. It can
often be difficult to determine. We look at our complaints. I
will say that people have lost a lot of money through hacks.
Mr. Casten. Yes.
Mr. Chopra. They have been cleaned out there, and another
thing is that it used to be gift cards. People would ask
someone to purchase a gift card in a fraud context, and now, it
is often a new technology like this.
Mr. Casten. Yes.
Mr. Chopra. It is something that the Justice Department and
others were trying to deal with, especially when it comes to
targeting the elderly.
Mr. Casten. I appreciate the confusion, and part of the
reason I asked the question is, we have seen a lot of public
actions by Treasury, by the Justice Department, and of course,
the Binance news and the shutdown that is there, and obviously,
a lot of information will come out of there. While we were
sitting here, I think the Treasury Department just announced
that they are sanctioning Sinbad, a virtual currency mixer that
is being used to launder stolen assets, primarily to fund the
North Korean nuclear program, as far as I can tell from the
public reporting. The Binance reporting said that the platform
was being used to fund child abusers, sanctions evaders, and a
whole host of bad terrorist groups, and remarkably, never filed
a single suspicious activity report (SAR). And I am not ranting
to criticize them, but I am just curious if that is a sign that
we have this under control or are we just getting at the tip of
the iceberg----
Mr. Chopra. I think when we talk about new uses of data,
and certainly when it comes to AI, digital assets, there are
all sorts of ways that we constantly have to think about how it
could be misused and not just----
Mr. Casten. Can you just, on that point, in the 2022 report
you talked about the use of crypto for, ``pig butchering.'' Can
you just explain for the committee what that is, as it is
related to this thing about--I guess it is like a high-tech
gift card?
Mr. Chopra. A major way in which people are defrauded is
often through romance scams, including through online dating
websites, and social media. And, ``pig butchering,'' is the
concept of building trust over time, to, at the end, ultimately
wipe them out of their financial assets. And you see,
unfortunately, a lot of that, and it can be very challenging,
particularly when the fraudster has so much information about
the target that they might be able to really trust them.
Mr. Casten. This shouldn't need to be said, but I am proud
to say that we have a bipartisan opposition to, ``pig
butchering,'' to funding North Korea nuclear programs, to
funding Hamas, and to child trafficking. I think all of us on
this committee want to make sure that we stop those things.
I am troubled by the fact that there is a common nexus in
all those, which is crypto networks that are used to evade
anti-money laundering rules. And I think we on this committee
have some accountability to do with the fact that just within
this term, the majority has passed two bills on a straight
party line basis that would actually limit the ability of
regulators like yourself to pursue anti-money laundering rules,
to even have any authority to go after folks who are using
unhosted wallets, these cryptographic assets. And if we
genuinely oppose these things, we should stop the ways they are
getting used.
I just want to raise a concern with some public reporting
that has come out this week that Chairman McHenry has been
threatening to hold up the Defense Authorization Act unless we
get a crypto-friendly bill, which is not going to make this
better. And there has also been some public reporting that
perhaps the currency will be to take out some protections
against fentanyl use, which, of course, has also been listed in
a lot of these reports as one of the common uses of
cryptographic money.
I realize this isn't your concern, but I want to thank
Ranking Member Waters for her efforts to block that. And I want
to thank Chairman Brown and the Senate for blocking that, and
just urge them to continue to do so because we do need a fully-
funded Defense Authorization Act. We do need to make sure that
our financial regulators have the tools to shut down money
laundering. And my goodness, we would like to put a stop to pig
butchering, terrorism, North Korean nuclear programs, and child
trafficking. Thank you, Director Chopra, and I yield back.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman yields back. Let me remind Members
to refrain from referencing the chairman when he is not in a
position to represent his side of the story, and represent his
views in response. With that, the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Williams, is now recognized.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Director,
it's good to see you again.
Mr. Chopra. Same.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Consistently, you have come before
this committee saying you would protect the interests of small
business. You have said that today. Yet, ever since you joined
the CFPB, your agency continues to add burdensome requirements
without consideration of their impact on small business and
small lenders, and you know I am a small business person. For
the past 6 months, I have been consistently hearing from small
and community bankers back in my district in Texas and across
the country on how unprepared and terrified they are about the
CFPB's Section 1071 Small Business Data Collection Rule. Small
lenders are concerned that the complicated reporting
requirements, which add 81 new data fields, will tie up loan
officers and increase compliance costs, ultimately forcing them
to pass these costs down to whom? The customer. Furthermore,
small lenders are worried this rule will push the industry
towards a standardized small business loan product and kill
relationship banking, which all of us are familiar with and
have grown up with. This overly-burdensome rule will limit the
banks' lending abilities and make it harder for small
businesses to access the capital they need.
Now, I have been working with members of this committee and
the Senate to push back against the rule, and I am glad to say
that our CRA is coming to the House Floor for a vote this week.
So, it is critical that we pass this bill to overturn the rule,
stop the regulatory overreach, and protect Main Street America.
This will be an easy yes-or-no answer for you, I think,
Director. Congress is elected by the American public, and you
are an appointed bureaucrat. The question is, will you respect
the views of the American people and overturn the 1071 rule
should both Chambers vote in favor of nullifying this rule? Yes
or no?
Mr. Chopra. If it is enacted into law, pursuant to the
Congressional Review Act (CRA), of course, we will comply with
that.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you. The funding structure of
the CFPB minimizes congressional oversight and budget authority
and, instead, relies on allocations from the Federal Reserve.
This unconventional funding approach has sparked numerous legal
challenges, raising concerns about the Bureau's lack of
transparency and accountability to the American people. This
funding mechanism is vastly different than other Federal
banking agencies. In order to have a check on the CFPB's power,
it is imperative that your operations be subject to
congressional operations or appropriations.
So, Director, while we wait for the court's decision on
your agency's funding, how are you ensuring that you are
remaining transparent and accountable to the American people?
Mr. Chopra. Respectfully, we try and do everything we can
with respect to our spending. We have not only complied with
the statutory requirements on audits, providing reports, we
have tried to answer all sorts of questions that people may
have and, frankly, taken a lot of feedback. We have also looked
very carefully at spending that can be eliminated. We have
spent below our budget cap that is given to us from the Federal
Reserve and have not even requested the full amount. We
continue to look at how we are going to have a workforce that
can help us deliver what Congress said, but, of course, we
await the Supreme Court's ruling. The CFPB, the Fed, the OCC,
the FDIC, and others are funded very similarly, so we are all
looking forward to getting a conclusion to that issue.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. The CFPB has indicated that
they are in the pre-rule stage of creating a new overdraft rule
that would reclassify overdraft fees and finance charges. This
proposal is widely unreasonable and burdensome for consumers
and providers. Overdraft is a key tool that allows consumers to
withdraw more money than is available in their accounts so that
they may make a payment with these temporary funds. With the
rising cost of everyday needs due to the Biden economics that
we see today, this feature is helpful in situations that are
dire because of Bidenomics, and this feature is helpful in
situations where a consumer has unexpected expenses or delays
in income. Overdrafts allow them to continue with the purchase
of whatever they may need, so this safety net is key for
consumers and must be protected.
So, Director, is the CFPB actively working to eliminate
overdraft programs that consumers rely on to meet day-to-day
needs, like groceries or other essentials?
Mr. Chopra. As I have shared before, we do believe that all
forms of credit, including overdraft services, have a role to
play. Our focus has been to focus on where it has been
illegally done, and we have received requests to look at a
rulemaking to provide clarity, but there is not an effort to
eliminate that need that you share.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentlewoman from
Texas, Ms. Garcia, is now recognized.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and it is always great
to have you with us, Director Chopra. You are always a breath
of fresh air, always willing to respond to all the questions
and with such candor and precision. I was a little taken aback
by my colleagues' comments that you are running your agency in
a lawless manner, acting outside of the law. I feel like I know
a little bit about the law, being a lawyer and a former judge,
and I think if you were doing anything lawless or outside of
the law, I would probably be the first one to raise the red
flag. Can you assure the public today and those listening that
you are, in fact, following the law and doing everything that
is mandated by Congress?
Mr. Chopra. Yes, and we take those congressional mandates
seriously. We are implementing each and every piece that has
been required of us, and we just take that responsibility
seriously.
Ms. Garcia. Right. And as you responded to an earlier
question, if the law is passed and is signed into law, of
course, you are going to follow that law.
Mr. Chopra. Yes, and I actually would recommend you putting
deadlines on that because it makes sure that it happens. We do
have issues with other agencies where it is passed and never
gets done.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you. It is reassuring, and I had full
confidence that would be your response, but I thought it was
necessary to put that in the record because under your
leadership, the CFPB has taken unprecedented action to combat
junk fees and medical debt, while holding credit card reporting
companies accountable and curbing predatory lenders. As always,
you have been there up front with a commitment to protecting
our nation's consumers.
I would like to begin by discussing your outstanding
efforts to tackle the junk fee situation. Prior to today's
hearing, I reviewed a useful fact sheet about the CFPB's whole-
of-government approach to addressing junk fees, and it briefly
mentioned the CFPB's enforcement actions against MoneyGram, an
international remittance provider. This was of great interest
to me because, as you know, my district is 77-percent Latino,
and many people in my district either know someone or have
relatives in Mexico. And, in fact, Texas has the second-highest
amount of remittances that go to Mexico within the United
States. In 2021, in fact, $7.7 billion in remittances were sent
from Texas to Mexico, making up 15.9 percent of all
transactions.
In 2012, the CFPB implemented its remittance rule,
requiring companies that offer remittances to provide
consistent disclosure regarding the price of a transfer before
the consumer makes a payment. Less than 10 years later,
consumer and immigration groups have found that U.S. consumers
lose approximately $8.7 billion in hidden fees due to the
exchange rate markups.
In June of 2023, you testified before this committee and
recognized this issue where remittances are advertised at zero
cost, but a hidden foreign exchange markup is added. These junk
fees impact a large number of my constituents who send
remittances to their families. Director Chopra, what action has
the CFPB taken since June to eliminate these junk fees within
remittances, or what other action can we expect from you soon?
Mr. Chopra. Let me first share that remittances are such an
important market for us to be focused on. We also know that
remittances are a key part of U.S. national security policy as
well, given the volume that takes place, so let me share this.
I do share your concerns about advertising, especially that
something is free, when, in reality, it has a big cost.
We have actually taken a number of enforcement actions over
the last 2 years, including fairly recently, to go after
violations of the remittance rule. I think as more consumers
are doing this digitally, we are going to need to evaluate
whether those rules need any updates so that they are fit for
the modern times. We do see that there are many people who are
sending them through apps, and we want to make sure they can
compare, get a good offer, and really know what they are
getting into.
Ms. Garcia. Great. Also, I read your Semiannual Report,
which notes the efforts to diversify in terms of your
contractors, with 43 percent of contracts going to minority-
and women-owned programs. However, when we looked at the
breakdown of the contract, it only showed .2 percent--not even
1 percent--.2 percent of the dollars spent went to Latino-owned
businesses. What steps is the CFPB taking to ensure that Latino
contractors are at the table and get some of those contracts?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We have our Office of Minority and Women
Inclusion that is required to oversee that. I am happy to
answer more questions for the record.
Ms. Garcia. Mr. Chairman, I will submit those in writing.
Thank you.
Mr. Barr. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk, is now recognized.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chopra, thank
you for being here and for being willing to answer questions. I
agree with some of my colleagues that there are some things
that we share that are important, and one is data privacy. That
is something I have been working on since I have been here in
Congress, and it seems that we continue to go backwards, not
forwards. I am talking about the Federal Government in general.
One of the things about data privacy is it is intrinsically
tied to data security, and one of the best ways to protect data
is to not have it. You don't have to protect what you don't
have, so only collect what you need, but that is a conversation
for another day.
I want to ask about the data breach that happened in
February of this year. Obviously, you are aware of this as you
have communicated this in the past, but I do want to ask some
questions about that, especially as early as 2014, the Bureau
was warned that vulnerabilities in its information security
program put it at risk of a breach, and the latest Office of
the Inspector General (OIG) report indicates the Bureau hadn't
addressed any of these cybersecurity action items that were
previously recommended. Have you implemented any of these
recommendations since the publication of the report? This
report was in February of 2023.
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We have gotten from our Federal
Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) audit, our OIG,
and our third-party review, a whole slew of things that, over
time, we have been able to successfully implement. I want to
give you the appropriate details of that, and we do know which
ones have been fulfilled, and we work with the Inspector
General to see if it is also to their satisfaction. But let me
just share that, of course, the misappropriation of data that
occurred earlier this year was extremely serious. One of my
reflections on it is that we are talking about an insider
threat.
Mr. Loudermilk. Yes.
Mr. Chopra. So, part of what we are doing is not just
making sure that systems are not penetrable from outside, but
also from the inside, making sure that there is limited access,
only where there needs to be. There will employees who have
access to information. We have made some system changes, too,
to limit the information that is accessible. I can confirm the
issue was not related to any sort of intelligence operation by
a foreign state actor. The individual is no longer employed at
the agency, but there is work to do as it relates to insider
threats across the----
Mr. Loudermilk. Right, and in a lot of cases, access by
foreign actors, criminals, come as the result of improper
actions by an internal operator, as we saw with Equifax a while
back, right?
Mr. Chopra. And ultimately, we know it was not just
Equifax, but Marriott, and the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM).
Mr. Loudermilk. Yes.
Mr. Chopra. It was bad actors affiliated with the Chinese
Government, that we have to make sure that we know this data is
used for all sorts of purposes.
Mr. Loudermilk. I just want to ask you specifically some of
these questions and bring it back up.
Mr. Chopra. Sure.
Mr. Loudermilk. You may not have the answer now, but if you
could respond in writing for the record, that would be great.
There are specifically three in the OIG report. The first was
to develop and implement a cybersecurity risk register and
associated process to identify and manage organizational-wide
cybersecurity risks. These were showing that they had not been
completed by February of 2023, but the response from the Bureau
was, ``implementation in progress,'' and, ``estimated
completion is this year,'' and we are running out of time. The
other two, and I can provide these to you, all three of these--
we will provide them in written format.
Mr. Chopra. Of course.
Mr. Loudermilk. If you can respond where you are on these,
I would appreciate it.
Mr. Chopra. On that one, we know that part of it was, I
believe we were procuring a new system, and it would replace
and implement something. We have tried to also complete these
in a way that is deliberate and also to the satisfaction of our
office.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. I am running out of time quickly, and
I need to ask this: How and when were the victims of the CFPB
data breach notified? Congress wasn't notified until May. Were
the businesses or the individuals that were potentially
breached, were they notified at any time----
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Loudermilk. ----and if so, was it before Congress or
after Congress?
Mr. Chopra. We notified Congress completely pursuant to the
guidance, and actually, when we found out, we looked to see
when the data may have left the system by the insider threat.
We did the customer notifications, and we had to work with our
supervised entity, because sometimes it was complicated, and my
staff just shared that Congress was notified in March.
Mr. Loudermilk. Right, but when were the customers
notified, before or after Congress?
Mr. Chopra. We actually didn't have their contact
information in most situations, so we had to work with the
institutions.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you.
Mr. Barr. The gentlewoman from Massachusetts, Ms. Pressley,
is recognized.
Ms. Pressley. It's good to see you, Director Chopra. I
always smile when I see you because I actually know what it is
that you do. I am grateful for your service and certainly your
resilience. Despite the destructive efforts by Republicans to
sabotage the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, I commend
you on your work to support vulnerable consumers. From cracking
down on junk fees and predatory lenders, to working to remove
burdensome medical debt from credit reports, and protecting
seniors against fraud, the CFPB's record speaks for itself.
Now, I want to talk about the $2-trillion crisis that is
student debt. You have heard the expression, ``like a dog with
a bone.'' I am no dog, but I am a Congresswoman with a cause,
and some of my colleagues may be tired of me bringing up
student debt, but imagine how tired our constituents are of
living with it. For borrowers who live in my district, the
Massachusetts 7th, whether it is a father juggling part-time
jobs, or a third grade teacher who spent a decade in the
classroom making payments month to month, their situations are
as precarious now as they were 3 years ago when payments were
first paused, and student loan servicers are not making it any
easier: high wait times when you call; false information when
you get someone on the phone; and wrong billing amounts when
they ask for money.
Just last month, MOHELA, the largest student loan servicer
in the country, proved its incompetence: 78,000 borrowers
received the wrong information for the SAVE Income-Driven
Repayment Plan; 153,000 borrowers did not receive a bill until
after it was due; and for the ones who did receive a bill,
21,000 borrowers received bills that were very high and far
from correct, including some who received a bill for $100,000.
Now, imagine opening your mail and seeing a bill for $100,000.
This is ridiculous, and it is proof that the CFPB's work is
more critical now than ever before.
Director Chopra, could you describe what steps the Bureau
is taking to protect student loan borrowers from the gross
incompetence of student loan servicers?
Mr. Chopra. Those servicers, just like mortgage servicers,
impact people's lives so much. We have seen, over the course of
the past 15 years, illegal foreclosures and other harms in the
mortgage market. But in the student loan market, a wrongful
default or a major error can hit people so hard early in their
financial life and eliminate their ability to even get an auto
loan or do anything else. They may not be banks, but they have
to follow the same laws. We are allocating real attention to
this, including the return to repayment, because many of those
servicers shrunk quite a bit during the payment pause, scaling
up, and we will be releasing more information about some of our
findings. We have taken enforcement actions, and it is very,
very important that people are not the victims of an unlawful
practice.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. And, Director Chopra, what is your
advice--sort of consider this a PSA, if you will--to borrowers
who are dealing with predatory student loan servicers,
scammers, and malicious actors?
Mr. Chopra. Certainly, be very, very cautious about talking
to someone who isn't the loan servicer. They may be using
information about you in order to get you to pay something that
you don't owe them. We also say if you are having trouble,
please file a complaint. We are often able to get those
individuals across the country fixes and sometimes clear
answers on what really needs to happen. This whole thing has to
work, or there are going to be big problems.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Director Chopra. Like many
Americans, I took on student loans to pursue higher education,
not because I wanted to, but because I had to. It was the only
way. It took me over 20 years to pay them off while I was a
caregiver to my mother and often working multiple jobs,
including as an aide in the House and in the Senate, but I want
an easier road for the next person. The people demand and
deserve student debt cancellation. In the meantime, we must
provide relief for our borrowers wherever and however we can,
and that includes holding student loan servicers accountable
for their incompetence. I thank you again, Director Chopra, and
your entire dedicated team, and I look forward to continuing to
work together.
Mr. Barr. The gentlelady yields back. The gentlelady--no,
the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Davidson, is now recognized.
Mr. Davidson. I'm glad we got that right. Thanks, Director
Chopra. I appreciate you being here, and I appreciate your work
on privacy. I have really enjoyed the prominence of the Fourth
Amendment in this hearing, and I know you know that I share
your fondness of the respect for privacy and the sense that it
really needs a lot of attention right now.
I have been developing a bill called the Payment Privacy
Act that would ban the sale or distribution of consumer
financial data unless the consumer provides express consent.
This consent would only be legal if the consumer can identify
who will receive their data at the time the consent is given.
We still have a few things to work out, but it is close to
being done, and most notably, we are trying to make sure that
enforcement and damages provisions match the impact of the data
breaches. This is clearly something that you touch on with some
of the rulemakings that you have been in process with, and I
look forward to continuing to work with you and your office on
that, so I appreciate that.
But as we talk about Section 1033, one component of it
would allow tokenized account numbers when making data
available to consumer-permission third parties, so they could
tokenize it, it kind of anonymizes the data in a sense. This
means the account identifier would mask that identity from the
third party. Has the Bureau considered any alternative
approaches to protecting consumer account information?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. In many ways, Congressman, we also have to
think ahead. I have talked to some of you on this committee
about quantum decryption and the risk of re-identification, and
we want to think of ways that are timeless, so we are very open
to feedback on other alternatives. We don't want any sort of
specific technology built in, but I do fear that if we don't
make sure that the rule has some real data protections, it will
be a haven for misuse.
Mr. Davidson. I think that is the point of not just
protecting the consumer privacy. They clearly didn't disclose
it. This is a way to bypass the fact that they haven't
disclosed it and technology kind of escalates.
Mr. Chopra. I see. That could sidestep it.
Mr. Davidson. Right.
Mr. Chopra. Oh, I'm sorry. I misunderstood.
Mr. Davidson. And I am also fond of zero knowledge proofs,
for what it is worth, and this touches on a transition point to
digital assets briefly.
Director Chopra, the former Director of the CFPB, Director
Kraninger, previously stated that the CFPB's authority over
digital assets is murky at best because there is a lack of
jurisdictional clarity. Given that the, ``larger payment
participant rulemaking,'' attempts to sweep in digital assets,
how do you see the scope of the CFPB's role in digital assets
and, in particular, with respect to protecting self-custody and
privacy?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. It is really when it is being used for a
consumer payment, so we do have a lot of nonbank payment apps.
To the extent to which they are using something that is just
for a consumer payment, there is case law which shows that is
covered under the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA), and that
is what we supervise for. I think we have tried to be very
cautious about this, and also, inasmuch that you are
legislating on it, we are happy to provide any input on it. But
when it comes to that, we are really trying to address those
large payment apps that we have to make sure are following the
same set of laws as the banks.
Mr. Davidson. Right. Yes. The general trend is to make
everything account-based, and one of the best things is self-
custody. So if I have cash, my identity is pretty well
protected.
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Davidson. And if I want to exchange that with someone
else, then we don't really have a lot of risk of data breach or
privacy issues. Now, for many of my colleagues, that level of
privacy is too much privacy. They like the spying-on-people
features of account-based systems, and I am really concerned
that we protect self-custody because that is at the core of
privacy. That is at the core of protecting your money because
someone's not skimming part of it for providing services unless
you want them to.
One other thing that I just want to touch on is that in the
last numbers I saw on Buy Now, Pay Later for Black Friday and
Cyber Monday, spending was $940 million. That is about a 42-
percent jump over last year. The pros of Buy Now, Pay Later are
really apparent. There is no credit check. It is interest free
up front. So if you want to buy something for, say, $200, and
you pay $50 now, you can pay 3 more payments of $50 and do it.
Does that, at some point, especially if you don't make that
next payment, start to look a lot like credit? You did some
work on this.
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We are trying to make sure that those
similar types of use cases have similar treatment. Buy Now, Pay
Later is an option for many, many people, and you are right, it
has grown, and there are a lot more providers. I think there
are some issues, some credit reporting issues and other things
that we do need to keep thinking about.
Mr. Davidson. Okay. Thank you. My time has expired, and I
yield back.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
Nevada, Mr. Horsford, is recognized.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to the ranking member for this hearing, and thank you,
Director Chopra, for returning to discuss the continued
consumer protection efforts that your Bureau has undertaken
since we last spoke. Americans everywhere deserve to have
someone in their corner every day to keep a watchful eye on the
financial sector and to protect hardworking people from
discrimination and fraud.
I was pleased to receive your report. In it, you identified
950,000 complaints that were received in the time period
encompassed by the report, with an impressive 99-percent
response rate from the respective companies. The CFPB is not
just standing idly by, but is actively securing redress for
harmed consumers. Under your leadership, I have been glad to
see the CFPB standing up for consumers, combating the negative
effects of medical debt, ensuring that fair lending standards
are adhered to, and holding bad actors in our financial sector
accountable.
I want to point to the issue of the Office of Servicemember
Affairs and how they are working to address the growing number
of complaints that members of our Armed Forces have regarding
their consumer protection needs. As you are aware, in June your
agency reported that there was a staggering 66,400 complaints
filed by servicemembers in 2022 alone. This is a dramatic 55-
percent increase from the prior year. Unfortunately, for my
home State of Nevada, the volume of complaints from
servicemembers ranks third in the country on a per capita
basis.
Director Chopra, your report on Servicemember Affairs shows
that active-duty personnel are 76 percent more likely to become
victims of identity theft than the general population. What are
your insights into why this may be the cause, what
characteristics make them most susceptible to theft, and what
recommendations do you have to further protect them from this
abuse?
Mr. Chopra. We have seen time and time again, active-duty
servicemembers' personal data being weaponized. It used to just
take the form of putting a fake debt on their credit report and
bullying them into paying something they didn't owe. Now, it is
getting even more sophisticated. We see that all sorts of data
companies are collecting information on military personnel.
Identity theft is just one piece. There are real national
security implications. We don't just care about these families
because they serve our country. They are often the canary in
the coal mine for everyone else, and that is why we pay a lot
of attention to it.
Mr. Horsford. I am glad you are. As you said, it does take
attention away from national security. It has serious negative
effects on morale and can even interrupt their service if it is
not addressed, so I look forward to working with you on that
issue. Private identity verification companies are fortunately
able to prevent some of these issues, so I am glad that while
the CFPB has enhanced capabilities to protect these
populations, fraudulent applications and identity theft can be
disastrous for any American.
As we look to continue to expand access to credit across
the country, have you considered that these unintended
consequences of your upcoming Fair Credit Reporting Act
rulemaking could lead to more legitimate applicants being
inappropriately rejected due to their perceived fraud risk by
financial institutions?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We haven't proposed anything as of yet,
but we are trying to look at all the ways that data could be
used or misused and, ultimately, look at the downstream
effects. Absolutely, we are looking at all aspects before we
propose anything.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you. Dr. Chopra, I have also been
pleased to see that the CFPB has brought about enforcement
actions to curtail the unscrupulous actors in the credit repair
marketplace. Unfortunately, in an industry rife with
malpractice, there are still bad actors operating in blatant
violation of your recent court ruling regarding deceptive
telemarketing practices. The Bureau should apply this decision
uniformly across the credit repair space to protect our most-
vulnerable consumers from being scammed by products that will
actually do little to improve their credit. Do you believe that
there is a benefit to providing clear, consistent guidance
regarding the telemarketing sales rule's advanced fee
prohibition in order to prevent bad actors from continuing to
take advantage of consumers?
Mr. Chopra. Yes, and the telemarketing sales rule, while we
enforce it, it is not administered by the CFPB. The Federal
Trade Commission (FTC) is the one that issues rules and
guidance, but I think certainly as these scams develop, we can
have a conversation with them about that.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you very much. I look forward to
continuing to work with you. I yield back.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, is now recognized.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I apologize for
my tardiness. I was in the Budget Committee testifying on our
debt commission that, I think, is also another significant
issue for us. But thank you, Director Chopra, for being here
today. I have a couple of topics I want to cover this morning,
so I ask for concise answers.
You have been employed by the U.S. Government for about a
decade. Is that correct?
Mr. Chopra. Yes, all told.
Mr. Huizenga. And holding several senior positions
throughout that time?
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes. Okay. You have served on the FDIC's
Board of Directors since October of 2021, correct?
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Huizenga. Since you have been a Director on the FDIC
Board, were you ever made aware of the July 2020 FDIC Office of
Inspector General report on the sexual harassment charges that
were happening at the FDIC?
Mr. Chopra. I can't recall when, but I did review, prior to
coming to the Board, all ofthose reports that the Inspector
General and others had issued on a wide range----
Mr. Huizenga. Had the Inspector General run you through
those and the Board? Who made you aware of those?
Mr. Chopra. Prior to being confirmed, I personally reviewed
all of those for the CFPB and others as well to prepare. I do
have periodic discussions with the Inspector General about
that. And with respect to implementing any recommendations, the
executives of the Corporation do file periodic reports about
where things are. So, we try our best to ascertain where the
issues are.
Mr. Huizenga. Are you alarmed by the FDIC OIG's findings of
underreporting and fear of retaliation at the FDIC?
Mr. Chopra. Yes, and, in fact, at the CFPB, we actually
implemented a number of new steps to make sure that there were
many ways for employees to report these issues. From a risk
management perspective, you want to be able to be sure you are
getting these complaints, and every agency is trying to do----
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Well, maybe not every agency is trying
to do that.
Mr. Chopra. Well, I can speak for the CFPB.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. So, you are speaking for yourself, and
you are saying--I am not trying to put words in your mouth--you
are saying you took your experiences and what you witnessed at
the FDIC, and you are trying to improve the CFPB's operations,
correct?
Mr. Chopra. Sure, and other agencies.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Now, I have been, and I think a number
of my colleagues have been a bit critical of your role in
ousting the last Chair of the FDIC and sort of what happened
there. Why weren't you as concerned or as aggressive with this
particular Chair?
Mr. Chopra. To be clear, the last Chair resigned. There was
an issue about the law----
Mr. Huizenga. There was significant palace intrigue behind
that.
Mr. Chopra. There was a violation of the law, in my view
and others, but I know you don't want to get----
Mr. Huizenga. Okay, a violation of the law. We have some
very, very serious charges with people at the FDIC, including
this Chair, and whether he knew and whether he was involved or
how he was involved, so why not take that same passion to the
FDIC?
Mr. Chopra. Certainly, any type of these issues are
serious. The Board has created a bipartisan special committee
that will have full authority to investigate it, to hire
outside players, to determine if appropriate actions were
taken, and to identify what needs to change.
Mr. Huizenga. I am going to remind some of my newer
colleagues that it wasn't that long ago we had another head of
an agency--the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA)--Mel Watt,
our former colleague on this committee, who was before the
committee to discuss allegations of inappropriate behavior, and
it was a bipartisan effort then. I hope the discussion of the
FDIC is a bipartisan effort now. As Chair of our Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee, I hold our government officials
accountable, and I hope and expect that the FDIC Chair and
others are going to cooperate fully.
Let me turn very briefly here to a recent enforcement
action of yours--Mr. Barr had brought this up earlier--about
the CFPB using the fine print, pop-ups, dropdowns, different
sort of criteria, as labeling that abusive. Now, in this
instance, the company in question was following the laws of the
State in which they were operating. And while your agency did
not accuse the finance company of breaking any laws, you still
went forward with an enforcement action. Last night, I sent you
a letter on this specific issue.
Mr. Chopra. That is not true. We did plead a violation of
law in the complaints. Every enforcement action, if it is being
litigated, has specific allegations of what law is being
violated, and that will be adjudicated.
Mr. Huizenga. My time has expired, but last night, I sent
you a letter on this specific issue, and I expect a------
Mr. Chopra. We will respond.
Mr. Huizenga. ----response in a timely manner. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired and I thank him
for his good work as our Oversight Subcommittee Chair. The
gentlewoman from Michigan, Ms. Talib, is now recognized.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
so much, Director Chopra. I want to talk about something that
my residents are actually asking me about specifically. Of
course, the CFPB has been incredibly responsive with a number
of fraudulent cases, issues that are coming up with folks'
credit card companies, so I appreciate your team and your staff
being so responsive to my team. They really are getting
callbacks and feeling like they have an advocate in the CFPB.
As you know, nearly 1 in 5 American adults are burdened
with medical debt, and this is something that I have been
continuing to talk about with many of my colleagues here. I
feel like it is completely wrong to have medical debt weighing
down credit reports. And you and I know no one chooses to get
sick, and I know you have personal stories yourself, but
medical debt should not prevent somebody from securing a home
or even education, basic needs. I have even had residents talk
to me about the fact that they had to sell their home because
of medical debt or get another loan on their home because of
medical debt.
In my own district, we have had residents who are veterans
or seniors report difficulty in paying $3,000 to $4,000 in
medical bills, and they are on a fixed income. And these are
folks, by the way, who get their stuff garnished, they go after
them, and these are people who are actually insured. Let's
understand that. They are not uninsured. They are actually
folks with health insurance, who are still facing a high burden
of medical debt. And for me, I was so incredibly excited that
the CFPB announced a rulemaking process to remove medical debt
from consumer credit reports, which I also called for in my
Restoring Unfairly Impaired Credit and Protecting Consumers
Act.
Director Chopra, can you describe, because I think it is
important for my colleagues to listen to this--this is
important, because even Chairman McHenry talked about the fact
that he paid his bill, and it still showed up, and the
inaccuracy of debt that is showing up on people's credit
reports. Collections are inaccurate. Things are already paid. A
medical service that occurred many, many years ago is all of a
sudden appearing from decades prior on people's credit. It is
really unbelievable the stories that are coming from many
folks. Can you describe some of the billing and collection
practices that motivated the CFPB to take action?
Mr. Chopra. What we saw is that the largest delinquent,
derogatory items on a credit report were no longer credit
cards, and no longer a normal loan. It was allegedly unpaid
bills, and the very common experience was people say, I am
disputing this, this is wrong, and then, they go through this
endless paperwork process to do it, and we know this is not
like a normal loan. This is a situation where there is a back
and forth between the insurance company, the provider, and the
facility, and we have found very serious inaccuracies. And I
think it has just raised the question about, given its limited
or almost no predictive value in cases, is the credit report
just a way to coerce someone to pay something they don't owe?
Ms. Tlaib. Exactly. And I think you led a little bit on
this, but your own research at the CFPB found that using
medical billing data on a credit report is less predictive of a
credit risk or performance than non-medical collection. So,
there is no benefit in having medical debt on credit reports
and weighing down on so many of our families, from cancer to
even folks who have really awful car accidents that lead to so
many charges, including physical therapy. Folks have told me
that they have insurance, but it didn't cover everything, and
years later, they are getting all this stuff showing up on
their credit report.
There is something that I talked to you about, and I really
want to take a moment, and I know you may not have coverage
over, but right now, auto insurance companies are using non-
driving factors, Director, and I talked to Treasury Secretary
Yellen about that this this morning. It really has had a
disparate impact on my residents, using marital status and
education level for credit scores. I just feel like that
practice is a way to discriminate, especially when I see folks
with DUIs but high credit scores paying 3 times less than
somebody with no DUI and a lower credit score. And I wanted to
see if you had anything to say about that?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. You are right, we don't regulate
insurance, but I think there are serious issues with how credit
scores are being used sometimes. For many people, it just
doesn't seem to make sense.
Ms. Tlaib. No. Somebody with a Ph.D. is not necessarily
going to be a better driver. I don't understand the rationale
that auto insurance companies use in this data.
Mr. Chopra. I think sometimes, they will say it reflects on
whether their premium is going to get paid, but sometimes, it
is so variant, and, again, we don't have authority over here.
We just cover the credit report and credit score, but
certainly, if Treasury's insurance office does further work on
this, we are happy to provide information on the State
insurance regulators. I know many of them are also wondering
the same thing.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. Some States have done that, but thank you
so much. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back,
and we will take a 5-minute recess.
[recess]
Mr. Fitzgerald. Okay. We are back, and next, we are going
to go to the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Rose, for 5
minutes..
Mr. Rose. I want to thank Chairman McHenry, and thank you,
too, Director Chopra for being here today.
Director Chopra, last month, The New York Times ran an
article with a headline calling you, ``Wall Street's Most Hated
Regulator,'' and stated that bankers believe that you are a
regulator gone rogue. Do you agree with the characterization
that you are Wall Street's most hated regulator and a regulator
gone rogue?
Mr. Chopra. Certainly not, but you will have to ask them.
We try and make sure that all of our work is really with the
public interest in mind, including honest financial
institutions.
Mr. Rose. Thank you for that. I want to say this to you,
because I feel this very strongly about all of our Federal
regulators, that in my view, your first responsibility is to
help those who you regulate comply with the regulations, and
that your entire approach to that regulated community that you
deal with should be to empower, enable, inform, educate, and
facilitate their compliance with the regulations that are
intended to protect the consumers of this country. Do you agree
with that observation?
Mr. Chopra. Yes, and, in fact, we spend much more of our
energy on supervision, and most of the issues are not dealt
with in litigation or enforcement actions. In many cases, they
are when they are serious or repeat offenses, but we do take
that as examiners looking at where there are issues and being
constructive about how it can be fixed.
Mr. Rose. I worry then a little bit. I know earlier in your
remarks, you highlighted the amount of fines that you have
recovered from the regulated community, and I just----
Mr. Chopra. Restitution.
Mr. Rose. ----would caution you that I don't think that is
the objective. I don't think that is what we ought to be
measuring your success by. I think compliance with a regulated
community that understands what they are supposed to be doing
to protect consumers is the goal, and what I would like to hear
is measures that affirm the agency's understanding, the
Bureau's understanding.
Mr. Chopra. And just to comment on that, we have really
focused on repeat offenders and others. We are not trying to
target with, ``gotcha,'' actions. I saw that at the Federal
Trade Commission, where that agency had a history of targeting
small businesses, strong-arming them into settlements. We just
are taking a very different approach.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. Director Chopra, as has already come
up today, and I am sure you are aware, of course, of the FDIC
Inspector General starting an investigation into the extremely
serious workplace misconduct allegations first raised by The
Wall Street Journal. As a Board member of the FDIC, will you
commit to fully cooperating with any requests made by the FDIC
Inspector General regarding their investigation?
Mr. Chopra. Oh, of course, and, in fact, we cooperate with
all sorts of inquiries on this.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. And will you commit to fully
cooperating with congressional investigations into workplace
misconduct allegations at the FDIC, including promptly turning
over any requested information and documents?
Mr. Chopra. As always, we will work with you to accommodate
your request. Obviously, it is another agency we have, the
CFPB, but you are right, I am a Board member, so we will do our
best to accommodate that.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. Director Chopra, have you ever been
investigated for workplace misconduct?
Mr. Chopra. I have never been a target of an investigation.
Of course, where there have been issues, there are lots of
other investigations. We always cooperate, but I have never
been a target of one.
Mr. Rose. Do you believe that consumers should have the
financial freedom to make their own financial choices as long
as loan terms are clearly disclosed?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. I think that is right. I think we want
consumers to have lots of choice and to be able to compare one
with the other. I think in the digital economy, there are new
issues about how they can present certain information, so-
called dark patterns, but yes, we want to give consumers that
informed choice.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. And as our time winds down here, would
you help to explain how you and the Bureau are ensuring that
the costs of regulations and other CFPB actions do not outweigh
any potential benefit, especially since those costs, of course,
will likely be passed on, ultimately, to the consumer?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We never want to do something that makes
the public worse off. I think your colleague asked me a
question about when there are benefits--Congress had passed the
Debt Bondage Repair Act, which the CFPB implemented. That is
about a human trafficking survivor getting their life back. It
is sometimes hard to put a dollar figure on it, but we do our
best in the required analyses in those rules.
Mr. Rose. Thank you very much, and I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. We now go to the
gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Nickel, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you very much. I want to thank Chairman
McHenry and Ranking Member Waters for their work on these
issues. And it is great to see you, Director Chopra. My
colleague from Tennessee referenced the article where you are
the most-hated regulator on Wall Street. I was just on Wall
Street yesterday, and I definitely don't think you are the most
hated. I can feel pretty confident about that. I don't know if
that is much of a consolation prize, but----
Mr. Chopra. It is not a popularity contest, so yes.
Mr. Nickel. Yes. And 25 of these, when you get down to the
final row here of Democrats, it has been a while, so thank you
for your testimony and being here. I want to thank you for the
work you and your colleagues at the Bureau do daily to protect
consumers, Democrat or Republican. All of our constituents rely
on the CFPB to protect them from financial harm. In fact, over
82 percent of Americans want the Bureau to continue doing its
job. I think that is a good record of success. And earlier, I
heard from some of my Republican colleagues, and I was glad to
hear them voicing words of encouragement and support for open
banking. I want to talk a little bit about open banking.
I am glad the CFPB proposed the Personal Financial Data
Rights Rule last month to accelerate the shift towards open
banking. Open banking would give consumers the right to control
their financial data, which is long overdue. As an example, if
one of my constituents has a checking account at a bank but is
receiving bad service, high fees, under the current system,
they would have to jump through a significant amount of hoops
to, ``break up,'' with that bank and move their data to another
financial services company, whether it is a bank or a fintech.
They would likely lose some of their data along the way, and
spend countless hours trying to piece it all together as they
make that shift. But open banking will change this, make life
easier for consumers, drive down costs, and promote financial
inclusion. Can you share your thoughts on how open banking is
transforming the financial landscape for consumers in the U.S.?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. I think the more we can give people the
ability not to just solely be judged by a three-digit score but
also their financial history, being able to give that data, to
be able to get a better term, to avoid illegal conduct, to
really have more of a driver's seat, I think this is really a
way to make banking a way to give consumers a wider range of
options. And I think smaller entities are really going to be
able to compete more easily with the big players this way.
Rather than being locked in with one provider, local
institutions or startups will have more of a chance to win on
the merits.
Mr. Nickel. Yes. Under this proposed rule, the CFPB would
rely on a separate standard-setting organization to establish
the technical standards and certifications for consumer
permission sharing. Given that this organization would be a
separate entity from the CFPB and not subject to its oversight,
how would you ensure that all parties have a seat at the table
and that this arrangement doesn't result in anticompetitive
behavior, while also meeting its standard-setting obligations
in a timely manner?
Mr. Chopra. It is a huge concern to make sure that there
are not a small set of actors who get to dictate, in an
anticompetitive way, so we would have oversight. Under our
proposed rule, the CFPB would have to recognize the standard-
setting body, and pursuant to longstanding guidance, that body
would need to be inclusive of all perspectives. It can't just
be the incumbents or it can't just be the fintechs. It really
has to have everybody. We are collecting comments on that now,
but that is going to be a big piece in determining how open
banking accelerates.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much. And in the remaining time, I
want to just touch on credit repair scams. I have been working
on legislation in a bipartisan way to finally stop credit
repair scams, and I know we have talked about this in my
office. I appreciate your work and your leadership here. These
companies market themselves to financially-distressed
consumers, falsely promising to increase credit scores while
charging exorbitant fees in monthly subscription services that
can cost thousands of dollars but yield few positive results.
While the Bureau took enforcement action against one of the
largest credit repair organizations earlier this year, are you
concerned that these scams will continue by new organizations,
especially as household debt increases?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. I am also worried about how they might be
targeted using very sensitive information about people,
particularly on social media, but not exclusively. We are
trying to look at how people can actually navigate ways to
address their debt issues without ending up worse off in the
process.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much, and I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. We now go to the
gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Steil, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
for being here, Director Chopra. I think we are discussing
really important topics.
Let me go back to your opening statement, if I can, for
just a minute. In your opening statement, you noted that credit
card debt is increasing now north of a trillion dollars. Auto
loans are increasing north of $1.6 trillion. Mortgages have
increased dramatically. The median mortgage in the United
States, over the course of 3 years, went from $1,200 to $2,400.
That is significant. It is a major concern. The driver of that,
I think should be noted, is largely the inflationary policies
put in place by the Biden Administration, in particular,
reckless spending, the war on energy, and paying people not to
work after the pandemic. And as we look at the drivers of
increasing debt for Americans, I would encourage my colleagues
on the left side of the aisle to join us to work to bring down
inflation. That is outside your wheelhouse, but I wanted to put
that out there because I think it is a really important point
to your earlier points and your opening remarks.
Let me jump into Earned Wage Access (EWA), which gives
individuals access to wages that they earned. Improving the
connection between pay and work in a more timely manner, I
think is a great opportunity that is out there. You commented
in the press that the CFPB is re-examining the 2020 guidance
that maintained that EWA was not a credit product. Can you give
me an update as to when you expect the review to be completed?
Mr. Chopra. I am hoping we will be able to answer more of
the questions that we have been getting in the next few months,
and, specifically, there has----
Mr. Steil. So, you expect that in the next few months, that
rulemaking process will be concluded?
Mr. Chopra. I think we are going to try and provide
additional guidance on it. The original guidance that was
provided a few years ago covered a pretty narrow set of
circumstances. It is essentially ones that were free, so earned
wage advance, earned wage access, some of it is with the
employer, and some of it is separate from the employer----
Mr. Steil. There is a significant development in the public
space----
Mr. Chopra. There have been significant developments in the
last few years.
Mr. Steil. So, you are expecting that in the next few
months, you will be coming forward with that. As you are going
through that process, I would like you to make sure that we are
not reducing consumer access in that space.
Let me follow up on my colleague, Andy Barr's, earlier
comment as it related to nonsufficient funds and your review of
that. I would echo his comment that I think it is important
that these rules are enforced prospectively and not
retroactively in light of the previous guidance from the CFPB.
I will jump to one more topic here, the proposed rule that
the Bureau's new supervisory powers, in particular, as it
relates to digital apps in wallets. You noted in your remarks
that consumer complaints is one justification of the proposed
rule, so if you could expand on how much complaints rose and
over what period of time?
Mr. Chopra. I can't recall. As part of that rule, we are
supposed to look at risk using a multifactor analysis, and----
Mr. Steil. No, I understand, but if you could get back to
me on the complaints, how they came back?
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Steil. Is there a portal at the CFPB where someone
could issue a complaint, or do you know how the CFPB would
receive those complaints from individuals?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We receive them through our website,
through the phone, and other ways. We receive thousands each
week.
Mr. Steil. Okay. And then, an analysis is taken into
account on how many complaints are resolved?
Mr. Chopra. Certainly, we look at all of those factors, but
with respect to that proposed rule, that is one issue, but
there are many, many other reasons for the rationale for that
proposal. It really focuses on the consumer payment apps.
Mr. Steil. No, I understand. In the proposed rule, it is
noted that one of the justifications for this is a rise in
consumer complaints. If there are consumer complaints, I would
like to know.
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Steil. I think that is a valid thing that we should be
thinking about on this committee.
Mr. Chopra. Totally.
Mr. Steil. I am just looking for some clarity as to what
the rise in consumer complaints is, and I understand you don't
have know off the top of your head. That is fine, but if you
can get back to me in writing as to what that is in a numerical
analysis, I would appreciate it.
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We will answer questions for the record,
and we will provide numbers of where we----
Mr. Steil. Perfect. Let me do one final piece here. Last
year, when you testified in front of the committee, I asked if
your speeches, press releases, and blog posts are reviewed by
attorneys. You responded that it is sometimes the case. You
were kind of open to the feedback that we had because I think
your words have very serious implications for consumers and
markets.
And I remain concerned that some statements that you have
made are more in light of shaming businesses into doing what
the agency wants rather than going through a traditional
rulemaking process. So, I would just continue to encourage you
to engage legal counsel in the review of your posts on blogs or
at other locations because I do think they have market-moving
influence. I am concerned that that is outside of the
functional rulemaking process, and I appreciate you being here.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. We now recognize
the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gonzalez, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Director Chopra, for being here with us today.
Let's talk about medical debt. The State of Texas has the
highest rate of uninsured working-age adults in the country, in
part due to the State Government and the Governor who refuses
to comply with Federal law to expand Medicaid. Most of my
constituency is severely unbanked or underbanked and do not
have the up-front capital to pay for healthcare costs, leaving
many with medical debt. The ding on their credit report for
medical debt, which is not an accurate measure, as you know, of
credit risk, also means it is harder for them to access
traditional sources for credit like bank loans and credit
cards. I was excited to learn of the proposal announced in
September of this year by the CFPB that would address this
issue head on. If this goes into effect, could you outline the
steps for the CFPB, the steps they would take to ensure that
creditworthy consumers are not unduly prevented from attaining
credit or even a job simply because of a debt they owe or a
debt they owe from a loved one who has gotten sick?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. Thanks for the question. I think really
our lodestar on this has been the real challenges of accuracy,
and, again, I mentioned to your colleagues, it is not like a
normal loan, and it is often a bill that is put on your credit
report. You mentioned uninsured, but a lot of the issues are
even people with insurance. There are many parties. There is a
provider. There is a facility. There is an insurance company.
There is a patient. There is a debt collector. There is a
credit reporting agency. And over many years, I think there is
been a consensus that there is extremely limited predictive
value of this. And given the inaccuracies, you worry a lot that
people, when they are applying for a job or credit, are just
paying something that they don't owe. The big credit reporting
conglomerates have taken some steps, but we are looking at
whether we might propose a rule to address it more directly,
and we are currently collecting feedback from small entity
representatives on that, and that will inform any proposed
rule.
Mr. Gonzalez. I can't agree with you more, and thank you
for these steps you are taking. Also, as you know, in 2012 the
CFPB implemented its remittances rule requiring companies that
offer remittances to provide consistent disclosure regarding
the price of a transfer before consumers make payments. While
the remittances rule created essential protections for millions
of immigrants, servicemembers, students, and others who send
money to other countries, providers have found ways to get
around it. According to consumer and immigration groups, U.S.
consumers lose approximately $8.7 billion a year due to hidden
fees, or they sometimes can change it under exchange rates and
recover it in the other country.
In June of 2023, you testified before this committee and
recognized this issue. Like my colleague, Mr. Vargas, has
stated in the past--he calls them junk fees, which I agree
with, and they have impacted our constituents who send
remittances to their families abroad. The money earned by these
hardworking people should not be lost to hidden fees or extra
fees but go to their families. So I ask, what is the CFPB doing
to protect consumers and ensure hidden fees aren't being folded
into exchange markup rates? Is there a plan in place to prevent
remittances providers from continuing this practice?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We have taken a number of actions against
providers that have egregiously violated the law on this front,
but I think there is this question of, how will a consumer be
able to get a competitively-priced remittance? They are paying
for it, and when you are looking at multiple levers, the
exchange rate, sometimes, there is an advertisement where it
says, ``free,'' and you know when it is really not free. That
is what we are really focused on. We are seeing if that is
working or not. There are a lot of other places where people
may have options on sending remittances that they may not even
be aware of, so we are looking at all of that.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes. Certainly, things have improved since
the 1990s, but the concern is whomever their partners are in
the receiving country----
Mr. Chopra. The other side.
Mr. Gonzalez. Right. And I know for Mexico, for sure, they
get shortchanged on the exchange rate, and I think that is
happening around the world. Thank you for the work you are
doing, and we hope that you continue looking into this issue
that impacts millions of people here and around the world.
Mr. Chopra. I appreciate it.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from South Carolina, Mr. Timmons, is now recognized.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The CFPB has kicked
off a massive rulemaking to revise Regulation V, which
implements the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). The FCRA and
Regulation V set strict guidelines for the credit reporting
system, and these guidelines enable our credit economy to
function. Thus, changes to this foundation should not be made
lightly, nor should they be rushed.
Accordingly, I have concerns with the FCRA SBREFA proposal
that seeks to designate specific data breaches as FCRA
violations. Numerous Federal and State laws already mandate
data security measures and breach notifications to consumers.
Nevertheless, the CFPB seems inclined to introduce a strict
liability standard concerning data breaches or unauthorized
access to consumer data by third parties.
But before I move on, the CFPB had its own data breach
impacting a quarter million Americans. Would a strict liability
standard be appropriate for the CFPB's own data breach?
Mr. Chopra. Just to be clear, we have not proposed a rule.
We have been looking at multiple options on data brokers as
well as how there may be access to data, but of course, the
situation at the CFPB with an insider threat was very, very
serious. We did the consumer notifications and we erred on the
side of making sure it was clear. We talked to our supervised
entities. In some ways, there were automatic triggers that led
us----
Mr. Timmons. How will they be made whole? How will the
victims be made whole? If it was a private business or a bank,
they would have to pay restitution. The CFPB has hundreds of
millions of dollars. Is there any restitution that is going to
be offered to these victims?
Mr. Chopra. Fortunately, we have no indicia, and it is
really based on the type of data that it could be used for any
type of identity theft. It didn't include----
Mr. Timmons. Like filing unemployment claims fraudulently?
Mr. Chopra. It didn't include the type of information that
could lead to that, but of course, I take your point. It was
very serious, and we are taking steps to address it. And with
respect to that outline, we are really trying to make sure we
are guarding privacy, and I agree with you that actually the
credit reporting system is foundational, and we want to be
judicial.
Mr. Timmons. Do you know of any other example of data
security and breach notification requirements that are enforced
with a strict liability standard?
Mr. Chopra. I do believe that some State laws do have that,
but I can look it up and answer the question for the record.
Mr. Timmons. Okay. That would be great. I guess I am just
concerned about what impact this standard would have on
economic activity. Almost every corner of the financial
services industry will tell you that their cybersecurity teams
spend more time and money on compliance than on actually
keeping their data safe. I think the last thing we need is yet
another redundant regulation taking resources away from these
entities providing actual cybersecurity.
Mr. Chopra. And we don't want to do anything redundant,
that is for sure.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you for that. Director Chopra, it has
been reported that the CFPB is readying a proposal focused on
bank overdraft fees, and apparently doing so just conveniently
right after your appearance on Capitol Hill this week. Is this
report accurate, and what are you proposing in that rule?
Mr. Chopra. We did put on our regulatory agenda many months
ago that we would be looking at overdraft and NSF. We haven't
made any decisions on it, but one of the places that we got
input on is people wanted some clarity on what the rules would
be. There have been guidance documents. There are a number of
places. We are trying to sift through all that and ideally
propose something that makes sure that there are not overdraft
abuses.
Mr. Timmons. I guess overdraft is a service provided by
financial institutions for consumers to manage their finances.
I am curious, given your previous statements today about
attempting to foster competition in the banking sector, why do
you think it is a good idea for government to set the price for
a clearly-disclosed service offered to customers in the private
sector?
Mr. Chopra. It is not about setting a price. I think there
have been certain places where prices are a safe harbor to
avoid some of the cost of compliance, but what we are looking
for is for there to be a competitive market. When people are
borrowing, we want them to have lots of choices and to be able
to get it in a way that is the function of the market.
Mr. Timmons. I guess that is just the free market. If they
want to go to a different service provider to get a better
rate, they should. I am just worried that such a rule will
merely result in denying overdraft protection for millions of
Americans. These are the Americans who need it most, and if we
start impacting the free market, I fear that they are not going
to be able to have access to overdraft protection, so the
people who need it most, their transactions will ultimately be
declined. I appreciate the intent, but the outcome will be
detrimental to those that you are seeking to protect. As you
consider this issue, just appreciate that the banks are not
going to offer overdraft protection if they are not able to
charge a fee for it.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. We now go to the
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Gottheimer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Hello, Director
Chopra. While I know that you don't have direct oversight over
tolling, you do have oversight over our financial institutions,
particularly with regard to revenue from exorbitant fees
charged to consumers. It has come to my attention that some
financial institutions are providing favorable credit terms to
New York's Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the MTA,
based on enormous and outrageous fees, including a new $23-a-
day congestion tax just to drive into New York City. That will
be paid by hardworking families, particularly my constituents
in New Jersey, and you are a Jersey guy, so you know about
these issues I am talking about.
We are talking about charging nurses, cops and
firefighters, labor, restaurant workers, and other hardworking
families $23-a-day just to drive into New York City. You
understand consumer fairness perhaps better than anyone else in
this room. Are you concerned at all that these banks will be
making money off of gouging middle-class Americans with
exorbitant tolls from their new congestion tax, and will you
commit to investigating the revenue that financial institutions
are making from this congestion tax?
Mr. Chopra. I actually have not heard this. I am from
outside Philadelphia, but my uncle worked for the New York MTA
for a long time. But I will look into this and get back to you.
Mr. Gottheimer. I would really appreciate if you would do
that. I would be very grateful, and I will follow up with you.
I am working with Representative Cartwright on legislation
that would require the 6-percent interest rate cap for loans
made to active-duty servicemembers to apply to all applicable
accounts held by the servicemember at a particular financial
institution. This is an issue I have been following closely,
and I know the CFPB released a credit card market report last
month which found that many credit card companies are not
proactively checking servicemembers' military status to ensure
that they receive the benefits they have earned in return for
their sacrifices and service to our great nation. What needs to
be done to make sure that more credit card companies are
proactively checking?
Mr. Chopra. This is a very good point, by the way. With
higher interest rates, you actually have a lot more people,
including on their mortgage, where the Servicemembers Civil
Relief Act protection is going to kick in. We released some
analysis about the low levels of take-up for National Guard and
reserve who were activated. Our Servicmember Affairs Office and
I put out some recommendations on what institutions can do to
make sure that they are covering everyone. It is voluntary. We
know some are doing it, but I do think there are some good
questions about whether it should be required to simply make it
go through the process rather than having the servicemember
deal with every single notice through that process, and there
is a database. So, we can get back to you with some further
details on that, but it is a good, worthwhile idea.
Mr. Gottheimer. Yes. I would really like to follow up with
you on that as well. That would be great.
And Director, this committee, as you might know, has
recently discussed Earned Wage Access, known as EWA, products
which offer individuals the ability to draw money from their
paychecks before payday. Several States, such as Maryland and
Connecticut, have classified EWA products as credit products.
Other States, like Nevada and Missouri, do not recognize EWA
providers as lenders. Director, does the CFPB view EWA as forms
of credit, and if so, does the Bureau plan to treat this
product on a level playing field with other credit products,
including by requiring the providers to disclose the cost of
credit?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. Earned Wage Access (EWA) is often a
branding term. It can be an earned wage. It is a cash advance.
Sometimes, it is through the employer, and sometimes, it is
not. The CFPB, a few years ago, did issue some guidance that
was pretty narrow. It essentially involved free earned wage
advance, so we know the market has developed a lot. Of course,
Federal law still applies. There is Federal and State law. We
live with federalism. We are looking, as I mentioned to your
colleague, at updating the guidance, given all the evolution in
the marketplace.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you so much. It is critical we
classify, in my opinion, and govern these products
appropriately.
I would like to shift gears quickly to open banking. One of
the most prominent consumer protections is protecting consumers
from fraud, as you would agree, and as you know, fraudsters'
practices are evolving constantly, and the industry needs to be
able to continue to innovate to be more effective in curbing
bad actors. I am concerned that the open banking rule as
written will hinder critical industry efforts to fight fraud by
prohibiting the use of consumer data to develop or improve
fraud identification products. Can you please clarify how the
proposal permits the development and improvement of antifraud
tools?
Mr. Chopra. I think what you are referring to is there are
limitations on secondary uses of the data, in other words, that
it is really to prevent fraud. We don't want someone baiting a
consumer to hand over their data, and say, I am going to give
you an auto loan, when in reality, they are using it for all
sorts of other purposes. Really, the goal is to protect the
consumer, to reduce bad actors. I think there are some
questions in the notice of proposed rulemaking about how data
can be used. We are collecting comments on that, but of course,
we do want to make sure that fraud is reduced. Congressman
Foster raised the issue of identity verification. There is
really a lot to work on, on this front. Thank you.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Norman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Director Chopra, for testifying
today. I am going to move through a couple of questions, and
for any we can't get through, we will write a letter, and if
you could just get back to us.
One question that has come up has been the funding for the
CFPB before the Supreme Court. You mentioned that you all have
undertaken a pretty extensive review of expenses, trying to cut
the costs, I guess, of the CFPB. Has that been successful?
Mr. Chopra. Just to make sure it is clear, we are always
looking at ways to sunset old contracts that are no longer in
use, and reduce waste. We try our best to constantly be doing
that and to find more ways to get value out of every dollar
with our procurement, and I have seen places where we are
making inroads on it. At the same time, we have to execute our
mission, and that requires expenditure.
Mr. Norman. When you look at what the history is, I think
what the CFPB has done is, they can issue a 1-page letter to
the Federal Reserve and fund up to 12 percent of the Federal
Reserve's expenses. In 2021, it was $717 million for Fiscal
Year 2021, and then, in 2022, it was $734 million. Has 2023
seen an increase from the $734 million?
Mr. Chopra. Yes, I believe so, and, in fact, we have to
consider a number of factors, and, of course, a big driver is
wages and compensation. That is our biggest piece.
Mr. Norman. But it's fair to say it has gone up?
Mr. Chopra. Oh yes, it has gone up. I don't think the
projections are out of line with other banking regulators. I
think, in some cases, it is lower.
Mr. Norman. I think it was brought up about how we voted on
doing away with the CFPB. I was one of 148 to vote to do away
with it because of funding. Congress ought to have some type of
oversight, and that a governmental agency can just submit a 1-
page letter and get funded, I think is unfair to the taxpayers.
In a sweeping change of topics, I think the CFPB has
removed or is in favor of removing all medical debt from credit
reports. Is that right?
Mr. Chopra. No. We haven't proposed it yet, but we are
collecting feedback from small entity representatives on that.
And I think, again, it is interesting because it is not like
another loan, and the inaccuracies and dispute rates on them
are extremely high compared to other products, and we also see
that FICO, and others----
Mr. Norman. You wouldn't be in favor of taking it off the--
--
Mr. Chopra. Oh, we haven't proposed it yet, but that is one
serious consideration that we are collecting comments on.
Mr. Norman. What is your opinion of it, briefly, because I
want to get to another one.
Mr. Chopra. Based on the data over the past 10 years, I do
think that the harms associated with inaccurate medical debt
reporting cause a nightmare for people----
Mr. Norman. So, you would take it off?
Mr. Chopra. ----relative to the benefits. I kind of want to
see how it all works.
Mr. Norman. Okay.
Mr. Chopra. The difference is, medical debt, we think of
separately from the medical bills that you don't apply for in
advance as opposed to the medical loans and----
Mr. Norman. I get it. Let me ask you this. You have a Small
Business Review Panel. Whom have you dealt with, or, I guess,
whom have you gotten opinions from? Has it been from medical
providers? Have you interviewed them?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. In terms of the panel, we will need to get
you more information on who is on it, but I have personally
talked to a number of medical professionals, including medical
debt collectors who are inside the hospitals, inside the----
Mr. Norman. You have met with them to get their opinion of
this?
Mr. Chopra. Yes, and I think----
Mr. Norman. And I will get a letter if you could just
respond who you have gotten with.
Mr. Chopra. And we can even share with you some conferences
where we have given presentations. What is interesting is many
of the hospitals actually don't send it to credit reporting, so
there is a lot of heterogeneity in the practices.
Mr. Norman. Okay. I am out of time.
Mr. Chopra. Okay. Sorry.
Mr. Norman. If you get can the information to us.
Mr. Norman. Now, on Regulation F, where consumers can
consent to receive accounts receivable via text, you have
certain companies that are blacklisting, that are not sending
texts, even though the consumer wants them to, like in
Operation Choke Point. Do you think this is right?
Mr. Chopra. Wait. Say that again, some----
Mr. Norman. If a consumer asks for the accounts receivable
to be received, the information on it via text, some companies
just are not doing that.
Mr. Chopra. Let us know about it. I will say the regulation
doesn't require that debt collectors provide information by
text. It just allows them if that is a choice, but we are happy
to follow up with you on it.
Mr. Norman. Okay. Thank you so much. I appreciate it.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman's time has expired. We now go
to the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Director
Chopra. It's good to see you again. Thank you for all your good
work.
I wanted to ask you about the proposed rulemaking that was
announced in November. We have a bunch of these larger fintech
firms that are using digital wallets, and in a way, they are
sort of blurring the line between regular commerce and banking.
I know that the original announcement was that you were going
to look at some of these larger firms and require them, because
they are in a good part of the banking business, to report, as
we require small banks and credit unions. I wanted to just get
some of your thinking behind that on how big does a fintech
firm need to be before they would come under this reporting,
which I think is appropriate for some of these larger and
busier firms?
Mr. Chopra. It is interesting. You have a lot of nonbanks,
particularly with apps, that are transmitting, I think it is
now trillions of dollars globally. In many ways, they look a
lot like what we see emerging in China where large tech firms
have a lot of ability to collect data, and move payments.
Mr. Lynch. Yes.
Mr. Chopra. We have proposed bringing in some of those
firms and subjecting them to supervision. We already have
enforcement authority over them.
Mr. Lynch. Right.
Mr. Chopra. We think the supervision actually makes sure
there is a level playing field between the banks that are doing
it and the nonbanks. There are a number of issues--fraud,
privacy--but I think there is going to be a lot of value in
that. We are collecting comments on the specific threshold, but
we estimate it is about 1 or 2 dozen that could come under.
Mr. Lynch. I was reading that one of your enforcement cases
recently was Inova. Was that the name of it?
Mr. Chopra. Yes, Inova.
Mr. Lynch. They actually went in and took money out of
their customers' accounts.
Mr. Chopra. Yes. Can I just share, Congressman?
Mr. Lynch. Yes, please.
Mr. Chopra. We have a lot of situations where people are
able to get information about a customer, and then they can
just grab the money. There are lots of issues that impacts. So,
making sure that our payment system has a lot of fidelity is so
important to the lowest-income people in our country because a
wrongful debit in their account can send them into a tailspin.
Mr. Lynch. Right, and there are credit rating issues there
based on much of that difficulty. I know one of my colleagues
raised an issue earlier today about, I think it was Citibank,
and there was a discrimination issue there with Armenian-
sounding names, I guess.
Mr. Chopra. It was actually names, particularly, that ended
in Y-A-N and I-A-N.
Mr. Lynch. I have a big Armenian population in my district,
so I am quite familiar with that.
Mr. Chopra. And those are obviously going to impact the
Armenian community.
Mr. Lynch. Where does that come from? Do you have any sense
of----
Mr. Chopra. As we have investigated in the enforcement
action, they actually filed false reports to those borrowers as
to why they were declined, and they ostensibly said it was to
detect and prevent fraud. But we allege, and I think provided
very strong evidence that it was prohibited national origin
discrimination. We have laws on the books that don't allow it
to say, ``you type of people.''
Mr. Lynch. These are Armenian Americans, though, aren't
they?
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Lynch. Yes, in this country. I was just curious what
the underpinnings of what the motivation might have been there,
if anything, during your investigation.
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We can share more, but they were excluding
people from the Glendale, California, area, which has a very
high concentration of Armenian Americans, as well as people
with that last name suffix.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Maybe, we can talk offline about that. I
do appreciate your good work, however, and how readily
available you have been to members of this committee. I think
it is commendable the way you have handled your
responsibilities. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. We now go to the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Director Chopra. It's good seeing you, and I, too, believe that
your work is focused on improving situations, but I can't help
but have a number of questions, and maybe you can help clear
some things up for me.
Your mission at the CFPB, part of it anyway, is to aim to
make consumer financial markets work for consumers, and
responsible providers, so both, and the economy as a whole, to
protect consumers from unfair, deceptive, or abusive practices
and take action against companies that break the law. However,
there are many in the banking and business communities that
think that the CFPB is guilty of practices that are unfair and
perhaps abusive and that there is tremendous overreach, and
that very often, rather than the bright-line concept, there is
ideology over specific rules. And this isn't just from one set
of resources. It is from large banks, small banks, super large
banks, super regionals, $1 billion banks, $10 billion banks.
I put out a text a little while ago to a few banks saying,
``Hey, give me some of your thoughts on the CFPB.'' And my
phone is blowing up with negative comments, for instance,
``1071, it will impose significant costs on banks, costs that
will be felt most acutely by small community banks that will
negatively affect their small business customers.'' This was
from a group.
From another group, ``The proposed rule's scope is
unnecessarily far-reaching. It would exempt very few community
banks, define small businesses so broadly as to include tens of
thousands of large businesses, and require institutions to
collect and report data on numerous data points, in addition to
the congressionally-required data points.''
Next one: ``The CFPB 1071 rule would create onerous
reporting requirements for both small business owners and
financial institutions.'' Here is one as well: ``The biggest
issue with the CFPB--and I know this person personally, a small
bank, with probably a billion dollars--is the regulations
restrict banks from residential lending, limiting options for
borrowers, and forcing community banks to lend to more
commercial customers.''
I will leave it to you. How is this working? Everybody,
what a great job is being done. Okay. I would love to see a
great job being done. I want consumers to be protected. I don't
want bad characters to be able to play out, and that should be
a good thing. But the fulfillment of all of this needs to have
a feel that there is some sort of synergy or at least
improvement in line with what is best for the economy as a
whole. That is a somewhat general question, Director, but I
will ask you to comment on some of those comments I read.
Mr. Chopra. It is true that when regulators are doing their
job, we won't always be the most popular when it comes to those
whom we enforce the laws for, when it comes to detecting where
there are potential crimes. I get it. Many of the things you
mentioned are things that Congress enacted in order----
Mr. Meuser. We are talking about 90 percent of the banking
community here whom I am referring to----
Mr. Chopra. I hear from a lot of financial providers who
are eager for us to crack down on some of the abuses that we
see, because they have to compete with these people. They have
to be the ones competing online often with these
misrepresentations. So, we take all the feedback. I have met, I
think, with every State bankers association representing people
on this committee, and maybe even more. We want to make sure
that the law-abiding businesses are not disadvantaged by those
that----
Mr. Meuser. I understand that, but----
Mr. Chopra. And, again, it is not a popularity contest.
Mr. Meuser. You are not receiving the feedback that, and
you said to me in the last hearing that you would reach out
more and have more of a comprehensive relationship or even get
feedback from those who are knocking themselves out. You went
to the Warren School of Business. I know you have to believe in
capitalism to an extent. It is a competitive marketplace. They
are trying to win customers. They are not trying to abuse their
customers. That would be ridiculous because they would go out
of business. That is how it works. The 81 total data points,
the questions that were added, last time we spoke, you said it
is not 81. I forget what you said. It is, like, 18 or
something--no, it is, in fact, 81.
Mr. Chopra. It is not 81. If you are asked a multiple
choice question of what State do you live in, that is not 50
questions. That is one.
Mr. Meuser. You expanded upon congressionally-authorized
questions that you were given. Why is sexual orientation
something that a bank is supposed to ask----
Mr. Chopra. Because in the statute, there are requirements
on----
Mr. Meuser. Not that.
Mr. Chopra. ----the demographic----
Mr. Meuser. Not in the statute.
Mr. Chopra. The Supreme Court has ruled that discrimination
based on sex----
Mr. Meuser. That is an overreach. It is not in the
congressional statute. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. We now go to the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Torres, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Torres. It is always a pleasure to see you, Director,
and I have found you to be as impressively communicative and
responsive as any agency head in the Federal Government. Thank
you for your commitment to protecting working people from
predatory fees.
My first question is about remittances. I represent a
district in the Bronx where families have to pay excessive fees
in order to transfer their own money to loved ones abroad, and
the high fees and long delays of the existing remittance system
imposes a hardship on the lowest-income Americans, particularly
immigrants. And as a nation of immigrants, as you know, the
United States is by far the largest source of remittances, with
$72 billion in 2021 alone. In your view, what can and should be
done to create a better, cheaper, and faster remittance system
for the most-vulnerable among us?
Mr. Chopra. There is so much. One, we need to make sure
that the existing providers are not engaged in bait and switch,
that they are telling the truth about how much it costs, and
they are not hiding things with junk fees, but I think with
digitization, we have also have to think more broadly. Lots of
you have constituents who send money abroad. I see how in big
commercial contexts, there are often agreements between large
banks, between central banks. We should be thinking about the
plumbing of the financial system so that people can send things
cheaply and safely, and I think that requires the attention of
us, the Federal Reserve Board, and many others.
Mr. Torres. I have a question about blockchains and
stablecoins in the context of remittances. Blockchains can
enable real-time transactions. Stablecoins can digitize the
dollar. Do you believe that the combination of blockchains and
stablecoins, if properly regulated, has the potential to play a
role in creating a better, cheaper, and faster remittance
system?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We have seen that some digital apps and
other products have been able to actually help people send
money to a family member who is in a very remote area.
Mr. Torres. Yes.
Mr. Chopra. They may not actually live near a bank or a
place that has a remittance provider and are sometimes able to
use that in ways that really kind of bridge the divide. Now, on
the underlying technology, obviously, it is complicated. We
want to make sure that it is well-regulated, that there is not
fraud, that people have a fair sense of what it is, but I am
totally open to working with all of you as you think through
that.
Mr. Torres. Much has been said about AI, and AI is the most
revolutionary technology of our time. I have found the
discourse about AI to be pessimistic to the point of
apocalyptic. So, I am curious, what do you see not only as the
greatest risk, but also the greatest reward of AI when it comes
to consumer protection in the field of financial services?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. In some ways, AI is not totally new. It is
really advanced computational methods. There are lots of good
ways to prevent fraud. There may be ways in which you could
detect some sort of error in your finances, to help you
automatically dispute something. There are certainly going to
be consumer use cases. I think a little bit of where we should
be cautious is throwing it out into the world and just kind of
seeing what happens. I think we should be thoughtful about how
are the different use cases, generative AI and copying of
biometric data lending and how it would work in algorithms. So
we should be precise on it, but I think there are
opportunities. I am not apocalyptic, but I want to make sure we
are being cautious.
Mr. Torres. Is the CFPB exploring how to harness the power
of AI to enhance enforcement?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. I think we are always looking at more
advanced tools on how we analyze our compliance data, and other
data to detect and deter wrongdoing, just as other law
enforcement does.
Mr. Torres. On the subject of crypto regulation, the
agencies that typically come to mind are the CFTC and the SEC.
What is or should be the role of the CFPB in the field of
crypto regulation?
Mr. Chopra. It is less about the underlying technology and
more about the use case. There has not been a huge
intersection, but, certainly, if you have a stablecoin that
very rapidly scales on one of these payment apps, like another
consumer payment, that is certainly a consumer use case there,
so that is a real place that we are watching it. But most of
the other uses that we see in the financial markets are indeed
outside of consumer financial products.
Mr. Torres. What are your existing authorities with respect
to stablecoin regulation?
Mr. Chopra. The relevant ones that come up a lot are the
Electronic Fund Transfer Act, which is kind of fraud movement
of digital money, and privacy and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
privacy provisions, but there are some other ones that get
implicated as well.
Mr. Torres. I see my time has expired. Thank you for your
service.
Mr. Chopra. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. I am now going
to recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I would like to insert a letter into the record from the
Consumer Bankers Association commenting on today's hearing.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
Director Chopra, your recent Fair Credit Reporting Act
proposal on data brokers and consumer data doesn't include a
fraud exemption when an entity is using data to help verify a
customer's identity. The treatment of credit header data
described in the outline would prohibit financial institutions
from using it for the essential antifraud purposes, for what it
is used for today, I guess. As you know, identity verification
and consideration for creditworthiness are two distinct actions
with their own legal frameworks, KYC laws and the FCRA. Have
you consulted with prudential regulators and the Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) to understand how capturing
identity verification activities under the FCRA may impede
compliance with the Know Your Customer requirements if, in
fact, the data is considered a consumer report?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. Just to be clear, we have not put forth a
proposed rule. One of the places that we know there is a huge
desire for fraudsters to take control over is really that
identity-related data. So, we are trying to think of all the
ways in which we can protect it but not undermine what banks
and lenders are legitimately trying to do for financial
services. To answer your question, yes, certainly we have
discussions with the Treasury, FinCEN, and others on a wide
range of issues, and I can assure you that I hear your message
here loud and clear.
We don't want to do anything that undermines some of the
legitimate financial companies' work, and I think it also goes
back to something Mr. Foster said about identity verification.
I really think all of us need to work on what is the future of
identity verification because it can open up a lot of questions
for harms in the country if we don't have a robust one.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. Let me shift gears here. A small
pediatrician office in Sheboygan, Wisconsin, has estimated that
the CFPB's proposal to remove medical debt from credit reports
will lead to a revenue decrease by 11 percent, or $11,000. I
worry that further reducing the information that lenders have
on borrowers is just going to result in higher costs and higher
rates for all. Is there any way that CFPB has studied this or
tried to figure out what the impact would be on individual
medical clinics?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. I think we are thinking about it in two
different contexts: the medical provider facilities; and then,
separately, the lenders. You raised two parts: what will be the
impact for them; and what would be the impact on the credit
reporting system? On the second part, there has actually been a
move away because of the limited predicted value of medical
bills on credit reporting. We have talked to a number in the
medical industry, and many of them actually don't put it on
credit reports, and actually for most small players, I believe
they don't. We are really looking at all of that, and, again,
we have not proposed a rule. We are going through the process
of collecting input in advance of proposing. We will then have
public comments before we pursue it. But I will tell you, I am
concerned about widespread inaccuracies in medical debt credit
reporting.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. One more on privacy. We have
heard from many Wisconsin bankers in discussions with their
small business customers about the 1071 reporting requirements,
which have been discussed many times today. They are concerned
about the public release of the data.
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. We are talking about villages of a thousand
people, and some counties, actually, would find themselves, I
think, in a similar situation. It would be very easy for
somebody to sit down and kind of figure out who this is or
which family this is. Considering how important privacy is to
the Bureau, why wouldn't you first publish the results of the
re-identification study and then take comments, as required by
the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), to balance the risks
and the benefits of the disclosure?
Mr. Chopra. We are pretty far away from any publication on
it, and let me just share with you that compared to mortgage
data under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, the data here is
going to be totally different. Like you said, there may only be
one type of small business type in an area, so we are going to
look at that. I will take that suggestion about how we might
proceed with that, but we are many years away.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. I yield back. And at this time,
I recognize the gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms. Pettersen.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and it's great to
see you, Director Chopra. It is wonderful to have you here. You
do a very good job of being in the hot seat.
Being last, all of my questions have been asked, but one
thing that I have thought a lot about sitting through this is
what it was like to live in poverty, what it was like when I
was younger, having multiple jobs while I worked my way through
college, putting myself through school, being just one
financial emergency away from being unable to pay for rent and
put a roof over my head. And when I think about those life
experiences that are so important to have when you are sitting
in these seats, and understanding what people are struggling
with every day, and how important your work is in fighting for
regular people, and who these junk fees can really have an
enormous impact on, or zombie debt. So, I just want to thank
you for the work that you and your team do every day.
And when I think about zombie debt in particular, I was
reflecting on when I was younger, in high school, and I had to
go to the emergency room. I paid for it. Later on, when I was
qualifying to buy a house, it showed up again.
Mr. Chopra. Credit report?
Ms. Pettersen. No, I paid for it, but then it was sold off.
So zombie debt, where it is paid years later, and you have no
proof, oftentimes lose that, and they know that, so they sell
it off knowing that is likely, and so many people in my life
have dealt with this. And I remember being a young person and
feeling like there was no accountability, nowhere to go. And I
know recently, the CFPB had a field hearing on this issue
around zombie mortgages specifically, and I wanted to see how
you all are thinking about what to do about zombie mortgages
and how they are targeting seniors, but also if there are gaps
that Congress should consider addressing?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. Thank you for that, and let me just share
one of the things that is really great about the work we do is
that we actually get to hear directly from thousands of people
a day about exactly those situations, and how it affects them,
and how we can fix things for them.
On zombie mortgages, there was, and we think this is quite
targeted in a few metro areas, but maybe nationwide, second
mortgages that were considered satisfied, but that have
reemerged and are targeting people sitting on home equity,
often seniors, zombie debt, more broadly, of things that just
keep popping up over and over again, and the consumer is often
put in a place to prove they have paid it, even though it may
be long ago. I think there are a lot of ways in which the
credit report, too, is used to coerce people into paying this
debt, debt parking.
We do use our authorities under the Fair Debt Collection
Practices Act and the Fair Credit Reporting Act, but I think it
is worthwhile to think if we need any sort of enhancements to
it in order to make sure that this type of what I see often as
fraud doesn't recur.
Ms. Pettersen. Great. Thank you for that. I know that you
are trying to change behavior by doubling down on going after
junk fees, and I don't know if you want to talk quickly about
how you all are identifying junk fees, and then also what you
are seeing with behavior changing from businesses and what that
means for consumers?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. I think we have seen a number of very
large banks which engage in some hyper-aggressive illegal
practices. We reached two major enforcement actions: Wells
Fargo, and Regions Bank. It was pretty bad conduct. We have
seen, though, a pretty big shift in the market of moving away
from some of these junk fees, and I think we have tried to go
to other industries to see where are they charging something
that really is for nothing. I mentioned earlier to your
colleague that we found a paper statement fee that they didn't
print or mail, so we have to make sure that this is just not
another way to cheat people. We are very proud of that work,
and I think it has made a difference of billions of dollars.
Ms. Pettersen. Great. With 20 seconds remaining, is there
anything else you want to add? I know that there were a lot of
talk----
Mr. Chopra. I have known some of you now for many years,
and I do hope that there are some things that we all see eye to
eye on, including protecting data privacy, and junk fees. I
think there is a lot we can do to really row in the same
direction, so I appreciate all of you who have met with me to
really help inform our work.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentlewoman's time has expired. We will
now go to the gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Director, it is
good to see you. It is great that Ms. Pettersen just asked
about junk fees, because one of my other colleagues asked about
it before as well, and I am trying to get an actual answer. Are
fees for negative business transactions, late fees, overdraft
fees that are part of the contractual services provided by
financial institutions to customers who sign up for products
such as credit cards and checking accounts--would you consider
those junk fees? Would you consider if someone signs up for a
credit card or a bank account, a late fee or an overdraft fee?
Mr. Chopra. Some of it is how it is assessed. For example,
I mentioned those two enforcement actions. Sometimes, they
assessed it by mixing around the transactions, and sometimes,
they didn't even deliver it.
Mr. Garbarino. I agree. If they don't deliver, if there is
no overdraft and they charge an overdraft fee, that is a
problem, but if the statement says if you are late with your
payment or if the contract says if you are late with your
payment, we are charging you a late fee, or if you overdraft
and it is a legitimate overdraft, we are charging an overdraft
fee.
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Garbarino. Are those junk fees? Would you consider----
Mr. Chopra. I think I am in agreement with the spirit of
what you are saying. The issue is that it can't override
Federal law, so there can't be deception around it. There are
other congressional prohibitions. And again, like Congresswoman
Pettersen said, I do want to recognize that the industry has
made some real moves on this, which I think are commendable.
Mr. Garbarino. I get that, but late fees and overdraft fees
aren't blatantly junk fees.
Mr. Chopra. It depends on how----
Mr. Garbarino. I agree, but----
Mr. Chopra. Yes, I take your point. Look, the way we define
junk fees are ones that are not subject to the competitive
process, really are hidden, or are sometimes for things that
are not even services or not even provided.
Mr. Garbarino. I get that.
Mr. Chopra. We try and focus on where it is illegal, or
fraudulent, but there are other places where you have a lot of
honest banks out there competing on the upfront price and then
others building a business model off of something.
Mr. Garbarino. I understand that. My point is, if a
contract says that if you are late paying your credit card
statement, we are going to charge you $25, and somebody is a
week late, it is pretty straightforward.
Mr. Chopra. Yes. It also has to comply with Federal law.
Mr. Garbarino. Of course, yes. I want to move on to
something else. I want to talk about an issue, and it is
related to the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) proposal and
the data brokers. From what I understand, the CFPB is
considering significant changes to the FCRA, including
broadening the scope of what constitutes a consumer reporting
agency to basically any entity that compiles and makes
available consumer financial information, whether or not it is
used for eligibility decisions. Currently, the Bureau's
authority is limited to regulations that are necessary and
appropriate to carry out the objectives of the FCRA. However,
the SBREFA includes a broad and novel definition of, ``data
broker,'' which seems to contradict decades of regulatory
guidance, case law, and congressional intent. It also creates
conflicts with the KYC requirements.
Given those contradictions, where in the CFPB's limited
rulemaking authority does it have the ability to create the new
definition of, ``data broker?''
Mr. Chopra. Yes. I don't agree with what you just shared
there. One of the pieces of input you all have given us is to
try and avoid, where we can, regulation by enforcement. There
are a lot of companies out there that meet the definition and
activities of a consumer reporting agency. Yes, we could go and
litigate it, bring enforcement actions. The goal is, in some
ways, to provide some clarity about the business model of a
consumer reporting agency, which now you have a lot of
different firms that are collecting these dossiers on us, and
to create a level playing field around it.
You mentioned the issue of KYC fraud. As I shared with
Congressman Fitzgerald, we are taking that very seriously and
looking at all of the uses of it. But I think we need to be
careful about data brokers often compiling information about
Americans and often selling our most-sensitive data to bad
actors overseas, including to defraud people.
Mr. Garbarino. I understand, but I just want to make sure,
so you think you already have the authority, the CFPB already
has the authority to do all this with the new----
Mr. Chopra. Yes, because we have to make sure that we are
administering the Fair Credit Reporting Act, and if you look at
even the legislative history----
Mr. Garbarino. You believe you have it under the----
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We can't propose a rule on anything that
we wouldn't have it.
Mr. Garbarino. I understand. I think there is a
disagreement of whether or not----
Mr. Chopra. We can talk about it. I am happy to talk about
it.
Mr. Garbarino. Okay. I appreciate that. I have another
question, but I am down to 10 seconds, and I know I won't get
it out. I will submit it to you for the record.
Mr. Chopra. Sure.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. Next, we have
the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the ranking
member as well, who is not here at this time, but I also thank
Ms. Garcia. And I thank you for appearing today, sir. It is my
belief that if we did not have the CFPB, we would need to
create it, and what I would like to do is explore some of the
rationale for my contention.
The staff has done an excellent job in providing
intelligence. There is an indication that the agency has
required financial firms that violate the law to pay more than
$4.1 billion in civil penalties. As a former litigator, I
understand the difference between a class action and a small
action. What would these persons have to do, if not for the
CFPB, to collect this amount in penalties? What would they have
to do without the CFPB?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We have obtained, I believe, about $20
billion in forfeitures. There is no way that people would have
been able to get all of this on their own, and in some ways,
Congressman, they may not have even known about the error or
the mischarge. We have been using our complaints and sometimes
can see the trends that it is not just 30 or 40, but it is
30,000 or 40,000, and I think we have had maybe tens of
millions of people who directly benefited from those. And look,
we should want a marketplace where people are playing by the
rules, and we try and help firms that do, but where they don't,
we do have to take action.
Mr. Green. I am proud that you do. Let's explore one
additional area: illegal discrimination. We found that a
certain bank--no need to mention the name--discriminated and
was ordered to pay $25.9 million. This type of litigation
usually is long term, meaning it would be 3 to 5 years. This is
what the consumer would have to suffer, just the time alone,
and then to find a lawyer who would do this for an individual,
you would have to have some deep pockets. Explain, if you
would, as tersely as you would like, why it is so important
that you engage in these illegal discrimination actions?
Mr. Chopra. Many times, people wouldn't even know they were
the victim of it. In the case you mentioned, those individuals
were given fake reasons why they were denied, but in reality,
it was because they were Armenian American. They wouldn't have
even known to do it, and so we have to make sure that we are
detecting it and taking action.
Mr. Green. I started with the premise that if we didn't
have the CFPB, we would need to create it. Sadly, this Congress
would never do it. Thank God, we have it now, because we
couldn't get it if we didn't already have it. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. We now go to the
gentlewoman from California, Mrs. Kim.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. And, Director Chopra, thank you for
being with us today. From its inception, the way the CFPB was
designed disregarded longstanding checks and balances. Under
our Constitution, no one agency or person shall have absolute
power to do as they please. Even the President is accountable
to Congress and to the power of the purse, and the CFPB should
not be the exception to longstanding constitutional rules. I
think we agree on that.
And I do agree with the mission that consumers must be
protected from bad actors. The CFPB, in the name of consumer
protection, is being used to divert the public's attention from
the real challenges faced by individuals and families. And the
CFPB, under your watch, Mr. Chopra, has not addressed the root
causes of indebtedness, of poor economic conditions for
millions of Americans. And in your testimony, you highlight
that for the first time ever, credit card debt eclipsed $2
trillion last year, and you also mentioned the cost of high
interest rates for consumers, but unfortunately, you don't
mention inflation once in your testimony.
You are a member of FSOC, and so you should have been privy
to discussions on how fiscal expansionary measures fueled
inflation. If you recall, everyone in the Biden Administration
was stating that inflation is transitory, when, in fact, we all
know that it wasn't. Why did you fail to mention inflation in
your testimony?
Mr. Chopra. Certainly, higher cost of goods--I think I
specifically mentioned examples of it, I am happy to look back
at it, and the examples of higher vehicle prices. There are
certainly issues with higher home prices. Of course, prices and
the rate environment, we do see both as being drivers. The rate
environment, I think, has also, as mentioned by one of your
colleagues, dramatically increased the price of new mortgage
origination. So, they are both certainly something we think
about in consumer financial products.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. Since consumers had to pay more for
goods and services, would you agree that inflation played a
role in increasing indebtedness to Americans?
Mr. Chopra. If you look at the amount of household debt
relative to net worth, we can share with you the trend lines,
but it is not our job to really look at what exactly is
happening with respect to each individual good. But we, of
course, know that when there are higher prices, when there are
higher rates, that is going to affect people, and certainly the
Federal Reserve Board is the one that----
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. I mentioned that, because we had a
peak of 9.1 percent inflation in 2022, I think around June, and
that was the highest rate in 40 years, so I just wanted to
point that out. I know Chairman McHenry mentioned this earlier,
and I share his concern, because back in August of last year or
this year, I led a letter with the Chair of our Financial
Institutions Subcommittee, Chairman Andy Barr, and there were
17 of my colleagues who sent a letter voicing our concerns
regarding the announcement of the informal dialogue between the
CFPB and the European Commission, and in that letter, we
specifically asked the CFPB to brief this committee. I want to
ask you again, will you commit to briefing this committee,
because we want to ensure that the EU is not exporting their
financial laws and regulations in the United States.
Mr. Chopra. Certainly. Let me be clear, we are not cutting
and pasting anything from there. We are having a meeting, a
series of meetings because many of the issues, particularly----
Mrs. Kim. I just need your commitment. We haven't gotten
the briefing----
Mr. Chopra. Actually, if I could just finish----
Mrs. Kim. ----that we asked for.
Mr. Chopra. We face some serious global threats when it
comes to some of the issues, particularly from bad actors based
in China and Russia, and I do think that we need some global
cooperation on this. Yes, we will brief you----
Mrs. Kim. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Chopra. ----but we are having meetings with them.
Mrs. Kim. Then, we can have that further conversation----
Mr. Chopra. We are having meetings with them----
Mrs. Kim. ----when you come and brief us----
Mr. Chopra. ----because there are some very serious issues.
Mrs. Kim. Let me reclaim my time, because I do want to ask
another question regarding the CFPB's SBREFA outline because on
that, the FCRA proposal raised concerns about legal versus
factual disputes, and there is considerable case law and
supervision guidance around factual disputes because those
questions can be determined by reinvestigation. The resolution
of a legal dispute depends upon information that is generally
not reported to a consumer reporting agency, so how could a
credit bureau make a determination on a legal matter?
Mr. Chopra. Mr. Chairman, may I respond?
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentlelady is out of time.
Mr. Chopra. We will answer for the record.
Mr. Fitzgerald. We can get that in writing, I am sure.
Mrs. Kim. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzgerald. What we are going to do is, because there
is an open roll call going on right now, we are going to go to
Congressman Flood, and then we are going to recess. We have
four more members, but it should be very quickly because there
are only two votes, and then we will come back in and finish
with those four members. Next, we will recognize the gentleman
from Nebraska, Mr. Flood.
Mr. Flood. Thank you to the very capable chairman from
Wisconsin. Mr. Chopra, I would like to focus on the CFPB's
recent rulemaking for larger participants in the market of
digital consumer payments. This rulemaking covers a lot of
ground, from third-party platforms used in small businesses
across the country, to digital asset wallets. Let's start with
the implications for digital assets.
When describing the supervisory authority that the Bureau's
larger participant rulemaking would give to the CFPB, there is
a footnote explaining, and it says, ``The CFPB's supervisory
authority is not limited to the products or services that
qualified the person for supervision, but also includes other
activities.'' In my view, this footnote signals that the
rulemaking will cover far more than the, ``general use digital
consumer payment applications.'' Can you comment on the CFPB's
intentions surrounding the scope of this rulemaking?
Mr. Chopra. I wouldn't misread that. We are looking to make
sure there is a level playing field between the banks and
credit unions that offer these services and the large nonbanks.
We already have enforcement authority over all of these
entities that would be covered. It wouldn't create any kind of
new jurisdiction, but what we are doing is going through the
rulemaking process to establish for certain larger
participants, are they following the existing law? We could go
through that process by an enforcement investigation. That is
more adversarial.
I think this is a little bit more of a way to make sure
that there are not harms, given some of them really are
touching tens of millions of customers. But I think I hear the
concern, which is kind of going outside of the jurisdiction,
but we can only supervise and enforce the laws that Congress
has specifically designated for us.
Mr. Flood. Given that the rule does not cover some digital
asset transactions, like an investor purchasing bitcoin through
a brokerage account, but does cover others, how would the CFPB
distinguish between the different types of transactions
conducted by the same digital asset wallet?
Mr. Chopra. Yes. We are going to have to deal with that. I
think most of what we are going to be doing is focused on ones
where it is really consumer payments. Inasmuch that they are
doing two different activities, we have a lot of familiarity
with how to do this. Many of our banks have broker-dealers
affiliated with them. They have commercial businesses that we
don't cover, so when we do an examination, we explain we are
covering the activities under Federal consumer financial
protection.
Mr. Flood. Do you think the CFPB has Regulation E authority
over transactions using a digital asset, like a stablecoin, to
purchase a consumer good or service?
Mr. Chopra. The Electronic Fund Transfer Act covers the
transfer of funds. There are certain exceptions for when it is
for trading of securities. I think there are other exceptions
there. Overall, when you have a consumer payment for household
use, I think the case law would suggest that is covered, but we
are collecting comments on this just to make sure, and we have
been pretty judicious on this point. I have raised with
Chairman McHenry and others that, inasmuch that you all enact
anything, we will need to make sure that it is well-reflected.
Mr. Flood. I would like to quickly switch gears and discuss
some of the non-digital asset implications of the rule. Given
that third-party payment processing tools are popular among
small businesses, how can you be sure that this rule wouldn't
result in some of the cost of compliance being passed down to
these small businesses?
Mr. Chopra. The rule proposes only for larger participants,
so we proposed a threshold for which we are getting comments,
so it is really not supposed to implicate small businesses, and
it is really focused on those consumer payments. I will keep my
eye out for that, but again, there is not any kind of new
authority. We currently have enforcement and other authorities
over these firms already.
Mr. Flood. I appreciate that. The cost-benefit analysis in
this rule states that the Bureau lacks sufficient information
to predict how compliance costs would be, ``borne by providers
or passed on to the consumers.'' However, you certified that
the proposed rule would not have significant impacts on small
entities, and therefore, the rule wouldn't need to go through
the small business panel process. I have 20 seconds left, so
quickly, how can you assert the rule will not have an effect on
small businesses if the analysis fails to even attempt to weigh
the rule's compliance costs?
Mr. Chopra. I think the proposal exempts small business.
Mr. Flood. Okay. I will look at that. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Chopra. I will let you know if it is something
different.
Mr. Flood. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. We will now take
a brief recess.
[recess]
Mr. Fitzgerald. Director Chopra, thank you for hanging in
there, and we will go first to the gentleman from Iowa, Mr.
Nunn, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Director
Chopra, for hanging in here. It is a marathon today, but it is
important for all of us to be able to go through this.
I want to follow up on a number of items that were brought
up from some local bankers in my community in Iowa. There are
many folks in the Midwest who are trying to do the best they
can to keep up with what seems like an ever-changing regulatory
environment, and it puts both an economic burden on them as
well as just a challenge to be able to support the customers
and communities that I exist in. Some of the words that they
have described to me in their dealings with your agency have
been that the guidance is unclear. It is not always concise. In
fact, sometimes it is conflicting. Some have called it
partisan, and others have said that it is analytically weak.
To get us all on the same page here, I would like to just
go over what the CFPB has that is unique to your organization,
that is different from a lot of others. First, let's be clear:
You are not under the appropriations clause, correct?
Mr. Chopra. The appropriations clause?
Mr. Nunn. Yes. You are funded by the Federal Reserve, not
directly through any appropriations?
Mr. Chopra. The appropriations clause is in the
Constitution.
Mr. Nunn. Right, and you are not under it, correct?
Mr. Chopra. Not right now.
Mr. Nunn. Yes. Second, you don't have an independent
Inspector General, do you?
Mr. Chopra. Our Inspector General is with the Federal
Reserve. They oversee both of us.
Mr. Nunn. They oversee the Federal Reserve, but you don't
report to the Inspector General. They oversee the entire aspect
of it. Do you have an executive board?
Mr. Chopra. No.
Mr. Nunn. Okay. I find the collection of those three things
concerning, and that is an issue for Dodd-Frank that we can
take up as we go forward. Now, when you and I last spoke, we
came on the heels of roughly a quarter of a million Americans
who had had their data hemorrhaged by the CFPB. I was hopeful
that when we spoke in June, we were going to get a written
after-action report on this. Has your office had the time to
review this and provide any kind of written after-action report
on what happened with that leak?
Mr. Chopra. Again, the misappropriation theft of data by an
insider threat was completely serious. We are continuing to
cooperate with all law enforcement related to that, including
any criminal law enforcement. With respect to changes we have
made, we are happy to brief you----
Mr. Nunn. I am asking you, Director, if you have provided a
report to Congress on exactly what happened?
Mr. Chopra. We have complied with all of the pieces of it.
If there are specific questions about what happened----
Mr. Nunn. I want to make sure this doesn't happen again.
Mr. Chopra. I do, too.
Mr. Nunn. Please provide us with a written after-action
report on what occurred so we don't have this again. Thank you.
I want to turn now to Section 1071. I know it has been part
of an ongoing conversation today, and you are statutorily
obligated under Dodd-Frank to collect a number of data points.
As I understand it, it has now swollen to 81. In fact, you have
exceeded your mandate by about 25 points.
Mr. Chopra. Sorry. Just to be clear, that is not accurate.
Mr. Nunn. Okay. Please describe to me where I am incorrect?
Mr. Chopra. There are 81 data fields, so I am just going to
give an example, which is not in the rule, but it helps to----
Mr. Nunn. I think that we can equivocate over how you want
to call it.
Mr. Chopra. But if you----
Mr. Nunn. There are 81 different items that members who
want to review this would have to fill out. Is that correct?
Mr. Chopra. Again, I am trying to explain that. There are
not 81 different items. We create a template for how people can
report. So if you have a first name, a middle name, a last
name, and a suffix, in order for the data to be cleanly
understood, that might count as five----
Mr. Nunn. So, there are a total of 81 different fields that
need to be filled out. I am going to follow up on this because,
again, you went above and beyond the requirement here by 25
additional requests. I want to understand how this information
is going to be used. Let's be very clear here. Is this
information going to be publicly available?
Mr. Chopra. There is not going to be personally
identifiable information. We're going to----
Mr. Nunn. Will any of the information be publicly
available?
Mr. Chopra. If you will let me finish, we are going to go
through a process, just like exists in mortgage data, to figure
out what type of----
Mr. Nunn. Director, are you going to provide this
information publicly, or is it going to stay internal to the
CFPB?
Mr. Chopra. As I just shared, just like the Home Mortgage
Disclosure Act data, there will be certain analyses and data
that will be made public, but that is years away.
Mr. Nunn. I believe it is the intent of the CFPB right now
to potentially publicly shame a number of organizations,
including my bank, Union State Bank, in East Peru, Iowa. It has
15 employees, a population of 200 citizens, and they have a
very different profile than what may be in a place like
Pittsburgh. But East Peru, for them, if they don't meet the
standards that you have laid out here in your diversity and
inclusion, there is a real chance that they could be publicly
shamed.
Mr. Chopra. No, that is not true, but the data that will be
used for the Community Reinvestment Act are not going to be
duplicative data. I am out of time, but I am happy to take that
question.
Mr. Nunn. I want to----
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Nunn. I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Next, we will go to the gentlewoman from
Texas, Ms. De La Cruz.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today, and thank you, Director Chopra, for appearing
before us today.
I serve a largely rural community, a Latino community in
deep South Texas, south of San Antonio, and my constituents
rely heavily on smaller banks, community banks, and credit
unions. And this is really important for their livelihoods, and
for the economic development of our communities. It worries me
increasingly, as I hear from these community banks that your
agency remains insulated and unchecked by Congress while
creating rules that directly impact constituents in my area.
The rule that really concerns me is the 1071 rule. We have
heard over and over today how it is going to affect community
banks, how it is going to affect small business owners like
myself, and, ultimately, who is most important are the
consumers, the entrepreneurs. So, I hope that today you are
hearing the message that the 1071 rule is just simply not
working. It is not going to work for community banks, it is not
going to work for communities that want to thrive, and it is
not going to work for small business owners.
This seems to be an expensive endeavor for community banks
to implement, not only with training for staff, but
implementation of new software. For the people listening right
now on C-SPAN, we are talking about going from 15 data points
to 81 data points. That is an incredible increase, and what it
is really doing is profiling customers who have never been
profiled before. Not only is it going to take a significant
amount of time to profile these customers, asking questions
such as sexual orientation, which, remember, banking has been
built on being able to look at a project, look at credit
scores, look at debt ratios, and to be able to make an analysis
away and apart from profiling customers. Now, because of the
1071 rule, they are actually going to have to start
implementing and profiling customers. I am worried about the
costs that it is going to take to comply with the 1071 rule.
I want to know, do you recognize that this rule may result
in less availability of credit to small businesses that it
targets, particularly if it leads to smaller banks having to
pull back from lending due to the costs associated to the 1071
rule?
Mr. Chopra. Let me just share with you what we saw during
the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), that actually the small
community institutions you mentioned really punched above their
weight class when it comes to serving small businesses. Many of
them have those relationships, so we were under a court order
to complete the final rule by March of this year. The CFPB was
sued a few years ago for not doing the rule. We complied with
the court order. We increased the loan threshold, which
exempted a large number. I don't have the exact number of small
banks, but, of course, I share with you that we want a robust
and really fair small business lending market. This is really
the fabric----
Ms. De La Cruz. I am going to reclaim my time quickly here.
When was the last time you actually spoke to a community bank
about this rule?
Mr. Chopra. I have conducted sessions with, I think, every
single bankers association represented in this committee and
more. I think I have met now with thousands of community
bankers, and you are right, many of them, in fact, do mention
this and other issues. I have done branch visits as well in
several places----
Ms. De La Cruz. And I am going to reclaim my time again. I
think it is more than just a couple of them or some of them.
Every single community bank that I hear from says this is a
problem, and this is going to create a lot of problems for not
only the banks, but the consumers, the small businesses, and
for the economic well-being and prosperity of our communities.
I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentlewoman yields back. We now go to
the gentlewoman from Indiana, Mrs. Houchin.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
ranking member. And thanks, Director Chopra, for your testimony
and for being here on this long day.
Since you were last here a few months ago, the CFPB has
continued to put forward what I view as politically-motivated
rules that go beyond your statutory authority. Despite my
colleagues and I making our concerns known to you at the last
hearing, I still frequently hear from constituents about the
lack of input on rulemaking, the failure to tailor regulations
towards smaller institutions, and an almost impossible-to-
navigate landscape that comes from the CFPB's continued
regulation by press release. It is beyond concerning, and we
are going to continue to push on these issues.
Director Chopra, my colleagues and I have previously made
our concerns known to you about the continued pattern of
regulation by press release, and when that fails, regulation by
enforcement. To one of my colleagues earlier in this hearing,
you said that the Bureau has, ``tried to articulate guidance
through the various laws that we have enforced.'' How is a
business supposed to know what guidance exists if they aren't
made aware of any wrongdoing until the CFPB alleges misconduct
has occurred and forces a business to pay a fine?
Mr. Chopra. I don't think that is the case. I think that we
try our best, and based on feedback from many industry groups,
including the Consumer Bankers Association (CBA), to be able to
publish information that answers questions about how to comply.
Mrs. Houchin. I am glad you mentioned the Consumer Bankers
Association. They recently reached out to me on Dodd-Frank
Section 1034(c) and the advisory opinion that was recently
published by the Bureau. They are concerned that it is
difficult to understand, and it is vague in what is the scope
of it and what isn't. It is a significant policy. Stakeholders
are required to comply with this within 2 months. And I
understand that the Consumer Bankers Association recently
reached out to request a meeting with CFPB staff, but the CFPB
rejected their meeting request. Why would your staff reject a
meeting with an important stakeholder like the CBA, and will
you ensure this is corrected so that industry stakeholders can
engage with you and get a deeper understanding of what is
required?
Mr. Chopra. You actually raised such a good example.
Congress passed that part of the statute. That is law. It is
the law of the land.
Mrs. Houchin. My question is, why would----
Mr. Chopra. If I could finish.
Mrs. Houchin. The question is----
Mr. Chopra. Instead of just bringing----
Mrs. Houchin. I am reclaiming----
Mr. Chopra. ----an enforcement action----
Mrs. Houchin. You are not answering my question,
respectfully. Why would your staff refuse a meeting with the
CBA, and will you ensure it is corrected so these stakeholders
can engage with you to get an understanding----
Mr. Chopra. I am happy to look into that and make sure
that----
Mrs. Houchin. Will you, yes, ensure that you will meet with
the CBA?
Mr. Chopra. I think our staff meets with associations all
the time, but I will check into that for you.
Mrs. Houchin. Will you commit that your staff will meet
with the CBA?
Mr. Chopra. Sure.
Mrs. Houchin. Okay.
Mr. Chopra. We will have someone meet----
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you.
Mr. Chopra. They have meetings with us regularly.
Mrs. Houchin. Perfect. I want to go back to this regulating
by press release. Under what authority does the CFPB govern by
press release, and why is it not clearly declaring rules and
going through the appropriate regulatory and administrative
processes, such as the APA?
Mr. Chopra. We are complying with the APA, and if you want
to share more detail about, ``regulation by press release,'' I
don't even actually know what that term means. We put out
regulations through the regulatory process. We have received
feedback that we should publish important developments, and
yes, we do post information on our website.
Mrs. Houchin. So until a rule is made final, any
announcements you have made to the fact are not enforceable?
Mr. Chopra. No, the regulation and the statute is what
governs it.
Mrs. Houchin. Great.
Mr. Chopra. The press releases are there to say we are
collecting comments. We have published this guidance. We have
issued this report.
Mrs. Houchin. So, you are not making enforcements based on
rules that have not been promulgated 100 percent?
Mr. Chopra. We would not win those in court.
Mrs. Houchin. But the question is not would you win them in
court, but are you making enforcement actions?
Mr. Chopra. If you have a specific example of that, I am
happy to discuss it with you, but we are often attempting to
issue the guidance in response to industry questions. This is a
program that Director Kraninger, my predecessor, started that
we have continued. And I am happy to address real concerns
wherever they emerge.
Mrs. Houchin. Do you agree with the well-established
principle that if an action is establishing a new obligation on
covered entities, it must go through the notice-and-comment
rulemaking process in order to be enforceable?
Mr. Chopra. The statute often creates the obligations. We
often issue guidance to say this is really how we intend to
supervise for it. It is for transparency. I am trying to also
react to you are saying that there is regulation by
enforcement. We are doing all these things to help avoid that.
Mrs. Houchin. I just want to know if you are, and I would
be happy to talk to you----
Mr. Chopra. We are complying with the Administrative
Procedure Act (APA).
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentlewoman----
Mrs. Houchin. ----further about this. I appreciate it.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentlewoman's time has expired. We now
go to the gentleman from New York, Mr. Lawler.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Director, thanks for
being here today, and you are here today at a time of
significant economic concern, as concern continues over
inflation, rising interest rates, and families struggling with
expenses. I know some of my colleagues have alluded to
significant concerns about the effects of regulations coming
out of your agency and the potential cost-benefit analysis. And
clearly, we have serious concerns about how you are ensuring
the cost of regulations and other CFPB actions do not outweigh
any potential benefit, particularly since those costs will
likely be passed on to consumers.
The fintech sector has helped to provide credit access,
particularly for low- and middle-income individuals, and many
of these providers are also pioneering strong consumer
protection. I am concerned that overly-broad regulations
threaten to kill innovative, law-abiding fintechs, registration
of nonbanks, for instance, or the 1071 small business lending
rule. What kind of cost-benefit analysis is the CFPB engaging
in to make sure that you are not harming vulnerable consumers
in the name of protecting consumers?
Mr. Chopra. Certainly, with respect to rulemaking, we are
under certain obligations to publish a regulatory flexibility
analysis, including to look at where the costs are. Sometimes,
when it comes to benefits, such as the benefits of getting a
credit report corrected, or avoiding an illegal foreclosure, it
can be hard to estimate, but we comply with all of that. And
let me just share, I agree with you that we want all sorts of
companies, particularly small and new ones, to be able to
compete against the big guys, and ideally, rules, including
laws that you pass, can be clear and even bright line so that
there is no ambiguity about it. And sometimes we strive for
that, but often the laws that are passed, new situations come
up, and we are trying to figure out how to make sure that those
small and nascent players can really compete to the benefit of
everyone.
Mr. Lawler. Are there instances where you could see low-
and middle-income consumers being harmed by an overly-
aggressive CFPB regulatory regime?
Mr. Chopra. Certainly, I have seen many instances. I used
to be a Commissioner at the Federal Trade Commission, and that
agency, many years ago, used to have a history of targeting
small businesses who couldn't defend themselves, and strong-
arming them into settlements, and that kind of fear, obviously,
could impact those entrepreneurs and those consumers.
Mr. Lawler. Do you see that happening now at the CFPB?
Mr. Chopra. No. Actually, one of the things we have done is
we really try to focus, especially on the enforcement side, on
repeat offenders, large players, those who know they were
engaged in wrongdoing. We also make sure that in our
supervision program, we are really tailoring it based on risk
and not overburdening. Again, I take the feedback seriously. We
always need to push ourselves to make sure that the system is
serving everybody well, and there is fierce competition.
Mr. Lawler. Previously, the CFPB's Office of Innovation was
focused on encouraging consumer-friendly innovation by creating
approved safe harbors, removing barriers to entry, and
enhancing competition in the marketplace. In 2019, the CFPB
rolled out several policies, including the Compliance
Assistance Sandbox Policy and the No Action Letter Policy, to
facilitate compliance and promote innovation. Just 3 years
later, however, the CFPB rescinded these policies entirely. Why
did the CFPB reverse its decision to help emerging fintech
companies enter the market, especially considering the Bureau's
focus on the importance of competition?
Mr. Chopra. Pretty recently, we have made sure that some of
those programs are still doing work. We approved an application
for those representing small banks on construction loans to do
alternatives, and we are going through that process. Some of
the programs you mentioned, we did a review of, and they
basically did nothing to spur innovation or competition, and we
found that the recipients of those letters were, in some cases,
marketing themselves as endorsed or approved. So, I think what
we are focused on is programs that affect lots of market
participants, but don't crown one winner. Government shouldn't
be picking winners and losers like that.
Mr. Lawler. My time is expiring, so I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. We now recognize
the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Donalds, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Donalds. Director Chopra, how are you doing? It's good
to see you again.
Mr. Chopra. It's good to see you, too, sir.
Mr. Donalds. Okay. It has been a long day. Hey, listen,
from what I understand, the CFPB is considering significant
changes to the Fair Credit Reporting Act, including broadening
the scope of what constitutes a consumer reporting agency to
basically include any entity that compiles and makes available
consumer financial information, whether or not it is used for
eligibility decisions. The Bureau's authority is limited to
regulations that are necessary and appropriate to carrying out
the objectives of the Fair Credit Reporting Act. The Small
Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act outline includes a
broad and novel definition of, ``data broker,'' which seems to
contradict decades of regulatory guidance, case law, and
congressional intent. In your view, where is the CFPB getting
the authority, under its limited rulemaking provisions, to
create this new definition of a data broker?
Mr. Chopra. I am happy to share more information with you
from the outline, but we have lots of data brokers assembling
dossiers on all of us that are being used for a whole set of
purposes, including sales to state and nonstate actors.
Mr. Donalds. I understand that, but----
Mr. Chopra. We are trying to----
Mr. Donalds. Hold on.
Mr. Chopra. Go ahead.
Mr. Donalds. But, Director, where does the CFPB get the
additional authority to make a rule around this or to expand
that definition, because that is a congressional provision?
That is not for an agency to make that determination.
Mr. Chopra. If it is a consumer reporting agency, and I
shared this before, I think it is better for us to go through
the process of explaining what are the indicia that would
trigger these obligations. We can pursue it through an
enforcement-only process, but we are studying the market to see
how these consumer reporting agencies have evolved over time.
We have lots of background screening companies, tenant
screening companies, and others. They all comply.
Mr. Donalds. I am well aware----
Mr. Chopra. That is what we are trying to do. We are only
going to use the statute as Congress has written it.
Mr. Donalds. I would say that sounds good, but looking at
the history of agencies in Congress, when we are initially
told, ``we will only use it for,'' it is always expanded at
some point in the future. That is my concern. But I want to
switch gears.
Mr. Chopra. You should amend the statute, then.
Mr. Donalds. Now, that is something that I think we
probably would find agreement on----
Mr. Chopra. I totally support----
Mr. Donalds. Congress should do its job and amend statutes
as necessary.
Mr. Chopra. I totally support that, and it is easier for
the agencies when you all agree on these privacy issues,
emerging issues. We are very happy to work with you on them. It
makes things easier.
Mr. Donalds. I am going to reclaim my time.
Mr. Chopra. Sorry.
Mr. Donalds. One thing I would say is that I think that if
Congress actually takes its article on power seriously, which I
think we should, we should go through and review a whole host
of financial regulatory statutes to make sure that the credit
raising and capital disbursement mechanisms of our economy are
clear and not bogged down by red tape, which, unfortunately,
has occurred over many decades, far before you and before me,
and we have to get that cleared up.
One thing I want to discuss quickly is dealing with data
breaches. It appears that the CFPB intends to include a strict
liability standard with respect to data breaches or
unauthorized accesses to credit report information by third
parties. Do you think the compliance costs are overly
burdensome on these institutions if, essentially, the
institutions are going to have a strict liability standard tied
to them?
Mr. Chopra. Yes.
Mr. Donalds. It is not like the companies are begging to
get breached.
Mr. Chopra. I think the question is often on unauthorized
access. We have not proposed that. It is something that we are
talking to the small entity representatives through the SBREFA
process about how a set of data might be used or shared. There
is sometimes an issue where they are sharing it, but then it
says that it was unauthorized, so we are working through all of
that before we propose----
Mr. Donalds. Okay. The one thing I would vehemently stress
is we should not be assigning strict liability standards to any
of these institutions. Obviously, the regulatory burdens here
in the United States of America are large enough as is.
Applying strict liability over data breaches when it is clear
that unless there is proof that the institutions actually
invited the data breach on purpose, we should not be applying
that level of liability to them. Nobody wants to see data
breaches, I want to be clear on that, but we have to be careful
and mindful of the fact that our financial institutions don't
want that either.
Quickly, the Section 1071 rule compilation of data for
minority- and women-owned businesses, and obviously
understanding that we want everybody to have full access to
capital in our economy, do you feel that the level of data
being proposed in this rule is actually going to be more of a
hindrance and a burden as opposed to opening up flows of
capital in the United States?
Mr. Chopra. I am hopeful that, based on how we incorporated
the comments, we complied with the statutory requirement, and
there are lots of use cases for it, but we are doing exactly
what Congress asked us to do.
Mr. Donalds. I would argue that what Congress asked for
under the Dodd-Frank Act was ridiculous, but that was another
time. I hope to change that as well. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Chopra. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. I would like to
thank Director Chopra for his time today and his testimony.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place his responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
I ask Director Chopra to please respond no later than
December 29, 2023.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
Voice. Good job, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 2:53 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

November 29, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
