- THE CHARACTERISTICS AND CHALLENGES OF TODAY'S HOMEBUYERS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE CHARACTERISTICS AND CHALLENGES
OF TODAY'S HOMEBUYERS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HOUSING
AND INSURANCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 20, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-83

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-393 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Housing and Insurance

WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio, Chairman

BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri, Ranking
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri             Member
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           RITCHIE TORRES, New York
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
MIKE LAWLER, New York                SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas, Vice       NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
Chairwoman                       STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana                BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
March 20, 2024...............................................     1
Appendix:
March 20, 2024...............................................    35

WITNESSES
Wednesday, March 20, 2024

Bailey, Nikitra, Executive Vice President, National Fair Housing
Alliance (NFHA)................................................     8
Fratantoni, Michael, Chief Economist and Senior Vice President,
Research and Industry Technology, Mortgage Bankers Association
(MBA)..........................................................     4
Lautz, Jessica, Deputy Chief Economist and Vice President of
Research, National Association of REALTORS (NAR)...............     6

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Bailey, Nikitra..............................................    36
Fratantoni, Michael..........................................    58
Lautz, Jessica...............................................    80

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Gonzalez, Hon. Vicente:
Written statement for the record.............................   107
Horsford, Hon. Steven:
Las Vegas Review-Journal article dated March 12, 2024,
entitled, ``Most homes sold in Las Vegas are
`unaffordable'''...........................................   108
Waters, Hon. Maxine:
Written statement of UnidosUS................................   111
Bailey, Nikitra:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   119
Fratantoni, Michael:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   120
Lautz, Jessica:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   122

THE CHARACTERISTICS
AND CHALLENGES OF
TODAY'S HOMEBUYERS

----------

Wednesday, March 20, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Housing
and Insurance,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Warren Davidson
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Davidson, Posey,
Luetkemeyer, Norman, Fitzgerald, Garbarino, Flood, Lawler, De
La Cruz; Cleaver, Tlaib, Torres, Garcia, Williams of Georgia,
Horsford, and Pettersen.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Also present: Representative Gonzalez.
Chairman Davidson. The Subcommittee on Housing and
Insurance will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``The Characteristics and
Challenges of Today's Homebuyers.''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Today, we bring together a panel of our nation's housing
experts to delve into housing challenges in purchase markets
across the country. Namely, we have asked our witnesses the
question, who is buying housing today and how are they paying
for it?
These may seem like simple questions, but underlying them
are more complicated factors that have been driving
unaffordability for millions of American families. Let's break
this down. The 30-year fixed-rate mortgage has increased over
100 percent, doubled since 2020, doubling the average monthly
payment. That alone is twice the amount of payment for everyone
wanting to buy a home.
But wait, there's more. Because of the lack of housing
inventory, the median home price has gone up too by 27 percent,
just since 2020.
How many of us have engaged in America's new pastime of
looking up homes for sale on an app like Zillow or similar? You
won't find nearly as many homes available as you did just a
couple of years ago, and some have shockingly high price tags.
These high prices are great for the current owners, but they
are difficult for anyone looking to move any time in the near
future as their equity is now worth more.
This is extremely disheartening for anyone who is in the
market for a new home, including repeat and first-time
homebuyers. Many families are putting their dream of owning a
home back on the shelf, needing to save more for that down
payment and finding it harder to do so because everything else
is expensive, too. The cost of groceries, the cost of gas, the
cost of healthcare, the cost of a family vacation, you name it,
you're probably paying much more to live in the United States
than you were in 2020.
Inflation is a tax paid by everyone, and it is
unfortunately part of a vicious circle that puts even more
pressure on the housing market as interest rates go up and stay
up, construction costs go up and stay up, and, frankly,
insurance costs for the home go up and stay up.
Many would say that we are living in a, ``new normal,''
where higher costs are here to stay. If so, this could have
serious implications for economic mobility and prosperity.
Owning a home should not be only for the well-off; it is the
hallmark of a thriving middle class and is an essential part of
the American Dream.
I think all of us on both sides of the aisle would agree
that the shrinking pool of eligible homeowners is a cause for
concern. The solution is not simply to increase Federal
spending on housing, however, which will only drive inflation
and increase demand for housing, adding more price pressure.
Our economists here today know very well that inflation is what
has gotten us into this mess in the first place.
I also have a hard time agreeing that more government
interference in single-family housing is the answer, when over
80 percent of the market is federally-backed and the Federal
Reserve holds a shocking $2.4 trillion in mortgage-backed
securities.
President Biden recently called for a new tax credit of
$5,000-a-year, for 2 years. for first-time homebuyers, and
$10,000 for some who agree to sell their homes, among other
costly proposals. These ideas are not enough to counter the
high costs for homebuyers, and they are too much for taxpayers,
who would be forced to subsidize another $260 billion in new
spending on Federal housing programs. That makes me think these
are not really serious proposals.
With the demand for housing we see today, and the lack of
inventory, the answer is not to increase demand further with
artificial stimuli; it is to work together to increase the
supply. That will take the will of policymakers at all levels
of government, as well as the private sector, responding to
market forces.
I hope today's hearing will provide a forum to discuss
credible solutions to our housing challenges as well as what is
driving them. I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses.
And I would just share a story. Recently, in western Ohio,
we had a mobile home park with about 1,700 homes in it. The
average rent was less than $1,000 a month, some as low as $500
a month, and there is no ready supply where these people are
going to find homes that are in that affordability range.
So, when you have a massive increase in demand, especially
in a localized area, you can't immediately respond to the
supply. We have challenges like that all over our country, so I
look forward to the discussion today.
Thank you. And I yield back the balance of my time.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Emanual Cleaver,
for 4 minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, thank
you also for holding this hearing on, ``The Characteristics and
Challenges of Today's Homebuyers,'' which has been described as
an effort to better understand the current profile of the
single-family rental market.
I want to thank the witnesses for presenting data on an
ongoing basis, including today, about the housing market and
the challenges facing borrowers.
I also appreciate that all of your organizations have
identified, worked on, and endorsed legislation that would help
solve the affordable and fair housing crisis and bring the
American Dream of homeownership within reach for millions of
Americans.
It is an election year, and the American public needs this
committee to immediately mark up these critically-important
proposals, which becomes increasingly challenging the closer we
get to November. I am particularly eager for our subcommittee
to act on rural housing legislation that I have joined my
friend and colleague, Congressman Luetkemeyer, in introducing.
The legislation would improve USDA-supported housing in rural
America.
Every community in America, whether urban, suburban, or
rural, is united in the desire to have a real opportunity to
live in a decent, affordable house. Having reasonable access to
shelter is a core human need of our constituents, along with
food and water. It is not a luxury. Americans in every
community are also united in the desire to own a piece of
American land and to be able to pass this generational wealth
down to their children. It is an American Dream, but it has
become an American fantasy for way too many families.
Several factors influence the price of housing. At the core
of the housing affordability crisis is the crisis of supply and
demand that is driving costs. The United States has a shortfall
of 6.5 million single-family homes due to underbuilding.
I welcome the committee moving to a bipartisan, bicameral,
Yes In My Backyard (YIMBY) Act to link up, among other
proposals.
The Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard University
found that in 2022, the median sale price for a single-family
home in the U.S. was 5.6 times higher than the median household
income, and higher than at any point on record, dating back to
the early 1970s.
Many would-be first-time homebuyers, particularly young
families, are eager and sometimes furious over the prospects of
trying to get a home. In 2019, the racial homeownership gap was
the widest it has been since the Census began recording rates.
And I think my time is running out, so I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. The Chair now recognizes the ranking
member of the full Financial Services Committee, the gentlelady
from California, Ms. Waters, for 1 minute for an opening
statement.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
The American Dream of homeownership symbolizes financial
security, economic mobility, and a sense of belonging. But for
too many in today's market, this is a dream deferred, a dream
reserved only for the wealthy. Our constituents are confronting
aging homes at historically-high prices, rising interest rates
and insurance costs, hidden fees from industry, and ongoing
discrimination. People are working more jobs, for longer hours,
and still can't seem to make it.
These are not new issues, but they are made much worse as
the affordable housing crisis grows, something that Committee
Republicans have shown absolutely no interest in solving.
So, I welcome today's witnesses and our discussion. The
Congress must come together to create real pathways to
affordable housing and homeownership for all.
I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the ranking member.
Today, we welcome the testimony of: Dr. Michael Fratantoni,
chief economist and senior vice president of research and
industry technology at the Mortgage Bankers Association; Dr.
Jessica Lautz, chief economist and vice president of research
at the National Association of REALTORS; and Ms. Nikitra
Bailey, executive vice president of the National Fair Housing
Alliance.
You will each be recognized for 5 minutes to give an oral
presentation of your testimony. And without objection, your
written statements will be made a part of the record.
Dr. Fratantoni, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL FRATANTONI, CHIEF ECONOMIST AND SENIOR
VICE PRESIDENT, RESEARCH AND INDUSTRY TECHNOLOGY, MORTGAGE
BANKERS ASSOCIATION (MBA)

Mr. Fratantoni. Chairman Davidson, Ranking Member Cleaver,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to testify today. My name is Mike Fratantoni, and I am MBA's
chief economist and senior vice president of research and
industry technology.
My testimony today reviews current trends in the mortgage
market, focusing on the buyers, products, sources of financing,
and obstacles that homebuyers and lenders face.
In my written statement, I also examined some of the
current trends in the rental housing market, including that for
single-family rentals. How large is the single-family
residential mortgage market? Well, $45 trillion in real estate
is owned by households, with $32 trillion in home equity and
$13 trillion in mortgage debt outstanding.
In 2021, lenders originated a record amount, almost $4.5
trillion in mortgages. To contrast with that, MBA is
forecasting about $2 trillion in originations for 2024, up from
$1.6 trillion in 2023.
These mortgages fund both the purchase of homes and the
refinancing of existing loans, supporting a U.S. homeownership
rate that in recent years has hovered around 65 percent.
Regrettably, there remains a wide homeownership gap across
different racial and ethnic groups.
Of the $13 trillion in mortgage debt outstanding, roughly
$9 trillion is securitized to Ginnie Mae and the Government-
Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Most
of the remaining $4 trillion of mortgage debt is held on bank
portfolios as whole loans, with some held by other types of
investors.
Before the Great Financial Crisis, as much as half of
securitized mortgage volume was private label. The PLS sector
is much smaller in today's market, comprising about $80 billion
or so of the $1.6 trillion originations in 2023. About $30
billion of this volume in 2023 was nonqualified mortgages known
as non-QM, with some more flexible underwriting standards
intended for self-employed borrowers or others with more
complex financial or employment patterns.
Typically, more than 80 percent of mortgages used to
purchase a home are 30-year fixed-rate mortgages. While many
refinance borrowers opt for shorter term, 10-, 15-, or 20-year
mortgages, most of the remaining loans, which are a small
percentage of overall volume, are high-rate adjustable-rate
mortgages with initial fixed rate periods of 5, 7, or 10 years,
and then, more frequent rate adjustments.
HUD home data from 2022 showed us that 70 percent of
homebuyers who used mortgage financing took out conventional
conforming loans securitized through the GSEs, 14 percent used
FHA loans, 9 percent used VA, 1 percent used RHS, and 6 percent
used conventional jumbo loans.
MBA's mortgage applications data typically show that about
90 percent of applications are for buyers who intend to occupy
their homes as primary residences, while the remaining 10
percent are for second homes or investor properties.
Roughly half of all purchase mortgages are for first-time
homebuyers who rely mainly on government housing programs for
their loans. In particular, the FHA supported affordable
mortgage financing for more than 478,000 first-time homebuyers
in Fiscal Year 2023, representing more than 82 percent of its
forward mortgage business.
Of course, not all homebuyers utilize mortgage financing.
Some purchase properties with cash. For existing homes, roughly
28 percent of buyers purchased with cash in 2023. For new
homes, more than 8 percent were cash buyers.
Lenders with different business models tend to focus on
distinct types of lending. For example, independent mortgage
banks (IMBs) tend to focus primarily on their growing share of
government and conventional loans to first-time homebuyers and
low- and moderate-income buyers, while depositories have
concentrated more on ARMs and jumbo loans for their retail
banking clients that they hold in their portfolios.
MBA's members believe the single biggest challenge in
today's housing market is the lack of adequate inventory.
Housing supply is millions of units short of what is needed to
support the corresponding demographic demand.
Given the lack of housing supply, and brisk demand, home
prices increased 39 percent over the 2020-2022 timeframe.
Mortgage rates reached record lows, below 3 percent, during the
pandemic. In 2022, to combat inflation, the Federal Reserve
briefly raised short-term rates, and 30-year mortgage rates
more than doubled in response. The net impact of the higher
rates and home prices was a dramatic reduction in
affordability.
My written statement outlines certain regulatory challenges
facing the mortgage market, including the Basel III Endgame
proposal's likely impact on mortgage credit, as well as the
current cost and lack of availability of homeowners insurance.
MBA appreciates the focus on these two issues by the members of
this subcommittee.
Thank you again for the opportunity to walk through these
latest market trends with you, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Fratantoni can be found on
page 58 of the appendix.]
Chairman Davidson. Thank you.
Dr. Lautz, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF JESSICA LAUTZ, DEPUTY CHIEF ECONOMIST AND VICE
PRESIDENT OF RESEARCH, THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS
(NAR)

Ms. Lautz. Thank you.
Chairman Davidson, Ranking Member Cleaver, and members of
the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify today. I
am Jessica Lautz, deputy chief economist and vice president of
research at the National Association of REALTORS (NAR).
Real estate is nearly 20 percent of the U.S. economy.
REALTORS who serve residential and commercial property
consumers are vital to homeownership, which is the bridge to
financial security. With the current housing market challenges,
consumers know it is critical to have a REALTOR aid in the
transaction given their enhanced training and subscription to
NAR's code of ethics.
There have been significant legal developments in real
estate in the last week that could potentially shift how buyer
representatives are compensated. REALTORS play a pivotal role
in a real estate transaction, especially for first-time and
low- to moderate-income buyers. These shifts in the market
could push homebuyers without the cash to pay for professional
representation out of the market. NAR is seeking to clarify the
existing mortgage finance rules which assumes seller-paid
commissions will continue. If not, limits on seller
contributions may need to be adjusted.
Veterans using VA loans are also currently prohibited from
paying for buyer representation under the Department's
guidelines. Should the market shift in a way that buyers are
expected to pay for representation, veterans could be left out
of the market, forced to forego professional representation, or
forced to use a different, less favorable loan product.
All of this said, I am an economist here to discuss housing
inventory, the erosion of affordability, and who is entering
the real estate market and, importantly, who has been left out.
For further information on legal developments impacting the
real estate industry, please visit competition.REALTOR.
In 2023, at just 4 million, the annual number of existing
home sales was the lowest recorded since 1995. The housing
market continues to have a deficit in inventory compared to
demand. In January, there were 1.1 million existing homes
available in the market. In comparison, in March of 2020, there
were 1.49 million existing homes available. Bidding wars are
more frequent. In January, the typical home seller received 2.7
offers, and 16 percent of homes went over the list price.
Home prices continue to rise. From March 2020 to January of
2024, existing home prices have climbed nearly 36 percent,
while household family income has climbed just 23 percent. In
the fourth quarter of 2023, 15 percent of metro areas had
double-digit home price gains.
In conjunction with the underbuilding of new inventory, the
lock-in effect due to the rise in mortgage interest rates has
compounded the problem. Homebuyers who purchased a $350,000
home at a 3.5-percent interest rate, compared to a 7-percent
interest rate, are looking at a mortgage payment that has
increased by $683 per month. Even with a new job or a family
change, an owner may be financially unable to move.
Not all buyers are affected by mortgage interest rates. In
January, 32 percent of buyers did not use a mortgage to finance
their purchase. This is the highest share since June of 2014.
First-time homebuyers struggle to enter into the housing
market as they lack housing equity. First-time homebuyers
accounted for 32 percent of primary residence buyers last year,
while the historical norm is 40 percent. First-time homebuyers
are older, with higher incomes, and are more apt to use
financial assets for their down payment today. In the 1980s,
the typical first-time homebuyer was in their late twenties.
They are now in their mid-thirties.
First-time homebuyers who bought in the last year had
household incomes that were $25,000 more than the past year.
Teachers and firefighters are being priced out of buying homes
in their local communities. While it is hard to obtain
homeownership, the typical homeowner has benefitted from the
rise in prices. The typical net worth of a homeowner in 2022 is
nearly $400,000, compared to that of a renter of just over
$10,000. Thus, the wealth held by homeowners is 40 times that
of a renter. Housing wealth can be used to help children to
attend college, or to buy a home for their own retirement. The
homeownership rate has risen for each racial and ethnic group
in the last decade, with Asian and Hispanic households reaching
all-time highs.
However, despite these gains, there remains a 28-percent
gap between White and Black households. For many, the financial
benefits of and potential pathway into homeownership are
unknown. Since 2009, the share of successful homebuyers who
used FHA financing has dropped by half. For prospective
homebuyers, many are unaware of low-down-payment products that
could bring homeownership closer within reach.
Thank you for the opportunity to share my views today.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lautz can be found on page
80 of the appendix.]
Chairman Davidson. Thank you, Dr. Lautz.
Ms. Bailey, you're now recognized for 5 minutes to give
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF NIKITRA BAILEY, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, NATIONAL
FAIR HOUSING ALLIANCE (NFHA)

Ms. Bailey. Chairman Davidson, Ranking Member Cleaver,
Ranking Member Waters, and members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today. I am Nikitra Bailey,
executive vice president of the National Fair Housing Alliance.
NFHA leads the fair housing movement throughout the United
States, representing over 170 local fair housing enforcement
agencies. NFHA's members serve on the frontlines combating
millions of incidents of housing discrimination.
The nation is faced with a fair and affordable housing
crisis that is squeezing the budgets of everyday people,
particularly consumers of color. Low housing inventory, record
competition from corporate investors, exclusionary zoning
ordinances, high interest rates, and more are all driving up
prices.
The Federal Reserve Board does have not the tools to
address these housing challenges. While the Federal Reserve
attempted several deflationary efforts, housing costs continue
to skyrocket. And Federal Reserve Chair Powell recently stated
that, ``Progress on lowering interest rates is not assured.''
Further data shows housing will continue to be a major
driver of inflation and its impact will not subside until the
end of 2024 and beyond. Thus, Congress and the Biden
Administration must act quickly to make equitable housing
investments that promote financial inclusion and stimulate
economic growth for everyone.
Homeownership has long been the primary way that most
families build wealth and achieve economic stability. However,
thousands of race-conscious housing, banking, and other
policies created systems and structures that were highly
inequitable and mostly to the benefit of White Americans.
Even after passage of the Fair Housing Act in 1968, and the
Equal Credit Opportunity Act in 1974, policies of the Federal
Government and private actors continue to perpetuate
segregation and discrimination. Explicitly race-based policies
were replaced with subtler race-neutral methods of excluding
people of color. These policies and practices created today's
persistent and growing racial homeownership and wealth gaps,
where the White homeownership rate is nearly 67 percent higher
than the Black homeownership rate, 45 percent higher than the
Latino homeownership rate, and 20 percent higher than the rate
for Asian-American communities.
Mortgage discrimination is not a relic of the past. The
Department of Justice's recent record settlements totalling
more than $100 million in redlining cases in Black and Latino
neighborhoods nationwide is a stark reminder that redlining
persists and underscores the importance of using all of the
tools that are at our disposal to root it out.
Even technological homeownership decisions perpetuate bias.
Researchers at UC Berkeley found that algorithmic systems
overcharged Black and Latino mortgage borrowers $765 million
annually, and automated valuation models perpetuate
discrimination against homeowners of color.
People of color continue to share stories of having to,
``whitewash,'' their homes to receive fair and accurate
appraisals. Can you imagine having to remove your personhood
from your home, which is also the family's largest asset? In
2021, homes in White neighborhoods were appraised at values
nearly 250 percent higher than homes in similar Black
neighborhoods, and values nearly 278 percent higher than
similar homes in similar Latino neighborhoods within the same
metropolitan areas, depriving households of color of
opportunities to build wealth.
Overall, White communities have access to over $15 trillion
more in capital because of racial bias appraisal practices.
There are solutions that are already working in forward-
thinking States like Minnesota, Maine, Vermont, and others.
Congress can follow their lead and remove barriers that stymie
progress and center housing as the path to restorative justice
and inclusive growth.
The Homeowner Assistance Fund (HAF) is an example of
Congress doing just that, by helping over 400,000 hardest-hit
homeowners remain housed during the COVID pandemic. HAF, along
with sensible mortgage service and reforms supported broadly by
the housing sector, were instrumental in thwarting another
foreclosure crisis like the one that occurred in 2008.
Further, inclusive policies like the Equal Credit
Opportunity Act, Special Purpose Credit Programs helped to
increase Black homeownership by 13 percent and Latino
homeownership rates by 7 percent between 2019 and 2023. We
actually partnered with our colleagues at MBA to create a
Special Purpose Credit Program toolkit to assist lenders with
properly developing programs. All future net household growth
will be from households of color, and White homeownership is
set to decline.
With housing accounting for nearly 20 percent of the United
States GDP, Congress must advance inclusive policies so that
the housing market and economy are not jeopardized.
My written testimony details other solutions, and I look
forward to discussing them with you.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bailey can be found on page
36 of the appendix.]
Chairman Davidson. We will now turn to Member questions,
and I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
This weekend, in a story about the lingering impact COVID
has had on our economy, the Washington Post reported, ``A new
normal has settled into the U.S. economy, one that nobody could
have predicted. The pandemic's impact on housing set off a
homebuying frenzy that resulted in a stunning 48 percent surge
in home prices that lifted the average U.S. sales price to over
$552,000.'' As these prices have gone up, wages have not kept
pace, and people don't believe it is going to be transitory.
Nationwide, median home prices are now nearly 6 times the
median household income, despite historic levels of government
intervention in housing markets.
Dr. Lautz, what do these shifts mean for the American
middle-class family looking to buy or sell a home? What does
the data tell us about how they are reacting to this
increasingly-expensive new normal?
Ms. Lautz. Thank you so much for the question.
Traditionally, when we look at our data dating back to
1981, the typical homebuyer who is placing 20 percent down
would be putting 20 percent of their household income toward
housing. Unfortunately, we know that has been pushed up more
than 23 percent in recent months, or even 28 percent. It is
coming down, and that is a good thing. And the reason it has
come down slightly is because interest rates have come down by
a full percentage point since October.
That being said, the price of housing is due to the demand
outpacing the supply. So, when we look at multiple-offer
situations, especially as we go into the spring months, we
suspect that they will heat up again because consumers are
interested in purchasing a home. The demand for housing is
there. We also know that we are at a really critical time point
as we have a lot of young millennials who are trying to enter
into the housing market at the same time that retirees are
looking for retirement property, and that is putting a lot of
demand for housing into the market.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you.
As borrowers attempt to grapple with the economic realities
of this housing market, it seems clear that some are resorting
to alternative ways to manage their higher housing costs. For
some, that might mean resorting to co-buying arrangements or
supplementing their incomes with something known as accessory
dwelling units, again, multiple properties on one lot. For
others, they might pursue other less traditional pathways to
finance a mortgage beyond the government-backed channels like
the GSEs or FHA.
Dr. Fratantoni, can you speak to what we are seeing in the
marketplace on some of the nontraditional ways that borrowers
and lenders finance homes?
Mr. Fratantoni. Yes. I think it would make sense first to
highlight that borrowers are using the traditional methods as
well. We are seeing that for many lenders, the FHA share of
their business has increased, and then, within that FHA share,
you see debt-to-income ratios increase because of the strains
that you're talking about.
Outside of that, I mentioned in my testimony some growth in
the non-QM market, which does provide some additional
underwriting flexibility, but I would still characterize it as
a very small portion of the market, and the flexibility is
limited.
I think with the structure we are operating today, the
entire market is much safer, certainly than we were 15 years
ago as a result of the safeguards that have been put in place,
and I think those are holding even in this tough environment.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you for that.
And you talked about one of the dynamics of the market
years ago in the Great Financial Crisis is structured credit
and the role that plays in our market.
One of the most pressing issues impacting housing
affordability right now is the lack of supply in single-family
rentals. Data from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis shows
that the average 30-year fixed mortgage rate has increased from
3.3 percent in 2020, to roughly 7 percent today. That is a 110-
percent increase just in that span. As a result, something like
80 percent of homeowners currently have mortgage rates below 5
percent and a huge number below 4 percent.
Americans have difficulty deciding to sell a home if they
have a mortgage rate that is low, locked into, and they are not
putting it on the market. And someone said, what if it was
transferrable or assumable? Somebody could assume your
mortgage. Of course, in the structured credit market in our
country, these risks have already been sold off, so it makes it
hard to price that risk.
So, Dr. Fratantoni, how could a secondary market develop?
How could we maybe get a way to price that risk in a secondary
market? Do you have any thoughts?
Mr. Fratantoni. Yes. As you know, FHA and VA mortgages are
assumable, but today, for a buyer to take that loan, oftentimes
they will need an additional amount to meet the purchase price
given the home price gains that we have seen, and that would
have to either come from cash or a second loan.
If we remove the conventional market back to where it was
prior to the late 1980s of having an assumable feature, again,
we would have to do that on a prospective basis. We couldn't
address the loans that have 3 percent rates today.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you.
My time has expired. And I now recognize the ranking member
of the subcommittee, the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Cleaver,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Lautz, thank you for being here.
Last week, there was an agreement by the National
Association of REALTORS to settle home seller claims regarding
commissions. You mentioned in your testimony the term, ``legal
developments,'' and you note that NAR is seeking to clarify
that the existing mortgage finance rule, which assumes that
sellers would pay commissions, will continue. If not, limits on
sellers' contributions may need to be adjusted.
Now, the American Banker, from my perspective predictably,
had an article today entitled, ``NAR changes could hurt
homebuyers.'' So, the sky is falling, and Chicken Little comes
out to talk.
Could you clarify the remarks you included in your witness
testimony and how any changes may impact the homebuying market?
Ms. Lautz. Absolutely. The first thing I will say is this
is, obviously, currently in action right now in settlement, so
there will be progress on this. And I am not the general
counsel, but I will also say that when we think about first-
time homebuyers, they need the ability to have representation
and to move forward with that transaction, and they need the
ability to have this representation in a very competitive
housing market.
And as they think about the person who is going to
represent them, their commission is always negotiable in that
transaction, but they need the ability to move forward so that
they can even have their offer seen when there continue to be
multiple-offer situations, and get them to that closing table.
But we are concerned about first-time homebuyers, low-
income buyers, moderate-income buyers, and VA buyers,
especially.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes. And I am always concerned about the
fuzziness when these kinds of decisions are made. Because after
you read it three times, maybe the decision wasn't made.
Anyway, it is giving me a headache.
Ms. Bailey, your testimony notes that appraisal bias
continues to undercut wealth-building opportunities for
families of color. And as you note, White communities have
access to over $15 trillion, with a, ``T,'' more in capital
because of racial bias appraisal practices.
How are the regulators doing in terms of meeting the goals
of the Action Plan to Advance Property Appraisal and Valuation
Equity (PAVE) plan?
Ms. Bailey. Thank you so much for the question. We are
encouraging them to finish the race. PAVE is a very important
initiative that was designed to help us address and end
appraisal bias. And we absolutely need to make sure that the
regulators follow through with the work that they started.
Some of the things that we want to make sure of is that we
get HUD to resolve the backlog of appraisal discrimination
complaints and the feasibility of releasing to the public the
Uniform Appraisal Dataset from the Federal Housing Finance
Agency (FHFA), the Federal Housing Administration (FHA), the
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and the U.S.
Department of Agriculture.
This data really lets us know what is going on. We are in a
situation where appraisals are not fair and they are not
accurate. And because families have to, ``whitewash,'' and
remove themselves, because that is the only way they believe
they can actually get a fair and accurate appraisal. So, we
need these important actions to take place so we can finish the
process and make sure we are actually doing the things that
PAVE was designed to do, which is really to end appraisal bias.
And we want to commend the Administration for being very
bold. This wasn't an easy thing to arrive at; it took a lot of
courage. So, we are really hopeful that they will continue to
run this race and complete the task.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes, I share the same optimism.
Now, let me just stay with you for a minute, and I hate my
time is running down low, but because this is so important,
that there is $82 trillion currently invested in private equity
and venture capital, and of that $82 trillion, less than 1
percent of that money is invested in firms that are owned by
minorities. That means 99 percent of all private equity and
venture capital goes to firms that are not owned by people of
color.
Given that disturbing reality, what more can we do to--we
have passed laws, and the problem just seems to hang on and
hang on and hang on.
Ms. Bailey. It is misguided to not understand that
diversity actually benefits all of us. Diverse companies that
have psychological safety outperform nondiverse entities. We
want to make sure America remains on the leading edge.
Diversity and inclusion is our way forward.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you very much.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the ranking member.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
thank you and your staff for doing the research necessary to
bring some expert witnesses in here who believe there are ways
to solve the challenges of today's homebuyers without the
Federal Government simply throwing more money that it doesn't
have, that it would have to borrow, to solve some of the
issues.
Dr. Fratantoni and Dr. Lautz, please summarize, each of
you, the impact of inflationary finance on housing
affordability over the past 3 years?
Mr. Fratantoni. As I mentioned in my testimony, to counter
that inflation, the Fed rapidly raised short-term rates, and we
saw mortgage rates more than double in response. When you
couple that with the rapid increase in home prices, we have
seen a median principal and interest on a mortgage payment go
up more than $900 on a mortgage. So, again, it's really eating
into affordability because, obviously, wages have not grown
nearly as fast.
Mr. Posey. Dr. Lautz?
Ms. Lautz. Thank you. And the only thing that I would add
to Dr. Fratantoni is that when we look at the component of rent
to CPI, it is 7 to 8 percent. So as individuals are seeing
their rents go up, they are hit by that financially and they
are having a harder time secondarily saving for their own down
payment for a mortgage. So, it is a double hit for renters
currently.
Mr. Posey. For sure.
Do you think that when inflation is tamed, we will go back
to more reasonable rates, and what effect will it have on the
market at that time?
Mr. Fratantoni. We do expect that inflation is going to
continue to decrease per the Fed's goal of getting it back to 2
percent over the next couple of years and, as that happens, we
expect that longer-term interest rates will edge down over
time, not quickly, but over time. But given the structural
undersupply in the market, we certainly don't expect that home
prices are going to decline. If we get some additional supply
from builders, maybe the rate of home price growth will flow.
But I think this level of home prices is baked in across most
of the country now.
Mr. Posey. Dr. Lautz?
Ms. Lautz. Yes, I agree. Looking at mortgage interest
rates, we do expect that, hopefully in the second half of the
year, we will see them come down. But unfortunately, they have
been stuck in the 6-percent range for the last 14 weeks, so
that is hitting affordability.
If we look at interest rates historically, we do know that
we are a full percentage point under the historical norm since
1971. So, we are at a lower point. But I think we also have to
remember that when we think about the lock-in effect of those
2- and 3-percent interest rates, it is very difficult to have
someone be financially able to move.
Mr. Posey. Okay. And you both alluded to it, but would you
care to further comment on how the long-term interest rates
determine the course of the housing market going forward?
Mr. Fratantoni. The answer to that--Dr. Lautz mentioned the
lock-in effect. A homeowner who was able to refinance into a
low 3 or high 2 mortgage rate is just much less likely to list
their property. It doesn't mean they are never going to list.
Life keeps happening. People still keep getting married, having
children, getting new jobs, and they might have to leave that
low rate behind. But it is a friction in the system, so it is
going to keep existing inventory much lower than it otherwise
would be. And that has been a support to home prices, but for
someone trying to get into the market, it really is an
obstacle.
Mr. Posey. Very good.
Dr. Lautz?
Ms. Lautz. Yes. And the lock-in effect is absolutely
happening, but life changes do happen as well, and generally,
the number-one reason why someone does move is because a life
change has happened.
I will also say that it is likely to impact first-time
buyers more than repeat buyers, because repeat buyers continue
to gain housing equity, where first-time buyers do not have
that housing equity to rely upon.
Mr. Posey. Thank you.
Dr. Lautz, in an effort to mitigate increasing prices, what
do you think Congress and local governments can do to help
remove the obstacles for achieving the benefits of building
modular home construction?
Ms. Lautz. Certainly, I think that there are a lot of new
home products that could come onto the market. And I think it
is really important to note, too, that while there are a lot of
new homes that have been built over the course of the last
year, I believe more ramped-up building than we have seen in
the decade prior, that we need all sorts of home products,
because we do know right now that there is a larger share of
single households.
There is a larger share of first-time homebuyers trying to
enter into the market, young adults, but also seniors who may
need a smaller property as well, so not the traditional, large
single-family home on the market.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, my time is about to expire, so I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank Mr. Posey.
The ranking member of the Full Committee, the gentlelady
from California, Ms. Waters, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you so very much, Mr. Chairman, for this
hearing, and I would like to thank Mr. Cleaver for all of the
hard work that he is putting into dealing with these housing
issues and this housing crisis.
Let me ask each of our witnesses here today, do you support
the Downpayment Toward Equity Act? Do you think it is important
to have assistance for down payments?
Ms. Bailey?
Ms. Bailey. Yes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
Ms. Lautz. Yes, but we also do need more supply.
Ms. Waters. Okay. Dr. Fratantoni?
Mr. Fratantoni. Yes. Similarly, we support down payment
assistance, but agree that supply is the bigger challenge right
now.
Ms. Waters. Okay. Very good.
Let me ask another question. I am going to direct this to
you, Dr. Fratantoni. Do you know or understand that banks do
not give mortgages for low-cost homes? For example, I
discovered that in Ferguson, right outside of St. Louis, there
were homes for $80,000 or $90,000 after they had the big
incident there. These people could not get mortgages for the
most part, and so private equity and others came in, and they
bought them up, and then, they rented them back. And people
were paying more in rent than they would have paid in
mortgages.
Do you know why banks do not provide mortgages for low-cost
homes?
Mr. Fratantoni. Yes. I wrote about this to some extent in
our written testimony, and we did a research study last year
looking really at, what are the drivers of that. You think
there are a lot of fixed costs to making a mortgage, and it
makes it much more difficult for a lender to make that loan
economically if the loan balance is very small. And,
unfortunately, it works exactly to the detriment that you're
talking about.
It makes it much more difficult to finance properties in
these more affordable parts of the country. Some of that you
can directly tie to some of the regulatory changes that have
been made, that have added to some of the fixed costs in the
business.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
I do believe that based on what we understand about the
profit margins of the banks, they could really afford to do it.
They may not get as much return on their investment if they
were doing a jumbo, but I think that in the interests of
affordable housing and secure housing for the people of this
country, they should be able to do it. And I think we should
pay more attention to that.
Let me just say that I have three bills, and the
Downpayment Toward Equity Act is but one of them. Another is
the Housing Crisis Response Act. Are you familiar with that?
Ms. Bailey. I am, and I wish the Build Back Better Act had
actually passed in the prior time it was offered. Because had
we passed the Build Back Better Act, we would have had $150
billion to address the nation's fair and affordable housing
crisis, and we would have the gotten the kind of relief that
consumers need.
Ms. Waters. Thank you so much. I am still mourning about
the loss of that at the hands of two Democrats on the Senate
side.
Let me ask our real estate representative here today, are
you familiar with all three of these bills?
Ms. Lautz. I am personally not, no.
Ms. Waters. Are you familiar with the Housing Crisis
Response Act?
Ms. Lautz. I am not. I am an economist.
Ms. Waters. Okay. The Ending Homelessness Act?
Ms. Lautz. Yes, I am familiar with that.
Ms. Waters. Okay. And you already said you knew about the
Downpayment Toward Equity Act, so I am very pleased about that.
And let me ask Dr. Fratantoni, are you familiar with all of
these bills?
Mr. Fratantoni. I am not familiar with the bills.
Ms. Waters. First of all, I want to thank you all for being
here. I really do appreciate the knowledge that you have, but I
would like you to take a look at my three bills. You already
know about them. You just talked about the Build Back Better
Act with the $150 billion that we had in that. In getting to
know them better, I would hope that you could also become
activists in terms of advocating if we want to really deal with
doing something about housing.
Now, it should be a bipartisan bill. What can you do to
help the Republicans understand that their constituents are
also in a crisis in many parts of this country and they should
be supporting them? Can you think of anything else we can do
that would convince them that they should support us on these
bills or any that they could come up with in order to produce
more housing in this crisis?
Yes, ma'am?
Ms. Bailey. I think if we passed the $10 billion in the
Housing Crisis Response Act, it should be noted that 96,000
Blacks, 83,000 Whites, 75,000 Latinos, and 29,000 Asian-
Americans in rural and urban communities would benefit from the
overall passage of that legislation.
Ms. Waters. So, this is not for any one ethnic group. This
is for everybody. Because we have a crisis in this country. And
we know a lot about what it takes--money, support, and getting
it done.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentlelady.
The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Fitzgerald, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I guess I would start by asking the witness panel to raise
their hand if they agree that all else being equal, boosting
demand while doing nothing to increase supply leads to higher
prices. Is that right? Does everybody agree with that
statement?
We have a situation where the supply of homes on the market
is out of reach for many young adults. I talk to builders in my
district all the time, and they have a similar story. A
municipality or a village approaches them about building a new
subdivision. By the time the in-ground costs are added to any
of the additional infrastructure that they would either have to
pass through or be responsible for, they end up with an average
cost of about a half million dollars per home. So what happens
is, a lot of times, everybody just walks away and nothing
happens. There are no new homes built.
So, we have a situation where the supply of homes on the
market is out of reach for many young adults certainly as
builders are just not incentivized to build the homes. And so
far, the Administration's solution to the problem is kind of--
and I know this has been discussed today--to boost demand. It
is like we are trying to make sure that there are more
consumers, which doesn't make any sense to me when we have this
supply issue, right?
Dr. Fratantoni, President Biden's proposal of a $10,000 tax
credit for those who sell their home below the median price in
the country--so if these sellers become buyers, is this likely
to have any effect at all on the supply of homes?
Mr. Fratantoni. I would say this first. We do appreciate
the bipartisan focus on the housing market and really welcome
the attention it is getting, because we have seen this issue
bubbling up for multiple years now, but we agree that the lack
of supply is the problem right now and don't think that this
one particular approach is going to solve that problem. We are
millions of units behind.
Mr. Fitzgerald. And then, what about the proposed $5,000
tax credit for first-time homebuyers? I have three sons, they
are in their thirties, and they all have different situations,
obviously. But a $5,000 tax credit is not going to be the game
changer that is going to allow them or any other adults between
25 and 35 to jump into the homebuyer market right now.
Mr. Fratantoni. Yes, many of our members tell me that they
have a long list of potential buyers who are prequalified or
credit qualified to get a loan but just can't find a property.
That is the problem in today's market.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Yes. And the proposed $25,000 down payment
assistance for first-generation homebuyers is not going to do
anything either. It is not going to have an impact on the
market. We have to get more supply.
Would the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB)
prohibiting certain closing costs set by lenders only serve to
increase the compliance burden on landlords, leading to
increased costs, more consolidation, fewer choices, and higher
rents? I think the answer to that is, yes.
Mr. Fratantoni. Yes. And I mentioned the challenges that
lenders already have in originating small-balance loans. Adding
to the costs of lending would just make that more challenging.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Yes. And I think some of the things that
the President and the Administration are proposing right now
will make that worse.
Last month, at the direction of FHFA, Fannie Mae, and
Freddie Mac, they released a bulletin clarifying requirements
for lenders or mortgage servicers with respect to verification
of homeowners insurance. Generally, the bulletin requires
servicers each year to verify the replacement cost value of all
properties secured by loans sold to Fannie and to Freddie.
Servicers have expressed concerns that this new policy is not
operationally feasible, it is not a good way to verify the
replacement value cost, and it could actually significantly
increase the cost of insurance.
Dr. Fratantoni, does MBA also share these concerns?
Mr. Fratantoni. We absolutely do. And we have been working
with folks at FHFA to try to address our concerns. At a
minimum, we need a delay in the implementation time to make
sure lenders can become compliant with this new requirement.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Torres, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Torres. Thank you.
Ms. Bailey, do you believe that exclusionary zoning has a
disparate impact on communities of color?
Ms. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Torres. Does the Fair Housing Act prohibit disparate
impact discrimination?
Ms. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Torres. Do you believe that exclusionary zoning, in as
much as it produces a disparate impact, violates the Fair
Housing Act?
Ms. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Torres. Do you believe that HUD should enforce the Fair
Housing Act against exclusionary zoning?
Ms. Bailey. Yes. And I need to clarify that a lot of the
challenges at the local level are based on local laws and lot
sizes. And if we were able to actually have localities be
incentivized with the $85 million that HUD is using to try to
incentivize the localities to change those laws, we could
actually increase opportunities to address the fair and
affordable housing crisis.
Mr. Torres. But even though zoning is a State and local
issue, if it violates the Fair Housing Act, it becomes a
Federal constitutional concern, right?
Ms. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Torres. Okay. I think we all agree that there is an
urgent need to expand the housing supply. An expanded housing
supply will require greater housing subsidies from the Federal
Government and greater land use reform from State and local
governments, but there is a third variable that affects housing
supply: cost. If we can figure out how to cut the actual cost
of housing development in half, then in theory, we could cut
rent, maintenance, and mortgage payments in half.
So a question for each of you, what is the most promising
strategy that you have seen for fundamentally reducing the cost
of housing development and housing construction in America?
And we will start with the Mortgage Bankers Association.
Mr. Fratantoni. I think it has been interesting to see in
Massachusetts, California, and other parts of the country, the
State level of government really sort of leaning into local
government to try to increase density. And I think that is
probably the most effective way this is going to be done at the
State and local level is just, where it makes sense, increase
density.
Ms. Lautz. Increasing density is certainly important, but I
also think that when we look at building more homes, we have to
look at the other problems that are holding back building.
Certainly, there are local laws that are restricting building
and holding that back that go beyond density.
So looking at those laws, I think is quite important, like
the number of shrubs and trees that need to be planted on a lot
to have a single-family home go in, things that really could
expand the number of homes.
Ms. Bailey. Fully enforcing our nation's civil rights laws.
There is a provision, the Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing
provision, under the Fair Housing Act, that requires two
things: for localities in States that are receiving Federal
dollars for housing and community development to stop
discriminating; and then, to create inclusive communities going
forward.
We have yet to have full enforcement, quite frankly,
because HUD has been underresourced by the prior
Administration, and HUD during this Administration had to do
yeoman's work to really build up the staffing at the Office of
Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity to approach this work with
the rigor that is required.
And if I may just speak to one issue about where we are in
terms of building and costs, we didn't arrive here by accident.
We actually underbuilt following the Great Recession. Builders
actually built homes at the higher end of the marketplace,
excluding building opportunities at the lower end of the
marketplace.
So, we didn't just come here from an accident where we need
to now focus on supply size strategies. By selling to focus on
demand size strategies, we have exacerbated and actually grown
the crisis.
If the House had passed the Build Back Better Act, which is
now the legislation that the ranking member mentioned, the
Housing Crisis Response Act--if we had passed that legislation,
millions of consumers would have gotten the housing relief that
they need and the overall market would be stronger.
Mr. Torres. I have a question about the relationship
between median home prices and median household incomes. Median
home prices have been rising astronomically, whereas median
household incomes have been stagnating, and the gap between
prices and incomes have been widening.
At what point did that gap become unsustainable? What is a
healthy ratio of home price to household income?
Dr. Lautz, if you want to----
Ms. Lautz. I think when we are looking at this, we have to
keep in mind that while first-time homebuyers are really
struggling to enter into the market, homeowners have had
incredible wealth gains. And 32 percent of the market paid all
cash.
A quarter of repeat homebuyers who are primary residence
buyers are paying all cash. They are not going to be wedded as
much to what their income is versus the gain in home prices
because of the ability to gain equity over time and make this
all-cash purchase. And right now, we are seeing a lot of Baby
Boomers do this.
Ms. Bailey. And many of these people have the ability to
pay all cash because the Fed's policies to rescue the market
during COVID did not land equally in every community. Wealthier
borrowers were able to take advantage of refinances at
historically-low rates, whereas borrowers of color were not
able to do so. So, we saw the Black/White wealth gap grow by
$20 trillion because of those inequitable policies.
Mr. Torres. Thank you.
Chairman Davidson. The gentleman from New York, Mr.
Garbarino, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses for being here today.
Dr. Fratantoni, the purpose of this hearing is to examine
the challenges facing today's homebuyers. So, I want to talk to
you about title insurance.
FHFA recently announced a pilot program that would allow
Fannie Mae to effectively self-insure the title on mortgages it
backs. Curiously, FHFA's announcement said the pilot would
reduce costs for lower-income households, but then went on to
say it would be limited to low-risk refinances, in other words,
borrowers who already own a home and have substantial equity.
Can you make heads or tails of this apparent contradiction
in the Biden Administration's new government-run title
insurance program? Put another way, do you believe that
eliminating insurance for refinances will help first-time
homebuyers purchase their first home?
Mr. Fratantoni. The short answer is, no. Title insurance,
as you know, provides critical protections for the real estate
finance system--borrowers, lenders, investors--by
authenticating to the parties at closing, confirming the
authenticity of the transaction documents and ensuring that the
property being mortgaged is free of other debts. Title insurers
provide insurance against future legal actions against the
property ownership and mortgage priority.
For decades, MBA has had a policy that there should be a
bright line between the secondary market activities that Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac are rightly involved in, providing
liquidity to the market, and primary market activities that
lenders, title insurers, and others using private capital, and
taking risk are involved in.
And we think this is another example of the GSEs
potentially extending beyond the secondary market activities
where they really are intended to be focused in their efforts
under their congressional charters.
Mr. Garbarino. Absolutely. And I can't speak enough about
how important title insurance is. I was a real estate attorney
before I came to Congress. I did hundreds of closings, probably
thousands of closings. And I have seen at the closing table,
the title closer there. They are not just making sure all the
bank paper--they make sure the deed is filed. They make sure
everything is written up properly. You go through. You make
sure there is no missing--there are no liens on the property.
They check the COs. They do a lot. And I think waiving this--
and this pilot program starts just with refinances, but they
have said, they don't know where it could go. Replacing title
insurance or getting rid of it just for Fannie or Freddie could
really hurt the consumer, because Fannie and Freddie are only
interested as long as they back the loan. But title problems
could come up much later down the line.
So, I think this could be a real issue for homeowners and
actually could work against them. You could save a couple
pennies at a closing, but in the grand scheme of things, it
could cost a homeowner a lot of money in the long run.
I would like to submit for the record, Mr. Chairman, a
letter written by former Obama-era FHFA Director, Ed DeMarco,
expressing caution on this very subject.
Chairman Davidson. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you.
Next, I want to move over to how we can encourage
innovation in the mortgage interest market. We have heard a lot
today about the challenges that first-time homebuyers face when
attempting to get into the market. My constituents face the
same thing. Actually, in New York, the latest stats have that
New York has the lowest percentage of homeowners in the nation,
under 55 percent. Given this, the goal should be to lower costs
for New Yorkers, especially when it involves bringing in new
private capital to create more options for consumers.
One way to reduce prices in the housing space could be
through a new model providing mortgage insurance designed to
create more flexibility and pricing for borrowers. By utilizing
a new streamlined, highly-capitalized approach, direct mortgage
insurance is estimated to save homebuyers $6,000, and reduce
taxpayer exposure for the GSEs.
Dr. Lautz, or Dr. Fratantoni, or both of you, as
homeownership has become increasingly unaffordable due to
elevated prices and persistently-high interest rates, do either
of you believe that we should not be looking at new, innovative
mortgage products to make add-on costs as competitive as
possible?
Ms. Lautz. I can take this first. We absolutely need to be
looking at innovation. We have to be looking at innovation in
every aspect to be bringing in new homebuyers, and not just
first-time homebuyers. We also need to be thinking about
retirees who want to downsize as well.
Mr. Fratantoni. I guess I would be more cautious. I think
the mortgage industry has learned the lessons from 15 years ago
very well, and I think there is a genuine caution there to make
sure we are not overextending ourselves once again.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much. My time has expired. I
yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman from New York.
The gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Garcia, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to all
of the witnesses for being here today. As we have heard,
housing is the number-one driver of inflation and continues to
outpace wage gains. Our nation is facing a housing crisis. And
this committee did constant work on the issue under the
leadership of then-Chair Waters. Yet, the Republican Majority
has chosen to delay working toward legislative solutions to
address the housing affordability crisis. In the greater
Houston area where my district is, there are only 33,000
affordable homes or places to rent for more than 217,000
extremely low-income renters; 83 percent of these extremely
low-income households spend more than 30 percent of their
income on housing.
Ms. Bailey, given the high demand for affordable housing
options in many communities across our districts, including my
own, what types of housing are needed to close the housing
supply gap?
Ms. Bailey. Thank you for the question. We need to make
sure we are thinking about the missing middle. Right now, there
is an opportunity for us to bring in things like accessory
dwelling units. And while those are important opportunities in
communities to help lower overall housing costs, financing
still becomes a major challenge for consumers of color. And
that is why we keep saying it is a fair and affordable housing
crisis. We need to make sure consumers of color are not locked
out of accessing credit on a fair basis, which they currently
are. The recent record settlements by the Department of Justice
show that we continue to see discrimination in the marketplace.
So, we need to make sure we are focusing on the missing
middle, and then, we need to utilize programs like first-
generation programs. These are programs designed for people
whose prior generations were locked out of homeownership
opportunity and who don't come with the kind of background to
the housing sector that others might have when they arrive.
First-generation down payment assistance in the Housing
Crisis Response Act would help rural and urban borrowers access
homeownership. And if we pass it at the level of the
Downpayment Toward Equity Act, we would actually grow
homeownership by 5 million new homebuyers: 1.7 million of them
would be Black; 1.4 million of them would be White; and 1.32
million of them would be Latino. We need inclusive policies
like that to give people a chance to run up against investors
who are really making it very difficult for first-generation
homebuyers to enter into the marketplace.
Ms. Garcia. And to follow up, can you speak to whether the
private market can solve the housing crisis on its own or, as
one of my colleagues from the other side referenced, without
the government getting involved? Can the private industry solve
the housing crisis on their own?
Ms. Bailey. Do you remember the Great Recession of 2008?
That is the only time our housing market was clearly private,
and that led to the United States housing market crashing and a
global collapse.
We need an all-out everything-in approach. There is $150
billion in the Housing Crisis Response Act, $150 billion that
we have all negotiated. We have done all the backdoor
conversations. That is a compromise. That is a solution that
would help millions of consumers all over the nation, and it
would help jump-start the economy.
We keep saying housing is 20 percent of the U.S. GDP, so if
housing tanks, the economy tanks. And we don't want to return
to that.
Ms. Garcia. Are there any other considerations that need to
be made by Congress, for example, to help address an
increasingly-limited supply of affordable housing?
Ms. Bailey. Yes. passing comprehensive legislation. There
was not any bipartisan support for the Build Back Better Act,
sadly. We are asking today for there to be bipartisan support
for the Housing Crisis Response Act, the Downpayment Toward
Equity Act, and all of those very sensible provisions. They are
not outlandish. They are not tons of money thrown at a problem.
They are very practical things that would keep the housing
sector safe.
Again, we are looking at a housing sector where, in terms
of homeownership, White homeownership is set to decline. So if
borrowers of color are locked out of fairly accessing credit,
that means seniors won't have anyone to sell their homes to, to
reach a successful retirement. That means overall instability,
and we don't want an outcome like that.
Ms. Garcia. Right. Are there any other considerations that
we should take when it comes to housing for seniors or for
veterans?
Ms. Bailey. We want to make sure we are supporting things
like housing choice vouchers. Seniors and veterans often rely
on those programs.
And we have been calling on the GSEs to really make sure in
their contracts with multifamily unit developers that they are
making sure that there will be no discrimination against
housing choice voucher holders.
Ms. Garcia. Okay. Thank you. I see I am down to less than
10 seconds, so I might as well yield back, because I won't even
get a question out in that time.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentlelady.
The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Norman, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norman. I thank each one of you for being here today.
As someone who has been in the business for a long time,
and built hundreds of houses, I don't know what affordable is.
I absolutely don't know what affordable is.
I will tell you this: If you want to solve the housing
crisis--and it is not affecting one segment more than the
other: White, Black, Red, it doesn't matter.
I am from South Carolina. We have people moving in. I have
building lots that are paid for that I can't afford to build on
at cost. Whether it is 1,000 square feet or whether it is 5,000
square feet, it doesn't matter.
Now, if you really want to solve it, it is not the
government. It is not a subsidize the down payment. It is not
doing away with title insurance. It is not accusing banks of
discrimination. Banks, when they make loans, they sub this out
to other groups. They don't know who it is. When I build
houses, I don't know who looked at the house.
But if you really want to get to the root of it, first,
it's gas prices. Everything that goes into a house is powered
by gas. This Administration has killed us on that.
Second, if you really want to help people afford a house,
give them more money to spend. Name me one person in this
country who is not paying more for eggs, or for gas, as I
mentioned, across the board. And that is a determination on
what they can afford.
I will tell you the demand is there, but until this--and it
is directly the result of this Administration's stupid rules
and regulations. I can't get copper pipe because most States
have ruled, Arizona being one of them--they have made it so
hard to mine copper. And it goes down the line.
We have canceled, I don't know how many projects, because
of supply chain shortages. If I can't get a meter base, does it
make sense for me to build a house for which I can't get an
electrical meter base? Time is money, and that is what--the
government is the last thing you want. And I would ask anybody
who wants the government involved, where are we going to get
the money? This country is bankrupt as it is.
So the housing crisis, if you get the gas prices, let us
get our own gas and oil here in the U.S., and get supply chain
shortages out of the way, you will see housing, maybe not boom,
but you will see it come back. It is not more government
spending. Government gets in the way.
The National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) says that
regulations imposed by government at all levels account for
$93,870 of the final price for a new single-family house. That
is a fact. Of the $93,870, $41,330 is due to higher prices for
the finished lot.
That is our fault for not getting with the planning
commissions that are saying no on a lot that is perfectly flat.
You don't have to have all of these things that go into just
bureaucratic red tape.
Anyway, any other regulations you all would say from your
end of it? I am running out of time.
Mr. Fratantoni. Again, I did mention that one of the real
obstacles to getting more small-balance loans originated in
this country is the cost of the regulations that are just added
to the fixed cost that a lender has to hurdle over in order to
get that loan done.
So, I agree with your thoughts of land, labor, lumber, all
the challenges to a builder that then just ultimately get
brought out in the price of the home.
Ms. Lautz. We have heard from the home builders as well
that one of the big hurdles that they are having is that their
skilled labor--the median age is well into their fifties. So,
we really need to be educating that perhaps this is a pathway
to a career choice for young adults, to bring them into skilled
labor, to bring more homes into the market.
Mr. Norman. Ms. Bailey?
Ms. Bailey. I think, again, fully enforcing our nation's
fair housing and lending laws are the solution to solving our
nation's fair and affordable housing crisis. When we fully
enforce those laws, we actually make sure people have the
ability to have housing choice, and they can live in all
communities and thrive.
And currently, we don't well-resource HUD in a way that
they can actually do its job. And our local fair housing
enforcement agencies are fighting over 4 million incidents of
housing discrimination every year. We need to get more support
to them so that they can help people with disabilities, women,
families with children, people of color, LGBTQ+, and others
avoid discrimination.
Mr. Norman. Thank you all.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlewoman from Georgia, Ms. Williams, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you, Chairman Davidson, and
Ranking Member Cleaver, for this hearing today. And thank you
to our witnesses for joining us.
I represent Georgia's Fighting Fifth Congressional
District, which is home to Atlanta. The Census Bureau just
announced last week that Atlanta continues to grow rapidly, and
we are now the 6th largest metropolitan area in the country.
You might have seen the signs that say that Atlanta is full,
but I welcome everyone who wants to come and call this magical
city home, and allow Atlanta to change their lives like it
changed mine.
But there is one big, glaring problem. We don't have enough
quality affordable housing for everyone, and that has
generational effects way beyond ensuring that people have a
place to lay their heads at night. For decades, homeownership
has been how Americans build generational wealth, making it an
essential tool for closing the racial wealth gap.
Atlanta has many accolades, which I am sure you will hear
me talk about many times throughout this Congress, but there is
one that we don't quite want to be proud of, and that is having
one of the widest racial wealth gaps in the country, a gap that
could be closed with the opportunity that comes from
accessible, affordable homeownership to build that generational
wealth.
One of the biggest challenges homebuyers in Atlanta face is
having to compete with large institutional investors purchasing
homes in bulk and turning them into rental housing, eliminating
the wealth-building potential of each house that they buy.
In the third quarter of 2021 alone, institutional investors
bought 42.8 percent of all single-family homes for sale in the
Atlanta metro area. This lost opportunity adds up. According to
research published by Georgia Tech, Black communities in
Atlanta lost $4 billion, with a, ``B,'' in home equity over 10
years due to large investors buying properties in Black
neighborhoods.
And that is why I have co-led the End Hedge Fund Control of
American Homes Act, bicameral legislation that would end hedge
fund ownership of single-family homes over 10 years.
We desperately need this legislation in Atlanta, where
Georgia State University has found that 19,000 single-family
rental homes are owned by just three companies--just three--
none of which are headquartered in Atlanta.
Ms. Bailey, how does the heavy involvement of institutional
investors in the housing market contribute to the housing
inventory shortage, which we have agreed on a bipartisan level
that inventory is a huge problem? How does that impact what we
are already experiencing?
Ms. Bailey. It is actually driving up all the affordable
housing stock in communities that have been hardest hit by the
Great Recession. That is the part of this conversation that we
are not really talking about.
They are buying homes for people who would actually be able
to afford homes if the market hadn't been overcorrected. We
know that following the Great Recession, there could have been
an additional 700,000 Black homeowners, but we overcorrected.
We overextended. Those buyers now need first-generation down
payment assistance to be able to compete.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you, Ms. Bailey.
These investors tend to concentrate their purchasing in
low-income communities and communities of color, in other
words, areas where buying a home and building equity is the
most direct path towards closing the racial wealth gap.
Ms. Bailey, how does the presence of institutional
investors harm first-time homebuyers, especially in
marginalized communities, as they are already struggling with
the lack of affordable housing?
Ms. Bailey. They make it really difficult for housing costs
to come down. If you are even a renter in those communities,
your rents are going up, because they are, again, taking
advantage of all the available affordable housing stock. So,
people are paying more money in their rental payments, making
it less likely that they will be able to save for a down
payment.
Again, we have a solution. The Downpayment Toward Equity
Act is one of the solutions, as well as the Housing Crisis
Response Act.
States like Minnesota, Vermont, Rhode Island, and New
Jersey are all instituting support for first-generation down
payment assistance. Even States in the South, like North
Carolina, are instituting the support, because we understand
that people just show up to this equation differently.
We have never corrected for our nation's history of
discrimination. So while it is uncomfortable talking about
Black and White when it comes to housing, the reality is we
can't escape it. These provisions are restorative, and they are
race-neutral, and they will help to bring economic activity in
communities that have long been denied.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you, Ms. Bailey.
We talked about the down payment assistance for first-time
homebuyers, but what other strategies should Congress examine
to help reduce the harm caused by institutional investors'
control of so much of the housing market?
Ms. Bailey. I think we need to look at the legislation that
you just discussed to make sure we are monitoring who is being
able to purchase in bulk those homes. Again, we need to make
sure we are fully enforcing our nation's fair housing and
lending laws.
The Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Law, a provision
under the Fair Housing Act, is something that we need to make
sure HUD is well-equipped to enforce. So, that is something.
We also need to make sure we are well-funding housing
choice vouchers so that renters can actually have the ability
to get access to quality housing. And we have to talk about
things like the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit. We need to make
sure it gives people a choice in terms of where they can
actually live.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you, and I am out of time.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentlewoman.
The gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Flood, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before a workforce housing event in Columbus, Nebraska, in
January, I had the Joint Economic Committee pull some housing
data regarding my district before the event. I would like to
use this data to demonstrate the unique environment we are
currently in for people who are looking for homes.
Using the data provided from a couple of months back, I
would like to take a look at a theoretical example of the
problem. Madison, Nebraska, is in my home county. The average
value of a single unit permitted in this county is $262,238. I
was curious, given the current environment, how much someone
would need to make in order to be able to afford the monthly
payments on that home.
If you start with a base assumption that the borrower has a
10-percent down payment, using the programs and the loan
products that are out there, you can get a mortgage rate of
maybe around 6.805 percent, if you are lucky, from a local
bank. You add in property taxes, homeowner's insurance, and
mortgage insurance, and you are looking at roughly $2,081
monthly in housing payments.
There is a rule of thumb in personal finance that your
monthly housing expenses should not be greater than 30 percent
of your monthly gross income. In order to remain within the
scope of the 30-percent gross income rule of thumb, the
borrower's income would need to be $6,938 a month. Annualized,
that salary would be $83,257.20 a year. The problem is that the
median monthly household income in my county is $5,095 or
$61,140 a year.
Now, it is worth mentioning that there are ways to get that
monthly payment down. If the borrower were able to put 20
percent down, they would get a better rate and not have to pay
monthly for mortgage insurance.
But the general problem remains the same. The cost
associated with owning a home remains significantly higher than
the median household income of the people in this county. That
is the problem we are seeing just in Madison County, Nebraska,
and across America.
People who work hard should have the chance to live in a
home and experience the American Dream. One significant part of
the problem is that the effect of the Federal Funds Rate in
February was the highest since 2001, an environment with higher
interest rates than we have had in a long time. The question
is, how can we make homeownership possible for people trying to
climb the economic ladder?
Dr. Lautz, do you frequently see a misalignment between the
incomes in an area and the same area's housing prices,
particularly in a high-interest rate environment? Is that
something that is becoming more common?
Ms. Lautz. Yes, absolutely. You are from Nebraska, and I
think it is really important to note that we have been seeing
this in coastal areas across the nation for years, but now we
are starting to see this move inwards.
And part of that is because of migration flows that
happened during the pandemic. Some of it is because of
population growth of young adults. And it is putting a lot of
pressure on the underbuilding, which is continuing across the
nation.
Mr. Flood. Second question: How big a role do interest
rates play in this environment relative to other factors such
as the cost of raw materials, the cost of labor, and general
housing shortages?
Since 2009, we have seen 16-percent inflation on building
homes in Nebraska. What are interest rates doing to the
problems that have been impacting coastal areas, and now,
inland areas like mine?
Ms. Lautz. What we consistently hear is that home builders
have to borrow to build. They have to finance that project. And
so, as interest rates went up, it become even more expensive,
and they became reluctant to actually build more new homes.
They are now coming back into the market, but I think it is
really important to note that as interest rates are higher than
what they have been, they are probably going to be tiptoeing
into the market, and we really do need that inventory.
Eighty-five percent of homes that are purchased are
existing homes, and those homes are getting older because of
the lack of new building.
Mr. Flood. What I am really focused on are homes that cost
between $200,000 and $250,000. That is really the sweet spot,
when you look at what our workforce needs.
Are you seeing enough building activity for those homes to
meet demand? And please talk about manufactured housing.
Ms. Lautz. I think the very quick answer is, no, we are not
seeing enough homes at that very affordable price point. When
we are seeing new builds, the typical home price that is being
sold is over $400,000. That is not affordable to many
communities and to many Americans.
As far as manufactured housing, that is one solution in
looking at the housing crisis.
Mr. Flood. Now, I know about Hagerstown, Maryland. I have
heard that there is some effort going on there. Is there any
other place in America that is putting together a development
for manufactured housing, that people in Nebraska could be
looking at for guidance?
Ms. Lautz. I think that is a great case study. I don't know
of any others off the top of my head.
Mr. Flood. I would just say this to the rest of America: If
you are a city leader, if you are running a city, if you are
working on solving this problem and you are effectively using
manufactured housing in a development, please reach out to my
office. Let us know. We need to know about it. We need to
investigate it.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms. Pettersen, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Cleaver, for hosting this committee hearing, and I thank all of
you for being here on such an important issue.
I am from Colorado, as you heard. And, like so many States,
we are facing a housing crisis. Our secret is out. It is the
best place to live. And we have had tens of thousands of people
moving there every single month for years.
It has finally tapered off, because it has become so
unaffordable, but it really has impacted us, especially our
rural communities. Now that remote work is an opportunity for
people, they are moving to the mountains. And people who have
lived there their entire lives have seen home values increase
sometimes threefold in just a couple of years, and they are
being pushed out of their communities.
Workers are unable to live in a lot of these communities.
It really impacts our small businesses and their ability to
attract and retain workers. And this is something that, in the
legislature when I was there for 10 years, wasn't a big
priority of mine. I focused on other issues. But I asked to be
on this committee because this really intersects in everything
that we are facing in Colorado and so many issues that we are
facing.
So, I appreciate the opportunity to chat about solutions.
When I think about the urgent needs that our country needs to
be addressing and how complicated these issues are, that is
definitely the case for housing.
We know that it is the financing piece, and with increased
interest rates, as you know, we need homes more than ever, but
home builders have started to slow down because of the cost of
building. We need to bring the Federal incentives that were
actually building the types of homes that we need.
In Colorado, we don't have access to places for seniors to
go. So, they are staying in the homes that they raised their
families in, even though it is really difficult for them to
make ends meet and stay in that house. They have nowhere else
to go. So, it doesn't bring room for new families to come into
those homes as well.
So, I am proud that we finally got something done in a
bipartisan way for the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC).
That is really big for Colorado: 4,100 affordable units will
either be preserved or built. That is a big step forward and an
example of how critical those public-private partnerships are
and what we need to do to incentivize.
I would love to hear from all of you on what additional
things we should be thinking about there, and then, how we can
address the zoning policies, the restrictive policies at the
local level that significantly increase cost? What can we do to
bring a carrot and a stick, as we can at the Federal level?
And I just want to thank you, Dr. Lautz, for talking about
what the workforce needs, because we have people who are
begging to work here, and we don't provide legal pathways for
people to do that. And we have employers who say that this is
the number-one thing that we could do to address rising costs.
And we can't even come together in a bipartisan way to get that
done in a time where it is needed most, which is incredibly
frustrating. So, thank you for addressing that, because it
really impacts construction.
I would love to hear from all of you what should we be
thinking about broadly on all of these different issues?
And then, also something that I want to highlight is a
staggering statistic that I heard from the HUD Director, which
was, if we don't act and we don't change policy and we continue
down the same path, in just under a decade, over 60 percent of
the housing supply will be owned by corporations.
Do we need to think about taking away the opportunity for
private equity firms and corporations to buy single-family
homes? Is that something that we should be considering?
Who wants to start?
Mr. Fratantoni. I am happy to. Congresswoman, I was just
talking with a number of lenders in Colorado in January. And I
would say something that I know you are aware of, that they
really focus on as the biggest concern, was the lack of
availability and cost of homeowners' insurance, particularly
with the increased wildfire risk in Colorado.
So, anything you can do to address that problem--it is not
only impacting the ability of borrowers to qualify for a loan,
but it is increasing payments for existing homeowners to such
an extent it really puts them on an unstable path. So, it
really is front and center for us right now.
Ms. Pettersen. And also a thing that we should think about.
Ms. Bailey. We would really encourage Treasury to ensure
that those Low-Income Housing Tax Credit investments are really
done in a way that they are built also in communities that are
well-resourced to really give consumers the chance to have fair
housing. Without that, people can't really choose to live in
places with the amenities that are necessary to thrive.
Ms. Lautz. I would add adaptive reuse. We have been talking
a lot about new build construction, but I think also
repurposing existing buildings.
Ms. Pettersen. Sorry it is a short time. Thank you so much.
I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you to the gentlelady.
The gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Horsford, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you to the chairman and the ranking
member for holding this hearing.
Yesterday I was with the President in my district talking
about housing and the importance of addressing housing
affordability and lowering the cost, both for rent as well as
the ability towards pursuing homeownership. So, this is a very
timely hearing.
Dr. Lautz, in the National Association of REALTORS' most-
recent 2023 profile of homebuyers and sellers, I noticed that
there was an alarming increase in all-cash buyers outbidding
everyday folks who are barely able to scrape together a down
payment.
According to your more-recent research, 32 percent of
buyers purchased their homes in cash. Would you be able to
provide any insights into the characteristics of these cash-
rich purchasers, the kinds of homes that they are more likely
to purchase or the likelihood that they would even occupy their
newly-bought homes?
Ms. Lautz. Yes. Thank you so much. In the last month, 32
percent of homebuyers did buy their home with cash. When we
look at who these buyers are, what we can see is that among
primary residence homebuyers, it is more than half of baby
boomers who are making all-cash purchases.
They have earned housing equity over time, and when they
are able to make their next trade, they are able to do so with
an all-cash purchase. We also know they are more likely to be
long-distance primary residence movers, so perhaps moving to a
more affordable area in the country, perhaps with migration
flows because of remote work trends.
When we look at other buyers, what we have seen in the last
6 months is more than half of vacation homebuyers are paying
all cash for their purchase, and a little over 40 percent of
mom-and-pop investors. So, we are not capturing institutional
investors in that measure. They have worked with a REALTOR.
Mr. Horsford. Why aren't institutional investors included?
Ms. Lautz. Because it is based on a survey that we do on a
monthly basis, based on our REALTORS----
Mr. Horsford. It is not available?
Ms. Lautz. Correct. It is not available.
Mr. Horsford. Right. Okay. That is the point I really
wanted to get on the record. It is information that we do not
know about these institutional investors. It is why I think it
is important that HUD be able to collect the necessary data on
the housing market to get a more accurate picture.
That is why I introduced, last year, the bipartisan and
bicameral Housing Oversight and Mitigating Exploitation (HOME)
Act, to actually empower HUD to gather this data needed to
understand the severity of our housing shortage and to protect
everyday Nevadans from being exploited by potential market
manipulators.
Again, I just addressed this with the President yesterday.
I was glad to see some of this included, but we need Congress
to act. And to the chairman of this subcommittee, I would urge
us to schedule a hearing on my bill, the HOME Act, so that we
can move that issue forward.
I would also like to submit for the record an article from
the Las Vegas Review-Journal entitled, ``Most homes sold in Las
Vegas are `unaffordable.'''
Chairman Davidson. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Horsford. Ms. Bailey, as they have learned from the
pilot on this issue, the Federal Home Loan Bank of San
Francisco estimated that a race-neutral program targeting
first-time homebuyers could reach more than five million
households, nearly all of them Black or Hispanic.
Would you please discuss the equity implications of a race-
blind down payment assistance program?
Ms. Bailey. Yes. By targeting down payment assistance by
first generation, we are able to bring resources to the
communities that were locked out of historic homeownership
opportunities and who still face barriers in the marketplace.
A lack of down payment is the primary reason consumers of
color report having an issue with entering into homeownership.
So, if we actually give them that fair opportunity through the
use of first generation, again, we could grow homeownership for
5 million new homebuyers: 1.7 million would be Black; 1.32
million Latino; and 1.4 million White. And these----
Mr. Horsford. And that would help close the racial wealth
gap.
Ms. Bailey. ----policies will help, yes.
Mr. Horsford. Because we would build equity, which helps
build wealth, for those individuals.
Ms. Bailey. And give them an opportunity to compete against
those institutional investors who are buying up all the
affordable housing stock in their communities.
Mr. Horsford. Would any of you like to discuss the growing
incidence of rent-burdened households in this country with the
remaining time left?
Ms. Bailey. I would just like to say that consumers of
color are the most cost-burdened, Latinos and African Americans
especially with rents. And, again, institutional investors are
playing a role there, because they are buying up all of the
affordable housing stock.
So, we need to make sure we are really supporting our
Housing Choice Voucher Program so that we can make sure
borrowers with the lowest incomes get the ability to safely
live in decent----
Mr. Horsford. Thank you. I appreciate the gentleman's time.
And I would just urge us to not just talk about this issue but
to schedule bills so that we can act on it.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman.
I think we noticed three bills for this hearing. I am happy
to talk to you about your bill.
The gentlewoman from Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to start by noting that the difference in
homeownership rates between Black and White households is
larger today than it was before the passage of the Fair Housing
Act of 1968, when housing discrimination was legal. Let that
just sink in.
I know in Michigan, we lost more Black homeownership during
the foreclosure crisis than any State in the country.
Nationwide, we know that the White homeownership rate is about
74 percent, 28 percentage points higher than the Black
homeownership rate.
In my district alone, the gap is even wider. It is 81
percent for my White neighbors or homeowners, while only 47
percent of my Black neighbors own their homes. Even when
comparing households, even when we compare households with
similar education levels or incomes, homeownership gaps persist
across racial groups.
So, Ms. Bailey, what explains the fact that the Urban
Institute reports that Black applicants with incomes above 150
percent of the area's median income (AMI) have a higher denial
rate than White applicants with lower incomes between 50 to 80
percent AMI?
Ms. Bailey. Thank you so much for the question. I lifted up
in my testimony the recent record settlements that the
Department of Justice had. Discrimination is not a relic of the
past. It remains a problem in our housing sector.
And, in fact, we know that White Americans with lower
incomes actually have a higher homeownership rate than
wealthier African Americans. This history of discrimination
continues to manifest itself in our marketplace.
Ms. Tlaib. And it is really just shocking, because many of
these settlements are not really--it is almost Band-Aids,
because for me and many of my colleagues, we talk about the
Community Reinvestment Act. We talk about fair housing.
We need to truly enforce them in a way that, again, pushes
back against what we know is very much systemic racism within
the banking industry. I see it even with small-dollar
mortgages. Many of my residents want to be able to afford their
homes that are less than $100,000. They can afford it, but they
are not actually being approved for loans less than $100,000.
Ms. Bailey, I have been trying to get HUD--and I have
talked to Secretary Fudge about this over the years. This is so
incredibly important. How can we get our banking institutions--
what can we do as the Federal Government to promote small-
dollar mortgages?
Ms. Bailey. I think the GSEs could provide more liquidity
for small-dollar loans. I think that is a really important
start.
And the thing we want to really be careful with, with the
lack of small-dollar lending, is that those consumers are then
only left with exploitive credit options.
And we want to make sure that our nation's consumer
protection laws are also fully enforced. So, we need to enforce
our nation's fair lending and housing laws, but we also need to
make sure the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau can enforce
our nation's consumer protection laws.
Ms. Tlaib. I know roughly 50 million consumers out there,
Ms. Bailey, were disproportionately people of color, who lacked
the credit history necessary to produce a reliable credit
score, not because of the different stereotypes that might go
through people's head. It is that they don't have the same
access.
Historically, my Black neighbors have enjoyed less access
to varied programs like FDIC-insured bank accounts and
revolving credit that have allowed many of our White neighbors
to build their credit profiles. Research actually has pointed
to the possibility of using other measures to assess
creditworthiness. For example, cash flow and rental payment
data can be used in mortgage underwriting, and both Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac have begun initiatives in that.
Ms. Bailey, can you talk about the use of alternative types
of data in mortgage underwriting and the impact their use would
likely have on our neighbors?
Ms. Bailey. Yes, it actually works. Things like positive
rental payment data is really most analogous to homeownership
payments. And what we have seen is that the Black and Latino
homeownership rate has been able to grow between 2019 and 2023,
because we have been looking at these more-inclusive methods of
underwriting, comparing it to things that are most analogues to
homeownership.
And we have to remind ourselves that cash flow data is data
that we always looked at historically, and we moved away from
some of those traditional underwriting criteria with things
like desktop underwriting. So, we need to go back to those
traditional things that work.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. I know a home is often a family's most
valuable asset, providing wealth that unlocks opportunities
both today and for future generations. And again, I think we
really need to realize the crisis that we have, especially when
we see these numbers, again, that are larger than before the
passage of the Fair Housing Act.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentlewoman.
The gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. De La Cruz, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today, and thank you to the witnesses for appearing
before us. I am glad to see our committee's continued focus on
housing affordability and availability.
As I have shared before, south Texans and Americans across
the country understand the very real impacts and challenges of
today's housing market.
As homeowners and homebuyers continue to see decade-high
interest rates and inflation impact nearly every area of their
monthly budgets, it is clear that working-class and middle-
class Americans face increasing challenges trying to achieve
the American Dream today.
That being said, Dr. Lautz, this committee has also
rightfully highlighted housing concerns for our veterans and
disabled veterans recently. In your analysis, what are some of
the unique challenges our veteran populations face in accessing
affordable housing?
Ms. Lautz. Thank you for the question.
When we look at recent homebuyers, what we have seen in the
last year, repeat buyers are telling us, 13 percent of them,
that when they took out a loan product, they did use a VA loan,
and about one in ten first-time homebuyers are accessing that
as well.
It helps them in saving for a down payment. And what we see
over time is that they successfully pay their loan and they
have the lowest default rates among all borrowers.
Ms. De La Cruz. That is great information. Thank you for
sharing that.
To me, the American Dream and homeownership, as I said,
they go hand in hand, especially for our nation's veterans. I
am proud to have introduced the bipartisan VA Home Loan
Awareness Act for this reason: We can and should provide our
heroes with the opportunity to achieve homeownership and the
American Dream they fought to protect.
We also, unfortunately, know that some of our most-
vulnerable heroes, disabled veterans, who have earned dignity
and respect through their service, oftentimes need additional
support. That is why I have introduced this bipartisan
legislation.
We must ensure that disabled veterans are treated
consistently and fairly by HUD's housing support programs, and
I look forward to continuing to work in a bipartisan manner to
make this happen.
Dr. Fratantoni, with that in mind, we see that the changing
characteristics of the average homebuyer indicate that working-
class and middle-class homebuyers face increasing challenges in
today's market. Do you know, off the top of your head, for a
State like mine, Texas, what does the average homebuyer look
like today?
Mr. Fratantoni. That is a great question. We know that
Texas homebuyers rely on government housing programs like FHA
and VA to a greater extent than borrowers across the country,
with 31 percent using those FHA, VA, and RHS loans, compared to
25 percent for the nation as a whole.
And even with that, we know that the homeownership rate in
Texas is about 2\1/2\ percentage points below the national rate
as of the fourth quarter. We often think of Texas as a more
affordable portion of the country compared to the coast, and
yet, many of your constituents, again, are really struggling,
given the challenges.
We know that it goes beyond housing, right? We are seeing
delinquency rates on consumer debt increase for credit cards,
for auto loans. A lot of households are stressed well before
they get into the housing portion of their portfolio. And right
now, mortgage delinquency rates are extremely low, but I think
with any softening in the job market, we are watching closely
to see whether those delinquency rates might increase.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentlelady.
I would like to thank our witnesses for your testimony
today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
I ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as
possible.
And this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:14 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

March 20, 2024

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
