- THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE FINANCIAL

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

______

THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE FINANCIAL

STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 6, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-73

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-278 PDF          WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
February 6, 2024.............................................     1
Appendix:
February 6, 2024.............................................    53

WITNESSES
Tuesday, February 6, 2024

Yellen, Hon. Janet L., Secretary, United States Department of the
Treasury, and Chair, Financial Stability Oversight Council
(FSOC).........................................................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Yellen, Hon. Janet L.........................................    54

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Horsford, Hon. Steven:
McKinsey & Company impact report, ``Diversity Matters Even
More,'' dated December 5, 2023.............................    57
Yellen, Hon. Janet L.:
Written responses to questions for the record from Chairman
McHenry....................................................    68
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Barr........................................    71
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Casten......................................    89
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Fitzgerald..................................    87
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Gottheimer..................................    90
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................    92
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Lawler......................................   108
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Sherman.....................................   105
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Wagner......................................   101
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nikema Williams.............................    84

THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE FINANCIAL

STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL

----------

Tuesday, February 6, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick McHenry
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives McHenry, Lucas, Sessions,
Posey, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Wagner, Barr, Williams of Texas,
Hill, Loudermilk, Mooney, Davidson, Rose, Steil, Timmons,
Norman, Meuser, Fitzgerald, Kim, Flood, Lawler, Nunn, De La
Cruz, Houchin, Ogles; Waters, Velazquez, Sherman, Scott, Lynch,
Cleaver, Himes, Foster, Beatty, Vargas, Gottheimer, Gonzalez,
Casten, Pressley, Horsford, Tlaib, Torres, Garcia, Williams of
Georgia, Nickel, and Pettersen.
Chairman McHenry. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``The Annual Report of the
Financial Stability Oversight Council.''
I will note at the outset that this hearing has a hard stop
at 1:00 p.m., and thank you, Secretary Yellen, for being here.
I will now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an
opening statement.
Thank you, Secretary Yellen, for being here today in your
capacity as Chair of the Financial Stability Oversight Council
(FSOC). FSOC's purpose is straightforward: to identify risks
that could impact our financial stability; to promote market
discipline by eliminating expectations of bailouts; and to
respond to emerging threats. FSOC's name pretty much sums up
its mission, and yet, under the current leadership, we have
seen FSOC expand its regulatory reach to fit the
Administration's political priorities. That is unfortunate,
and, unfortunately, FSOC appears to be a part of the same
troubling trend as President Biden's other financial
regulators.
When you are distracted by shiny partisan objects, you take
your eye off the ball. For example, aside from a stale mention
of interest rate risks in 2022 in the annual FSOC report of
that year, the FSOC did nothing to identify the emerging
instability that set off the March 2023 banking sector
turbulence, and indicators produced by FSOC's research arm, the
Office of Financial Research (OFR), showed no signs of emerging
risks even as the risk was indeed emerging. Secretary Yellen,
we remember the panic Americans experienced in March. I commend
you for your willingness to engage in stabilizing the markets.
I think your credibility lent a lot of effort to the
Administration, and at that time, we worked together to quell
concerns and provide a levelheaded response in an uncertain
time.
The goal was to do no harm and to regain stability without
injecting politics, and I think we achieved that, a goal that
President Biden clearly did not share when he took advantage of
the situation to blame Republicans for what was a widely
bipartisan regulatory reform law enacted a few years ago. In
real time, many members of this committee stood behind
regulators' emerging actions with the expectation that we and
the public would receive a full accounting of the decisions
made that week.
But now, nearly a year later, we do not still know the full
story, as FSOC and other Administration officials have been
less than transparent. To be clear, this does nothing to calm
the nerves of an already-skittish consumer, and with issues
still plaguing some regional banks, it is irresponsible for
this Administration and your fellow regulators to continue to
stonewall.
While Republicans have worked to get the answers the
American people deserve, FSOC has been busy making changes to
enable it to serve as a roving regulator, something architects
of the Dodd-Frank Act vigorously promised FSOC would not be.
This includes relaxing the criteria used to designate nonbank
financial companies as systemically important and putting them
under Federal Reserve regulation. This proposal is based on the
premise that our financial system would be best served with
more oversight and control by the Federal Reserve, even beyond
banks.
It is important to note that the gross incompetence of
Federal Reserve and FDIC supervision is what led to the bank
failures in March. However, prudential regulation is grounded
in mitigating the specific risk that bank activity poses. These
regulations are not necessarily appropriate for institutions
that may engage in different activities and, therefore, pose
different risks. Given the significant consequences associated
with the systemic risk designation, Congress did not intend for
this designation to be politicized nor weaponized. This move,
taken with the apparent failure to identify and respond to
emerging risks, calls into question the effectiveness of the
Financial Stability Oversight Council.
Secretary Yellen, I would encourage you and your fellow
Federal regulators to get back to the work with which you have
been tasked. We have already experienced what happens when you
take your eye off the ball and get engaged in politics. The
American people should not have to suffer through that again. I
yield back.
I now recognize the ranking member, Ms. Waters, for 4
minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Treasury Secretary
Yellen and President's Biden economic team have been hard at
work to turn the tide on the disastrous economy that the twice-
impeached, 4-times-criminally-indicted former President left
us. The numbers show their hard work is paying off. In 2023,
the unemployment rate remained below 4 percent, and the economy
created a whopping 2.7 million new jobs, more than any year of
the Trump Administration. Inflation has fallen to the pre-
pandemic level of 2 percent over the last 6 months, 16 million
small businesses have been created, and twice as many Black
households now own a business. Workers' wages and wealth are
higher now than before the pandemic began, with income of
nearly 4 percent last year after adjusting for inflation. To
top it off, consumers' confidence is returning to our nation's
economy, and they are shopping and traveling again.
There is currently more work to do to address the housing
affordability crisis, but the Biden Administration has
masterfully guided the United States to the fastest economic
rebound from the pandemic of any wealthy country in the world.
Of course, this progress would not be possible if it were not
for Secretary Yellen's strong leadership and that of President
Biden's banking regulators, who decisively prevented harm to
our financial system after the failures of Silicon Valley Bank,
Signature Bank, and First Republic Bank. Make no mistake, the
seeds of that banking crisis were planted by Mr. Trump and his
bank regulators' deregulation of regional banks.
Less than a year later, it is a shame that Republicans have
teamed up with Wall Street to spread misinformation and to try
and block efforts to strengthen capital. At our nation's
biggest banks. Wall Street is peddling lies about what the
needed capital reforms will do, going as far as taking out
expensive TV and social media ads, and even setting up a
website to purportedly educate the public, except it is filled
with misleading claims. What they don't want you to know is
that the only people who benefit from lower capital
requirements are the wealthy bank executives. Less capital
means consumers are left more vulnerable, especially in a
downturn, while bank executives take home bigger bonuses each
year.
Lower capital requirements also mean that taxpayers are
more likely to be called on to bail these banks out when they
run into trouble. Let's be clear: Research overwhelmingly shows
that well-capitalized banks lend more than other banks in good
times and in bad. I am sure the Secretary will set the record
straight about how these capital reforms will ensure first-time
homebuyers, small business owners, and communities of color
looking to build wealth can better access credit, and prevent
future bank crises.
Finally, I want to applaud the Financial Stability
Oversight Council for updating its designation procedures to
ensure the Council can use all of its tools to protect our
economy. I also applaud the Council for continuing the work
Committee Democrats started by guarding us against risk from
artificial intelligence (AI), cryptocurrencies, and climate
change. I am so proud to see Secretary Yellen here today. Thank
you for all that you have done in your leadership, and I look
forward to today's hearing. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman McHenry. I will now recognize the Chair of our
Financial Institutions and Monetary Policy Subcommittee, Mr.
Barr, for 1 minute.
Mr. Barr. Secretary Yellen, the three statutory purposes of
the Financial Stability Oversight Council and the Dodd-Frank
Act are to identify stability risks, promote market discipline
by eliminating bailout expectations, and respond to emerging
stability threats. Last March, FSOC did not identify a systemic
risk as it emerged, did not promote market discipline as 100
percent of large uninsured deposits were bailed out, and did
nothing to respond to the emerging stability threat. Nothing
would have been different if FSOC had never been created.
FSOC has not fulfilled its statutory purposes. Instead, it
is an unaccountable, roving regulator, ensnaring private firms
into the regulatory net using new designation processes that
remove analytical discipline. We are left with an FSOC used to
pressure nominally-independent financial regulators into
whatever policy objectives the Biden Administration wants to
push into the regulatory framework without legislative
authority.
The current FSOC is poised to operate as a partisan body
and a rogue regulator, which is not what is statutorily
intended in Dodd-Frank, or maybe it was intended to act that
way, and we don't like it. We look forward to your testimony
today. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. We will now go
to the ranking member of our Financial Institutions and
Monetary Policy Subcommittee, Mr. Foster, for 1 minute.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Chairman McHenry. Secretary Yellen,
thank you for joining us today and for your leadership of the
Treasury Department.
Since the Dodd-Frank Act created FSOC in 2010, it has been
a vital forum for U.S. financial regulators to share
information regarding systemic risks to our economy. FSOC's
comprehensive view of the financial system is critical because
systemic risks rarely develop in ways that fall entirely within
the jurisdiction of a single agency.
This year also marks the first time that artificial
intelligence (AI) has been listed as a vulnerability in FSOC's
annual report, and I am happy to have seen the steps that
financial regulators have started to take to address AI-related
risks since President Biden's Executive Order on AI was issued
last fall. While AI presents many opportunities to make our
financial system stronger, deepfake impersonations have the
potential to supercharge financial fraud and cybersecurity risk
by making it harder to identify the real identity of the person
on the other end of a call, a video, or an internet connection.
The response to emerging issues like these should not take
place in a silo, and I am happy to see FSOC recognize the
importance of holistically addressing these and other emerging
risks. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. Today, we
welcome the testimony of the Honorable Janet Yellen, Secretary
of the Department of the Treasury. I will not go into her full
bio, but suffice it to say she has held every significant
economic post in our government. We welcome your testimony
today, and thank you for being here. You will be recognized for
5 minutes. And without objection, your written statement will
be made a part of the record. You are now recognized for 5
minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JANET L. YELLEN, SECRETARY, UNITED
STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY, AND CHAIR, FINANCIAL
STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL (FSOC)

Secretary Yellen. Thank you. Chairman McHenry, Ranking
Member Waters, and members of the committee, thank you for
inviting me to testify.
Over the past 3 years, the Biden Administration has driven
an historic recovery. GDP growth is strong, and inflation has
declined significantly. We have also achieved a healthy labor
market. The prime age labor force participation rate is up by
over 2 percentage points from January 2021. The unemployment
rate remains below 4 percent, continuing the longest streak in
50 years. Real wages have increased. Household median wealth
has, too, by 37 percent between 2019 and 2022. That is the
largest 3-year increase on record. Families are now putting
their additional income and accumulated savings back into the
economy.
Our continued economic strength depends on a solid and
resilient U.S. financial system. Throughout 2023, the Financial
Stability Oversight Council monitored a wide range of risks,
including risks stemming from the commercial and residential
real estate sectors and from global geopolitical conflicts and
technological developments.
When two regional banks failed last March, we acted quickly
to prevent contagion to banks with similar vulnerabilities and
to maintain confidence in the banking system. The Council also
increased transparency this year, issuing an analytic framework
that, for the first time, provides the public with in-depth
information on how it monitors, assesses, and responds to
potential financial risks.
Let me now highlight five areas of ongoing work that are
further detailed in the Council's 2023 annual report. First,
the Council is focused on risks from the banking sector and
from nonbank financial institutions. It supports member
agencies' plans to review whether capital measures
appropriately reflect a banking institution's ability to absorb
losses, improve resolvability at large, complex, or
interconnected banks, and address vulnerabilities from
uninsured deposit levels and depositor composition. Nonbank
institutions are an important source of capital in financial
markets but also pose potential risk to the financial system,
including risks related to liquidity mismatch and leverage.
Securities and Exchange Commission initiatives focused on hedge
funds, money market funds, and other investment funds are an
important step forward here.
Second, the Council is focused on member agencies'
enhancing assessment efforts and increasing coordination around
climate-related financial stability risks from increasingly
severe and frequent climate-related events. Financial
regulators should also continue to promote disclosures that
allow investors and financial institutions to consider these
risks to their investment in lending decisions.
Third, a key focus has been bolstering protections against
cybersecurity risks. The Council promotes sharing timely and
actionable cybersecurity information, including through ongoing
partnerships between State and Federal agencies and the private
sector.
Fourth, the Council is closely monitoring the increasing
use of artificial intelligence in financial services, which
brings potential benefits, such as reducing costs and improving
efficiencies and potential risks, like cyber and model risk.
Financial institutions, regulators, and market participants
should continue deepening their expertise and monitoring
capacity in this area.
Fifth, the Council is focused on digital assets and related
risks, such as from runs on crypto asset platforms and
stablecoins, potential vulnerabilities from crypto asset price
volatility, and the proliferation of platforms acting outside
of or out of compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
Applicable rules and regulation should be enforced, and
Congress should pass legislation to provide for the regulation
of stablecoins and of the spot market for crypto assets that
are not securities. We look forward to continuing to engage
with Congress on this.
With this overview, I look forward to answering your
questions on these and other areas.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Yellen can be found on
page 54 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you, Secretary Yellen. I will now
recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Let's begin with your last point on the regulation of the
spot market for digital assets. This committee has produced two
bipartisan bills--one on stablecoins, one on market structure--
to regulate the spot market of digital assets and provide this
clarity between the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
and the SEC. You testified that FSOC's view is that we need
Federal law and law changes on the spot market. Can you tell us
why? Can you describe why that is FSOC's belief?
Secretary Yellen. There are many areas with respect to
digital assets where we do have clear regulatory authority, but
we have identified some gaps where, for consumer investor
protection and to address financial stability risk, it would be
very useful for Congress to take action to fill those gaps. The
CFTC, for example, doesn't have supervisory or regulatory
authority with respect to spot markets in commodities like
Bitcoin, so that is a regulatory gap.
Furthermore, stablecoins pose risk to the financial system
that both FSOC and the President's Working Group on Financial
Markets have identified as potentially becoming significant
over time, and we would very much welcome an effort by Congress
to create a regulatory framework that would be appropriate to
address those risks.
Chairman McHenry. Stablecoins are now being regulated by
the States. New York has a very resilient regime. Are you
suggesting something like the New York regime would be
applicable to fix this problem?
Secretary Yellen. FSOC believes that it is critical for
there to be a Federal regulatory floor that would apply to all
States and that a Federal regulator should have the ability to
decide if a stablecoin issuer should be barred from issuing
such an asset.
Chairman McHenry. Okay.
Secretary Yellen. Also, we believe that because wallets are
a critical part of the stablecoin ecosystem, and we have seen
many instances in which there have been significant losses,
that it is critical to enact regulatory protections for holders
of wallets.
Chairman McHenry. Back to the spot market, though, in your
report, you state clearly that we need to change the law in
order for us to have proper regulation of the digital asset
spot market. Is that correct?
Secretary Yellen. Yes, that is a recommendation.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. Let's go to the broader set, not
the emerging issues, but in November, FSOC issued its final
guidance on nonbank designation. Are there firms that FSOC has
identified that are being analyzed right now for designation?
Secretary Yellen. I don't think it is appropriate for me to
talk about individual firms. We have certainly not reached a
stage at which the Council has taken any action or received
recommendations with respect to designation. We did put out, as
you know, revised guidance pertaining to nonbank designations,
and we published an analytic framework, but we wanted to make
sure that our entire toolkit that Congress gave to FSOC is
usable. There are many tools in that toolkit, and the analytic
framework recognizes that designation is only one of those
tools. It is not in any sense the preferred tool. It really
depends on the specifics of the financial stability risk.
Chairman McHenry. What many of us have highlighted is the
fact that that is such an opaque process that it leads to
greater instability, and greater uncertainty in the
marketplace.
Let me finish with this: the overall economy. Fed Chair
Powell was interviewed this past weekend on 60 Minutes, and he
said that the American people have a right to be unhappy. The
cost of food is dramatically up under your tenure as Treasury
Secretary in this Administration. What do you say to the
American people, who are unhappy with paying more for the
basics of life?
Secretary Yellen. Households have been struggling through
the pandemic with many burdens, including a higher cost of food
and some increases in gas prices. We have had several years, a
couple of years of high inflation, and it is a top priority of
this Administration to bring inflation down and to use the
tools we have to reduce the burdens on hardworking households.
We have certainly used it with respect to healthcare costs,
limiting insurance premiums for healthcare, and the copays for
insulin.
Chairman McHenry. My time has expired. Thank you for your
testimony. I yield to the ranking member, Ms. Waters.
Ms. Waters. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. Secretary
Yellen, I again want to applaud your excellent work and that of
the Federal Reserve and the FDIC to quickly act last spring to
contain the damage from the sudden failures of Silicon Valley
Bank in my State, Signature Bank, and First Republic Bank that
could have spiraled out of control into a costly financial
crisis, a recession and corresponding layoffs, foreclosures,
and lost savings for millions of people.
Of course, some of us warned about Trump's deregulation
efforts, and S. 2155, a Republican bill that Trump's regulators
used to reduce capital and other requirements for regional
banks like SVB. In fact, it allowed Silicon Valley Bank to opt
out of maintaining nearly 2 percent more capital for their book
of securities that had a large amount of unrealized losses when
the Federal Government raised interest rates. When SVB was
forced to sell those securities at a steep loss, it alarmed
customers, resulting in the fastest bank run in United States
history.
Since then, Republicans have tried to claim that capital
had nothing to do with the bank failures, but their own
witness, Margaret Tahyar from Davis Polk, testified that SVB's
capital shortcoming was a problem, and she supported efforts to
fix it. I am so happy our Federal banking regulators have
issued proposals to fix this issue and otherwise strengthen
capital requirements for the largest banks. The Financial
Stability Oversight Council urged regulators to finalize these
bank capital rules in its annual report.
Would you briefly try and explain to Members why the bank
capital proposal is so important for financial stability?
Secretary Yellen. It is really critically important to the
safety and stability of our entire financial system for there
to be strong standards of capital, liquidity, and risk
management for banks, especially for the largest banks, and the
banking regulators have proposed new rules to address these
risks and to implement an international agreement on Basel III.
I would say the proposals are out for comment, and it is really
up to the banking regulators to decide on the appropriate
specifics.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Unfortunately, I
want you to know that the megabanks are working overtime to try
and kill the bank capital proposal, claiming, among other
things, that it will limit their ability to make loans to
communities of color that they already rarely serve and
routinely have discriminated against over the years. Capital is
not something that is locked away, but, rather, it is a source
of funds that banks can redeploy. In fact, research shows that
better-capitalized banks actually lend more, not less, to
consumers in both good times and bad.
Secretary Yellen, will lending come to a halt if regulators
implement their capital proposal? Did you hear similar industry
attacks when you were at the Fed helping implement the Dodd-
Frank post-crisis reforms?
Secretary Yellen. I think what we found during that time
was that implementing strong capital, liquidity, and risk
management rules led to a stronger banking system that was
better able to meet the needs of borrowers throughout the
country, and I think we saw the benefit of that when the
pandemic struck. While there were many financial stability
risks that did materialize, the banking system was strong and
able to meet the credit needs of the country's businesses and
households.
Ms. Waters. Secretary Yellen, do you recall the weekend
that all of the regulators and so many people were involved in
after the failure of Silicon Valley Bank, to try and save this
country from experiencing a bank run that could have actually
crippled our banking system? Do you recall the work that went
into that, 24 hours a day for 3 days, so that when we woke up
on Monday morning, we were safe rather than going back to what
happened in 2008. Do you remember that?
Secretary Yellen. I will never forget it. I was involved in
it, and we did everything we could to put together a package of
measures that would stop what could have become a run on the
banking system to the huge detriment of our economy and to
hardworking Americans and businesses.
Ms. Waters. And, again, if there had been adequate capital
at Silicon Valley Bank, we could have aborted what took place
in the way that it did.
Secretary Yellen. There was an issue with their management
of interest rate risk, which had produced mark-to-market losses
on long-duration assets that they held, and that was coupled
with very heavy reliance on uninsured deposits that were
concentrated among a group of tech firms that were active on
social media. We saw a run that was the largest and fastest of
anything anyone has ever witnessed in this country.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlewoman's time----
Ms. Waters. Do you support a 2-percent increase in capital
for all of the biggest banks?
Secretary Yellen. I am going to let the banking regulators
decide what the----
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. I will now go to the Vice Chair of the
committee, Mr. Hill, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, it is
nice to have you back here. We are grateful to have your
expertise. The last time we were together, we talked about the
subject that Chairman McHenry brought up, which is FSOC's
recommendations on stablecoins and the spot market, and I was
very pleased to hear your testimony on that, reiterating that
Congress does need to take action there, and I am proud to have
worked with the Chair and my Democratic colleagues on
bipartisan bills to do precisely that.
With that said, Madam Secretary, as Chair of FSOC, what
have you done to encourage the SEC and the CFTC to work
together in these areas to make these bills stronger, and
cooperate together to make our work here in Congress go more
smoothly? Have you had a meeting with the Chairman of the SEC
about stablecoins and the digital assets regulatory framework?
Secretary Yellen. The President's Working Group on
Financial Markets produced a report----
Mr. Hill. Yes, ma'am, we have read that report thoroughly.
I am talking about in recent months, since June and July of
last year. For example, when we marked up this bill in July,
have you worked with Chairman Benham or Chairman Gensler on
this legislation? Have you talked to them about it?
Secretary Yellen. I have talked to them often over the last
couple of years about stablecoins, and I am not sure if I have
talked with them over the last couple of months on this topic,
but we have had many, many conversations.
Mr. Hill. Another area where I think Chairman Gensler has
stumbled is his proposal on custody, which the bank regulators,
like the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Reserve,
don't support. Many of us on this committee are concerned about
that. Do you support the SEC's rule on custody as proposed?
Secretary Yellen. We have had some concerns about how it
would impact banks, and that is something I have discussed with
the Chairman.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Let me turn to
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) Director Chopra
suggesting that FSOC use, for the first time ever, Title VIII
authority to address payment clearing and settlement
activities. For example, he has proposed considering
designating certain nonbank payment platforms as systemically
important. Do you support that?
Secretary Yellen. We have not taken a position on that.
What I have said is that I think it is important for Congress
to address this issue. We have made recommendations, and we
think that is, by far, the preferred approach, and I have not
looked into other alternatives. We stand ready to work on a
bipartisan basis with you to take this on.
Mr. Hill. Thank you. Would you agree with the Director that
peer-to-peer (P2P) payment activity, or nonbank peer-to-peer
payments, represent financial stability risks to the financial
system overall--Zelle, Venmo, do you think peer-to-peer payment
systems present a financial stability risk to the system?
Secretary Yellen. I don't believe that is something that
FSOC has highlighted, and I don't----
Mr. Hill. I want you to reflect on that. I'd be happy to
have your views in writing on that, but I think some FSOC
members may not be viewing the designation of a nonbank
activity as really a last resort, that we have regulatory
systems and other rules to handle that, and I think this is a
particular case.
For example, do you think the Fed, having been the Chair
there, has sufficient expertise, knowledge, and supervisory
authority to deal with companies in different industries, like
asset managers or cloud providers or big tech companies, if
they were to be designated under that sort of an idea?
Secretary Yellen. I do want to make clear that there is
nothing about FSOC's approach that places designation as a
preferred approach. There are many tools and only certain
situations in which it would be appropriate. Congress
designated in Dodd-Frank that if a company's material distress
poses severe threats to financial stability, the Fed should be
the regulator. And I certainly remember from my time there when
several insurance companies had designated that the Fed build
substantial expertise to----
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I yield back.
Secretary Yellen. ----iron that out.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. We will now go
to the gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. You play an important role on foreign policy.
I hope, in dealing with the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
you make it clear that our support for Pakistan's request is
focused on the fairness of their elections and on human rights
and democracy in Pakistan in general. I hope you will do
everything possible to make sure that any change at the IMF
does not give Iran additional Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) or
allow them to use their existing Special Drawing Rights to turn
into currency that they can use. And finally, I hope that we
see sanctions against the individual human rights watches
identified with the Amhara regional forces in Northern
Ethiopia, and that you will focus on Eritrea's terrorizing of
the Tigray Region of Ethiopia.
On taxation, I want to commend you on the Direct File
Program, but you can go a step further. Senator Warren and I
have focused on the 36 countries where they send you a pre-
populated return, and you can just click, ``yes,'' or you can
change it, and, of course, it is voluntary. You don't have to
look at it at all, and I look forward to the day when the vast
majority of taxpayers can just click, ``yes,'' or maybe add the
name of a newborn child and be done with their tax return.
On crypto, you were instructed by the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act to have the rules in force for the 2023
tax season. They are not in force, so you are behind on rules
designed to enforce taxation on crypto transactions.
But I want to focus your attention on the capital gains
allowance. We provide, at very great cost to our Treasury, an
incentive for investors to invest in stocks, chiefly real
estate, because we want to build our economy, and there are
arguments as to whether it is very effective or only slightly
effective, but the reason for the capital gains allowance is to
encourage investment that builds an economy. Can you think of a
reason why we would, at a cost to the U.S. Government,
incentivize people to invest in the Chinese economy? Why do we
provide a capital gains allowance for investing in Chinese
stock? Is there any reason you can think of?
Secretary Yellen. In general, we have made a decision that
capital gains should be treated similarly and only taxed when
they are realized, and----
Mr. Sherman. I am not talking about realization. You sell a
Chinese stock at a profit. You pay a lower tax on that than
your assistant pays on his or her earned income. Now, that is
to encourage you to invest in the stock. Is there a national
purpose in encouraging Americans to invest in Chinese equities
that you are aware of, because I am not aware of any.
Secretary Yellen. In general, I think the view has been
that both inward and outward investment are economically
beneficial. There certainly can be cases----
Mr. Sherman. I want to move on to another issue.
Secretary Yellen. There can be cases----
Mr. Sherman. Encouraging the building of the Chinese
economy is not thought by most Members of Congress to be a good
use of Federal funds.
On bank regulation, there is no easy answer. If our
standards are too low, we could see the need for bailouts, as
we did in 2008, which not only shakes the economy, it shakes
the social fabric of our society. But if those standards are
too high, we lose economic growth and we move money away from
banks, which do an inadequate job of lending to small
businesses in our districts, over to Wall Street, where they
don't even, for the most part, pretend to do the job of
investing in small businesses in our districts.
We have the possible designation of systemically important
financial institutions (SIFIs). When I was here and we crafted
that definition, the thinking was that some companies have such
liabilities that if they go bankrupt, it would destroy the
whole economy. Is there a reason why you are focused on
identifying entities as SIFIs that don't have substantial
liabilities, such as mutual funds and money managers?
Secretary Yellen. I'm sorry. We are certainly focused on
the entire financial system. FSOC is not only focused on banks.
Mr. Sherman. Right, but why would you designate an entity
that doesn't have substantial liabilities?
Secretary Yellen. We would only designate an entity if FSOC
determined that its material distress would pose a severe
threat to the financial stability of the United States.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr.
Lucas, is recognized.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Secretary Yellen,
thank you for testifying today. During our discussion when you
were here last before the committee, the Basel Endgame proposal
had not been officially proposed by the banking regulators, and
since then, over the past 6 months, there has been a robust
response to the overwhelmingly negative consequences of the
proposal. I am concerned that the Basel Endgame will undermine
many of the steps taken by Congress to strengthen the financial
system and support the economy.
One example I have focused on is the impact on derivative
end users. Back in 2010, I sat on the Dodd-Frank conference
committee where there was bipartisan support to not
disadvantage end users like farmers, ranchers, and small
businesses. This has a long history of broad bipartisan
support. Unfortunately, both of the proposals from the Federal
Reserve will drive up the cost of hedging for end users and
undermine the longstanding work done by Congress and this
committee, and this is just one example of how the Fed's
proposal moves us in the wrong direction.
Secretary Yellen, at some point in the months ahead, the
banking regulators will vote on a final rule. When we last
discussed Basel Endgame, you said that Treasury would have the
opportunity to provide feedback on this proposal. Given
Treasury's mission, which is to maintain a strong economy and
promote economic growth, has Treasury provided feedback to the
Fed, number one, and number two, are you confident that the
proposal will not undermine the resilience of the U.S. capital
markets that are so critical to the economy?
Secretary Yellen. I am not aware that Treasury has provided
any formal feedback to the Fed on the Basel regulations. As you
know, they have received many comments expressing concern about
a number of different proposals that were embodied in the Basel
III package, and I know that all of the banking agencies that
publish are considering how to respond to those comments and
concerns in trying to craft a final rule.
Mr. Lucas. Are you concerned that the proposal will
undermine the resilience of the U.S. capital markets?
Secretary Yellen. I am not going to take a position on the
details of the rule. I would just say, again, that I believe
that there should be strong capital and liquidity standards to
ensure that these institutions operate in a safe and sound
manner, but it is up to the banking agencies to evaluate the
specifics.
Mr. Lucas. So, it is fair to say that whatever concerns
might be at Treasury don't rise to the point of providing
feedback. Okay. Another aspect of the Basel Endgame is the
impact on the U.S. Treasury market. Consumers, businesses,
governments, and the global financial system depend on a well-
functioning U.S. Treasury market, and of course, a healthy
market for U.S. Treasuries is essential for U.S. Government
operations. However, the proposal from the Fed could cause
banks to pull back from the market-making activities in the
Treasury's futures markets, which would raise costs for market
participants. At the same time, just this past December, the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) finalized a rule that
would increase central clearing for Treasury markets along with
other reforms. So, you have the increased cost coming from the
Federal Reserve, and you have the significant market structure
reforms coming from the Securities and Exchange Commission, all
impacting the U.S. Treasury market at the same time. I just
worry that this could create a huge problem.
Secretary Yellen, how have you engaged the SEC and the Fed
to evaluate the cumulative impact of the proposals, and how can
we be sure that there will be no significant market
disruptions? ``Turbulence'' may be a better word for it.
Secretary Yellen. We have formed an interagency working
group that includes all of those agencies and Treasury and the
New York Fed to focus on the resilience and operation of the
Treasury market. It is critically important to us that the
Treasury market is well-functioning, deeply liquid, and can
enable the dollar to be the most secure asset of any in the
world, and they are looking at specifics, including improved
disclosure. They have taken the view that increased central
clearing can make the Treasury market more resilient, and they
are considering many factors.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Lucas. My time has expired but not my concerns.
Mr. Barr. Thank you. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott,
is recognized.
Mr. Scott. Secretary Yellen, in its 2023 annual report,
FSOC identified several market vulnerabilities related to
commercial real estate lending. FSOC specifically identified
significant concentrations in the commercial real estate for
many of our regional and community banks as a risk to our
entire banking system, which means our entire economy, and I
want to ask you your thoughts on that.
And you went a little bit further in that report: ``The
vulnerabilities to the regional and community banks are
negative trends in the office market and an erosion in high
multifamily property values.'' Now, Secretary Yellen, we are
talking about the backbone. These communities and regional
banks are the backbone of our banking system for most of the
American people.
So my question to you is, given that the commercial real
estate loans are the largest loan category for half of U.S.
banks, and that one-quarter have commercial real estate loan
portfolios that are significantly larger relative to their
capital reserves, Secretary Yellen, should we not be concerned
that a spillover effect could lead to banks lending less to
other very important sectors of the economy, like our American
people?
Secretary Yellen. Thank you for that question. Commercial
real estate is an area that FSOC focused on in its annual
report, and it is something that the Financial Stability
Oversight Council addresses in its meetings on a regular basis
because, as you mentioned, many, especially smaller and
regional banks, have concentrations of commercial real estate
lending. I think office properties in some cities are of
special concern because vacancy rates have increased, and there
have been declines in property value.
Mr. Scott. Yes, and my time is slipping by, but I have to
ask your opinion on something that is very, very important to
me, and that is the implementation of this Basel III Endgame
proposal. As you know, the largest banks would be required to
hold more capital for their actual risk taking, and I remain
deeply concerned that this will further diminish the credit
capacities and weaken the economic conditions of our American
people. Tell me your thoughts on this Basel Endgame business?
Secretary Yellen. The banking agencies, I know, have
received many comments that have expressed this concern, and
the heads of those agencies, the financial regulators, have
expressed a commitment----
Mr. Scott. I have such respect for you and your economic
genius and prowess in the financial system, and I think the
majority of our committee is very much against it. How do you
feel about it? Are you with us on this? This will be terrible
for our economy.
Secretary Yellen. I think it is important to ensure that
credit availability is not significantly diminished, and----
Mr. Scott. But do you support this Endgame business with
Basel?
Secretary Yellen. I do believe it is important to have a
strong banking system with adequate----
Mr. Scott. I really wanted a, ``yes'' or, ``no.''
Secretary Yellen. ----capital.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Sessions, is now recognized.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Madam
Secretary, welcome back. You are here today to discuss this
annual report of 2023 from FSOC, and I want to refer to, if you
have someone there giving you notes, page 10 of the report. But
I'd like to start with, on February 16, 2022, then-Chairman of
the Budget Committee, John Yarmuth, said in a well-understood
statement, ``Congress need not worry about rising borrowing
costs because we can print all the money we need.'' The
national debt at that time was $30 trillion, it is now $34
trillion, and the national debt will triple, just a projection,
from $475 billion in 2022 to $1.4 trillion in 2032.
At what point does this become a problem? I say this
because your own report says on page 10, ``Higher interest
rates and slowing economic growth--they correspond to each
other--have increased nonfinancial corporate credit risk. If
credit quality significantly worsens, a potential wave of debt
defaults could lead us to large redemptions at investment funds
with significant liquidity mismatches and, in turn, disrupt
bond market functions. Moreover, such defaults may have a
cascading effect across broader financial markets.''
Madam Secretary, tell me about what Chairman John Yarmuth,
a Democrat from Kentucky, said, and tell me your viewpoint.
Secretary Yellen. Well, let me make sure. Your question was
about the Federal debt, was it not?
Mr. Sessions. Of course, it is. That's what John Yarmuth
was talking about.
Secretary Yellen. Yes.
Mr. Sessions. The Chairman of the Budget Committee.
Secretary Yellen. I think it is critically important that
the U.S. be on a fiscally-sustainable path, and President Biden
has put forward a series of budget proposals, most recently----
Mr. Sessions. Spending proposals.
Secretary Yellen. No, and also tax proposals and investment
proposals that would, I believe, guarantee that we are on a
fiscally-sustainable path.
Mr. Sessions. Does that mean ever attempting to balance any
one particular year over the next 50 years?
Secretary Yellen. I don't think the budget needs to be
balanced to be on a fiscally----
Mr. Sessions. This is what I wanted to get at. Your
tendency is to say, as Mr. Yarmuth did, that Congress need not
worry about rising borrowing costs. As you know, Treasury and
the Fed are going to have to go to the marketplace and pay an
extra large amount of money because of the risk that our debt
now poses to the United States. And they are paying record
amounts for Treasury, which takes money that is in banks, local
banks, out of local banks that provide small business loans,
housing loans, that provide agricultural loans, that do all of
these things. It is moving, shifting the marketplace literally
$10 trillion from where it had been in stability now to the
Fed.
Secretary Yellen. I believe that----
Mr. Sessions. And we are paying for that.
Secretary Yellen. I agree with you that we need to be on a
fiscally-sustainable path, and it is critical to reduce
deficits in order to ensure that is the case. And that is why
President Biden's budget for 2024 proposed an additional $2.5
trillion of deficit reduction, coupled with investments in our
economy, that are critical to ensure that we grow and collect
tax revenues that are----
Mr. Sessions. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I would tell you
that putting 10 million new illegal people in this country, and
living in Central Texas, seeing the Federal Government let all
these people in, give them free ticket rides, cellphones, go to
the city of their choice, live in housing to knock children out
of their own school, protect them at Chicago International
Airport, doing all these things is not wise management of our
resources. Madam Secretary, I want to thank you for being here.
And Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Barr. I thank the gentleman, and the gentlewoman from
New York, Ms. Velazquez, is now recognized.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Yellen,
welcome to the committee, and thank you for being here. I just
want to say that I have great respect for my friend and
colleague, Mr. Scott, but he does not speak for all members on
this side of the aisle on the Basel III proposal. I, for one,
support stronger capital requirements at our largest
institutions, and I want the record to reflect that.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
Ms. Velazquez. Ms. Yellen, the FSOC's annual report
identifies property insurance, which is becoming prohibitively
expensive or inaccessible for homeowners and developers, as an
increasing risk to financial stability. This is becoming a more
pervasive issue in my community, particularly when it comes to
affordable housing. How is FIO working with the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) insurance
carriers and State regulators to analyze this increasingly-
important issue?
Secretary Yellen. Thank you for that question. We are very
focused on rising insurance costs in particular areas of the
country and the risks that it poses to homeowners, to banks,
and to financial stability. FIO has been working to improve our
understanding of the ways in which climate change is impacting
the availability and cost of insurance coverage, and in early
January, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) approved a
data collection effort by FIO that would be at the ZIP Code
level to collect granular data to evaluate what is happening to
insurance premiums and availability across the country. FIO
looks to work with the NAIC, which is engaging in a similar
effort to reduce the burden associated with this data
collection, and that collaboration is ongoing.
Ms. Velazquez. And how is FIO working to ensure that it is
not duplicating efforts already conducted by the NAIC or State
regulators?
Secretary Yellen. There is a collaboration. The focus and
need for data is slightly different for NAIC and FIO, but I
think there is a good chance that they will be able to
collaborate and go out with a single collection in order to
collaborate and reduce burdens on insurance companies.
Ms. Velazquez. And has the Council or FIO had any
conversations with HUD on how these insurance premiums are
impacting the operation of its affordable housing programs?
Secretary Yellen. I believe that FIO and the Council have
had discussions. I know they have had discussions with other
agencies. I am not positive. I assume HUD would be in them, but
I'd have to verify that.
Ms. Velazquez. I will encourage your Department to really
talk to HUD because we cannot address the affordability crisis
that we have in housing in this nation without tackling the
issue of the cost of insurance in our country.
Secretary Yellen. Absolutely.
Ms. Velazquez. Last February, the Treasury Department
published a White Paper that identified several challenges in
the financial services sectors' growing reliance on third-party
cloud service providers. In response, an executive steering
committee was launched by FSOC. How has the executive steering
committee worked with the big three service providers and the
member agencies to reduce identified challenges?
Secretary Yellen. The executive steering group has been
very active on this issue. They have formed, I believe, nine
different public-private workstreams. Each one is looking at a
specific gap that was identified in the report that was issued
last February, and they are trying to understand, also, what
authorities the existing regulatory agencies have and how they
have been using them, and they will release recommendations
later this year.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Mr. Barr. The gentlelady's time has expired. The gentleman
from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is also the Chair of our
Subcommittee on National Security, is now recognized.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome,
Secretary Yellen. It's good to see you today. As Vice Chair of
the House Small Business Committee, it is disappointing that
you still, almost 3 years from your statutory requirement to
show up at a Small Business Committee hearing and give a report
on the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), have not done that.
It is kind of amazing that you and your Administration continue
to pick and choose which laws you want to obey, and which ones
you want to ignore, so I'm very disappointed.
My first question, though, deals with the World Bank. I had
a conversation last week with the president of the World Bank,
and he was talking about the need to increase capital.
Unfortunately, that same board continues to give China
preferential treatment and allows the world's second-largest
economy to be considered a developing nation. My question to
you is, will you commit to making a capital increase
conditional on graduating China from World Bank assistance and
not allowing Beijing's voting power, increasing the voting
power, at the institution?
Secretary Yellen. Let me first say we are not looking for a
capital increase at this time for the World Bank. We do
believe----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I am not saying you did. They are looking
to do that, so my comment is, let's not do that unless you can
get China, who wants to also increase their share, in a corner
and not allow them to continue to be a country that gets
assistance from the World Bank when they have the second-
largest economy in the world, and then allow them to increase
their voting.
Secretary Yellen. Let me say we are strongly opposed to the
World Bank lending to China. We have pushed the World Bank and
other MDBs to reduce and eliminate their lending volume to
China.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Well, my comment is we have to work
harder. We have to make sure they don't have access to that
Bank. It is very important.
You made a comment a minute ago that I really appreciate
from the standpoint of the concern I have with AI. It is a
wonderful technology, hopefully it can do wonderful things, but
it can also be used for some bad stuff. As we saw with Silicon
Valley Bank, social media, and the 24-hour news cycle,
suddenly, within 10 hours, had $42 billion run out of the bank
as a result of a tweet and social media following that around.
AI could do the very same thing, and I am concerned about that
and have some bills to address that. I haven't gotten a hearing
on them yet, but hopefully that will happen soon.
Along those lines, though, you talked about FSOC's role in
these three banks and how you were able to help resolve the
situation. My question to you is, what has FSOC done to fix the
situation with these banks that are upside down with their
interest rates? Their business models are off. They should be
regulated differently. They should be forced to change how they
are operating. Are you doing that?
Secretary Yellen. The responsibility for supervision of
these banks and regulation rests with the banking agency.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I agree with that, Madam Secretary. The
problem is you, as the Chair overseeing the Comptroller, also
have the ability to go in and change these business models. Are
you doing that with the national banks that you oversee?
Secretary Yellen. The Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency (OCC) is an independent agency within Treasury. The
FSOC is trying to understand and discusses the extent to
which----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Madam Secretary, FSOC has a tremendous
amount of control over this. They can dictate how these things
are done----
Secretary Yellen. That is not----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. ----how regulatory attitudes are toward
situations. My question is, are you taking an active role in
trying to get the banking models that are upside down and
beyond the norm--are you getting them back in order?
Secretary Yellen. I would say that the supervision of
interest rate risk and liquidity risk is a responsibility of
the banking agencies, and----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I agree, but you oversee the banking
agencies.
Secretary Yellen. We do not----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I am hoping that you have some directions
to those agencies to----
Secretary Yellen. We do not oversee the agencies. We
identify risks and sometimes make recommendations to agencies
about actions that they should take.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. With all due respect, that is----
Secretary Yellen. And they do have frameworks for managing
liquidity----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. I have one more----
Secretary Yellen. ----capital interest rate risk, and----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. ----question to ask you here very quickly.
Last week, Chair McHenry, Mr. Jordan, Mr. Huizenga, and I sent
a letter to Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN)
Director Gacki highlighting how FinCEN, an agency created to
promote our national security, was using its authorities to
target law-abiding citizens with countervailing political
views. These allegations are reminiscent of the Obama
Administration's Operation Choke Point that I spent years
investigating as the Chair of our Financial Institutions
Subcommittee. I am just very concerned about that. We are going
to have Director Gacki here very soon, and we are going to ask
her about her involvement with you and your response to that.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The Secretary
is directed to respond to that question in writing, if she
could.
Secretary Yellen. Yes, I will.
Mr. Barr. Thank you.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Cleaver, is now
recognized.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary,
thank you for being here today. I want to follow up on my
friend and colleague, Mr. Scott's, earlier question. I think he
started out in this direction, and then was running out of time
and went in another direction.
In my community, in Kansas City, Missouri, there is a great
deal of concern, and I would imagine around the whole country,
that even though the pandemic is not taking all of the lives
that it was taking a couple of years ago, its impact is still
here, particularly on the economic level. I think of that Trepp
Company analysis of commercial real estate, and they issued a
frightening report that there is about $448 billion worth of
loans that matured last year, $270 billion of which were from
banks, and we have some people breaking leases, and we have
others trying to renegotiate leases.
In my estimation, we have a problem with our commercial
real estate, and I think that is where Mr. Scott was going,
that it could impact other components of the economy. Do you
have a concern about where commercial real estate is and may
continue to go?
Secretary Yellen. Yes, I do have a concern about commercial
real estate. We discuss it in the FSOC annual report, and FSOC
has been quite focused on it. The banking supervisors have also
been focused on commercial real estate and are working closely
with the banks they supervise to discuss ways to manage and
work with borrowers who have problems. They are, in some cases,
working to make sure that loan loss reserves are built up to
cover losses, that dividend policies are appropriate, and that
liquidity is adequate. The higher interest rate environment
and, in some cases, particularly in the case of office
buildings, shifts in work patterns due to the pandemic, coupled
with many commercial real estate loans coming due and needing
to be refinanced in a context where vacancy rates in some
cities are quite high, is going to put a lot of stress on the
owners of these properties. And the banking agencies are very
focused on helping the banks manage these situations.
Mr. Cleaver. So, you are concerned but not distressed?
Secretary Yellen. Yes, I am concerned. I believe it is
manageable, although there may be some institutions that are
quite stressed by this problem.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you. Madam Secretary, are you familiar
with Larry Kudlow, the former Director of the National Economic
Council?
Secretary Yellen. Sure.
Mr. Cleaver. Three days ago, he conceded that his
prediction of a recession was wrong and admitted that the U.S.
economy is doing much better than expected under President Joe
Biden, and he said that on Fox News. He offered a mea culpa
because if you look at some of his comments previous to that,
everything was horrible. Do you agree with Mr. Kudlow that the
U.S. economy is headed in the right direction?
Secretary Yellen. I absolutely believe it is headed in the
right direction. Our growth is extremely strong. The labor
market is at least as strong as it was prior to the pandemic.
It has been 50 years since we have had a string of unemployment
rates this long, under 4 percent, and job creation remains
utterly robust. More people are participating in the labor
market----
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
Secretary Yellen. And inflation is way down.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The gentleman
from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, who is also the Chair of our
Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee, is now recognized.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will just note
to my friend from Missouri that when the government is throwing
that much money into the economy, yes, it has been propped up.
I will also note it is so strong that the Federal Reserve
cannot lower interest rates with unexpected job growth in those
areas, so we are seeing inflation continue.
Secretary Yellen, I want to very briefly touch on this--I
think I wrote down a quote of yours, that you are not going to
take a position on the details of the rule. I am talking about
Basel III. Mr. Lucas responded, ``So any concerns don't rise to
the level of feedback.'' Mr. Scott brought it up. A number of
us have brought it up, on both sides of the aisle. So who are
you giving your thoughts to on Basel III, because clearly, with
your background--Federal Reserve, FSOC, Treasury--you must have
thoughts about Basel III. You are not willing to share them
with us, but who are you sharing those thoughts with?
Secretary Yellen. I meet on a regular basis with all of the
heads of supervisory agencies, including the OCC, the FDIC----
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. And the President, I would assume, too?
You are sharing that with the President, your thoughts?
Secretary Yellen. I haven't had a meeting with the
President on this specific topic.
Mr. Huizenga. Then, I am left to assume that we are just to
be left in the dark until things get sorted out, correct?
Secretary Yellen. They have put out a notice of proposed
rulemaking. They are evaluating----
Mr. Huizenga. I know that, but you have had a number of
people on both sides of the aisle asking your opinion, your
learned, educated, experienced opinion about it, and you have
refused to offer any of those insights to us. So, I can't come
to any conclusion other than you are sharing those insights
with others, but you are not willing to share them with
Congress, which is your choice. I think it is a bad choice, but
that is your choice.
I want to very quickly take you down a path, and I am
trying to be an equal opportunity questioner on this because I
just asked Secretary Fudge this not that long ago. With the
disaster at the FDIC under Marty Gruenberg's leadership and the
culture--I am sure you saw the article that all of us saw in
November regarding the unacceptable behaviors that have been
happening there--I am concerned how it might impact their
mission and, most importantly, how it can potentially spill
over into the safety and soundness of our financial system.
Following those revelations at the FDIC, did you take any steps
at Treasury to make sure that Treasury isn't suffering from
some of that same culture.
Secretary Yellen. We have a rigorous process for reporting
an investigation of----
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Nothing new necessarily, and I am not
trying to be accusatory. I am not saying that there is a
culture problem under your leadership. I am just curious if
that prompted you to respond, and since the FDIC is part of
FSOC as well, there are multiple times that you would have
interacted.
Secretary Yellen. I am not aware of any such allegations at
Treasury.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. I am not either. That is not what I am
saying. I just wanted to be clear. I am asking everybody, when
they saw the culture problems at the FDIC, did that prompt
anybody to change behavior or double down on making sure that
whistleblowers are protected and those kinds of things.
Secretary Yellen. We certainly believe in whistleblower
protections and having in place systems that guard against the
kind of thing that is alleged.
Mr. Huizenga. Good. I will accept that answer. I have a
minute-and-a-half left here and I want to shift topics to the
CFRAC Committee that was established almost a year-and-a-half
ago, the Climate-related Financial Risk Advisory Committee
under FSOC. It looks like, according to the website, they have
met twice: March 7th of 2023 and July 18th. Your report devotes
a lot of time to the potential impacts of climate change. In
fact, you say that is one of the things the Council is focused
on: Member agencies enhancing assessment efforts and increasing
coordination around climate-related financial stability risks.
That is in your written testimony. Has there been a problem?
Has there been a lack of cooperation or coordination?
Secretary Yellen. No, I think CFRAC is----
Mr. Huizenga. Then, why are you having to enhance those
assessment efforts?
Secretary Yellen. All of the agencies are increasingly
focused on understanding the risks relating to climate change.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay.
Secretary Yellen. And it is appropriate for them to work
together to exchange information.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. In my closing seconds here, are there
any CFRAC meetings that have not been listed on the website?
Secretary Yellen. Not to the best of my knowledge.
Mr. Huizenga. Could you check on that and please get back
to me?
Secretary Yellen. Certainly.
Mr. Huizenga. And I guess I will finish with this. I am
sure you are aware that the SEC has been working on their
climate rule for 2 years. Do they consult or do they just jam
the rest of FSOC like they have been jamming those whom they
are trying to regulate?
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
Secretary Yellen. The SEC's rule, I am supportive of their
requiring disclosure on----
Mr. Barr. Any additional comments can be submitted for the
record.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barr. Thank you.
The gentlewoman from Ohio, Mrs. Beatty, is now recognized.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters. Secretary Yellen, thank you so much for being here
today testifying, and, also, I want to take this moment to
thank you for clearly outlining for us risk factors, but then
identifying the five areas that you are working on with the
risk factors and for being very transparent about that, and
also for the work that you do to keep our financial system safe
and secure.
I would like to start with climate-related financial risk.
The FSOC report identifies climate change as an emerging and
rising threat to the United States' financial stability. I,
too, am concerned about this threat, especially considering the
fact that low-income and minority households are more likely to
face greater climate risk. Can you explain why these
communities are at greater risk and how failing to address
climate risk can exacerbate certain disparities that are
already at risk, such as housing values and the costs
associated with homeownership in some communities?
Secretary Yellen. I believe there is a large body of
research which shows that low-income communities are more
exposed to some of the physical impacts of climate change and
that they may be less able to afford protections, whether it is
for their home or insurance, that are necessary to guard
against it, so it is a severe risk to low-income communities.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you. Let me turn now to FSOC's guidance
on the designation of nonbanks as systemically important. First
of all, let me thank you for your leadership in issuing this
guidance. As we see increasingly large roles that nonbanks are
playing in the financial system, it is clear that any strategy
to protect financial stability must also cover nonbanks.
Nevertheless, there have been some concerns about due process
for nonbanks that are designated as systemically important.
FSOC's guidance emphasizes that the nonbank designation process
will entail engagement with both the company and its current
financial regulator, if it has one.
Can you describe what other due process protections exist
for the company, for example, the ability to request a hearing,
meetings with FSOC staff, or the need for a two-thirds vote for
destination in annual FSOC reevaluations?
Secretary Yellen. I think you just listed the protections
the company would be provided with, with a great deal of
information from FSOC. If it completed stage one and entered
stage two, it would have the opportunity to provide any
information that it thought was eligible, the right to a
hearing, and, as you said, designation requires a two-thirds
vote, including the vote of the Chair.
Mrs. Beatty. And lastly, when I was the Chair of our
Diversity and Inclusion (DEI) Subcommittee, and you would come
before the subcommittee--I think it is important, again, for me
to thank you--you always had some of the highest numbers, or
you admitted what you were doing and working on it.
Secretary Yellen. Thank you.
Mrs. Beatty. In light of all that is happening across this
country, including in financial institutions, I am concerned
about the effect that DEI rollbacks at financial institutions
will have on our financial stability and on access to financial
services in low-income or marginalized communities. I don't
know if you have any comments or are you concerned when we are
still struggling in America to make it look like America?
Secretary Yellen. Certainly. Let me say the Biden
Administration, Treasury, and other agencies I am aware of, we
have a robust and committed agenda to promote diversity in all
of the work we do, not only in terms of our hiring, but in
terms of all of the programs. For example, at Treasury, we have
undertaken research that you are probably well aware of which
shows that low-income individuals, African Americans, are
disadvantaged by the way the earned income tax credit has been.
So, we are trying root out----
Mr. Barr. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary Yellen.
Mr. Barr. The gentlelady from Missouri, Mrs. Wagner, who is
also the Chair of our Subcommittee on Capital Markets, is now
recognized.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Yellen, as
Treasury Secretary, you championed requirements that any
deposit flows into Americans' bank accounts totaling as little
as $600 are to be reported to the IRS. Increasingly, we are
hearing that the Federal Government is suggesting that banks
search private financial transactions using highly-partisan
political terms, or check to see if customers made purchases
that could be associated with legal sales of firearms or even
religious texts. My question is this: Has Treasury, including
FinCEN or Federal banking agencies like the Fed, the FDIC, or
the OCC, instructed financial institutions to search Americans'
legal transactions in attempts to surveil their purchases?
Secretary Yellen. We received a letter from you, I believe,
on this topic, and we intend to investigate fully and to
respond.
Mrs. Wagner. Have you instructed banks, financial
institutions, to provide this information?
Secretary Yellen. FinCEN's job is to work with financial
institutions to make sure they instruct----
Mrs. Wagner. Are they instructing, ma'am, financial
institutions to search Americans' legal transactions in
attempts to surveil their purchases?
Secretary Yellen. I promise a thorough look into everything
that has occurred----
Mrs. Wagner. Well, this is really concerning, and I would
hope that you get to it just as quickly as possible, Secretary
Yellen, I am going to give this a shot, too, since we all have,
on both sides of the aisle. The Financial Stability Oversight
Council, which you chair, Madam Secretary, you chair FSOC----
Secretary Yellen. I am aware of that.
Mrs. Wagner. In 2023, FSOC put out their annual report
plainly stating that, ``The U.S. banking system remains
resilient overall,'' and, ``U.S. banks continue to have sound
levels of regulatory capital.'' Do you still stand by these
statements, ma'am?
Secretary Yellen. As an overall statement, I do.
Mrs. Wagner. Then, what is the need for the proposed
massive increases in regulatory capital requirements from the
Fed, the FDIC, and the OCC?
Secretary Yellen. They have proposed regulations to enhance
the safety and soundness of----
Mrs. Wagner. But you just said that the safety and
soundness is there. It is resilient. They are well-capitalized.
It is clear, and as a Chair, your report.
Secretary Yellen. There are risks that their guidance
suggests could be handled better than it has been.
Mrs. Wagner. Okay. Let me move on. Secretary Yellen, in a
2019 letter to Secretary Mnuchin, and in 2021 testimony to the
Senate Banking Committee, you said that, ``Activities-based
regulation is the appropriate approach for asset management.''
Given the FSOC's recent guidance regarding the designation of
nonbank financial institutions as systemically important, do
you still stand by those public statements?
Secretary Yellen. I am not sure that I made such a sweeping
statement as you read.
Mrs. Wagner. I have it right here. It is a letter. I would
like to submit it for the record, please. This is your letter
with those words, ma'am.
Mr. Barr. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mrs. Wagner. So, I would tell you to go back to your 2019
letter, and then again to your Senate Banking testimony in
2020.
Secretary Yellen. 2019, did you say?
Mrs. Wagner. In 2019, in a letter to Secretary Mnuchin, and
in 2021, in your testimony to the Senate Banking Committee, you
said, ``Activities-based regulation is the appropriate approach
for asset management.'' I want to know why FSOC is saying that
designations of nonbank financial institutions are systemically
important. Clearly, others don't think so. What do you believe
FSOC did wrong that led to the courts vacating the MetLife
designation in 2016, ma'am?
Secretary Yellen. Look, there is no preferred approach to
how to handle a financial stability risk that has been
identified. In some cases, and perhaps this is what I was
referring to, if that is an accurate quote, we----
Mrs. Wagner. It is.
Secretary Yellen. ----are, for example, concerned about
risks associated with money market funds. We have been----
Mrs. Wagner. Are you doing a cost-benefit analysis,
anything?
Secretary Yellen. Excuse me. We have been concerned about
the pressures on open-end bond funds that can be forced to sell
less-liquid assets. These are industry-wide practices that
are----
Mrs. Wagner. A court has already vacated you once, ma'am.
Secretary Yellen. ----addressed with an activity-based
approach.
Mrs. Wagner. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Secretary Yellen. The SEC----
Mr. Barr. The Secretary may respond in writing with the
remainder of the answer.
The gentlelady's time has expired. The gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, is now recognized.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, would
you like additional time to express your thoughts there? You
were sort of cut off. Rather than adding them in writing, would
you like some time to respond?
Secretary Yellen. Yes, if I could just----
Mr. Lynch. Or we could move on, it's your choice.
Secretary Yellen. Thank you. If I could finish the thought.
Mr. Lynch. That would be great, yes.
Secretary Yellen. Sometimes, activity-based regulation is
the appropriate approach when there is an industry-wide
practice of concern, as, for example, as the situation has
been, in the situation with money market funds or with open-end
bond funds. However, sometimes the risks have to do with a
particular institution. For example, the largest U.S. banking
organizations recognize that their failure could result in a
threat to financial stability. The same could be true of a
nonbank institution, and in that case, designation is
appropriate, but the appropriate form of response by FSOC
depends entirely on the specifics of a situation and the
threat. And I thank the gentleman for his time.
Mrs. Wagner. And I thank the gentleman for his time.
Mr. Lynch. Reclaiming my time, that makes perfect sense,
Madam Secretary. Recently, FSOC identified the use of
artificial intelligence in financial services as an emerging
vulnerability in the U.S. financial system, and not very long
after that, Chairman McHenry and Ranking Member Waters created
a bipartisan working group on artificial intelligence, and I
have the good fortune of being the top Democrat on that working
group.
I have some concerns. There are some opportunities, I
think, to use artificial intelligence in a thoughtful way. I
think about the work that FinCEN does in trying to analyze
suspicious activity reports (SARs) and currency transaction
reports (CTRs), and how they might analyze those. But I think
there is also a risk on the explainability end of some of these
algorithms that are being used, and also the fact that many
smaller firms, rather than developing their own data sets and
developing their own artificial intelligence, are just simply
buying them. And I am not quite sure that they have the
expertise or the personnel to make sure that technology is used
in a compliant way with existing financial regulation and laws.
Do you have a sense of whether we have the capacity in the
industry to onboard much of this artificial intelligence that
vendors are offering to financial firms?
Secretary Yellen. We are concerned. This year, FSOC
identified the use of AI in the financial sector as a potential
financial stability risk, and at the moment, we are trying to
understand what the risks are, some of them are related to, as
you said, explainability when models are used and generate
outputs. I believe the CFPB has been clear that financial
institutions, when they take credit actions, have to explain to
the customer what the reason is and not to be able to say,
well, an AI system generated this result. But there are a whole
variety of risks to customers, to cyber, and we are trying to
build our expertise and work with the financial sector to
address these risks.
Mr. Lynch. At least from Treasury's position, do you accept
the fact that when a financial firm acquires AI, that AI
company, that vendor, is now a covered entity under financial
services laws? Is that accepted, or is that still in dispute?
Secretary Yellen. I am not sure. I need to get back to you
on that.
Mr. Lynch. Okay.
Secretary Yellen. But certainly, when it comes to third-
party providers, the banking regulators, for example, do have
authority to make sure that----
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
Secretary Yellen. ----are being----
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Mr. Barr. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes. Madam
Secretary, you tout a historic recovery, a healthy labor
market, and economic strength, and Larry Kudlow's name was
invoked earlier in this hearing, the former Trump White House
Economic Advisor. I know Larry Kudlow, and, yes, he
acknowledged that we are not in a recession right now, and I
wouldn't presume to speak for Larry Kudlow, but I do think he
would agree with me that asking Americans to feel good about
Bidenomics is like asking them to smile during a root canal.
The discomfort is just too hard to ignore.
Americans continue to suffer from the effects of 40-year
high inflation experienced throughout the Biden term so far,
including lingering high prices. And the Administration may
wish to tout inflation numbers coming down, but, Madam
Secretary, you are an economist, and as you know, inflation,
which is the rate of increase in prices, should not be confused
with the overall level of prices. And prices have continued to
rise even as the rate of inflation has fallen since the Fed
began an aggressive program of monetary tightening and since
House Republicans put a stop to Washington's spending spree.
As a result, today, even with the decline in the rate of
price increases, a family of four is paying $15,000 more per
year just to purchase the same goods and services compared to
the day President Biden took office. Yet, the Administration's
plan to fix inflation caused by too much spending is even more
spending. That is why the Inflation Reduction Act is perhaps
the most misnamed legislation in American history, but this is
a supply/demand mismatch. Too much spending created excess
demand. Climate obsession constrained the supply of energy. But
now, the Administration and the Fed are proposing to constrain
the supply of credit, which will exacerbate inflation through
this Basel III Endgame, precisely when corporate and commercial
real estate borrowers will need to refinance at higher rates.
Secretary Yellen, I want to ask you about Basel III. The
heterogeneity and business model diversity within the banking
sector distributes and diffuses risk across the system and, I
believe, contributes to systemwide financial stability. The
Basel III Endgame proposal would de facto repeal regulatory
tailoring, subjecting Category 3 and 4 regional banks to one-
size-fits-all standards that currently apply to G-SIBs,
eliminate the use of internal risk models, and transition the
industry and regulators toward a standardized framework,
reducing business model diversity, and push financial
intermediation and lending outside of the bank regulatory
perimeter. The banking industry will get smaller and more
concentrated as a result. How does any of this reduce systemic
risk?
Secretary Yellen. Having strong capital and liquidity and
resolution standards, I believe, does diminish systemic risk,
and I think we have seen a clear example of this in the ability
of the banking system to weather the pandemic.
Mr. Barr. Yes, ma'am, and reclaiming my time.
Secretary Yellen. But there are----
Mr. Barr. Quickly, reclaiming my time, you have said many
times that our banking system is currently well-capitalized. Do
you agree that a less-diverse banking system, a barbell banking
system, banks under $100 billion not directly affected by this
proposal and Wall Street too-big-to-fail fail banks but no
regional banks because of the forced consolidation this would
provide, and less-diverse business models that this proposal
will produce--do you believe that strengthens financial
stability or undermines stability?
Secretary Yellen. I think we benefit from having a diverse
banking system with institutions that meet different needs of
different firms----
Mr. Barr. I agree.
Secretary Yellen. ----and different households.
Mr. Barr. And, Secretary----
Secretary Yellen. Banking agencies have received extensive
comments on all of these issues, and----
Mr. Barr. I know, and just reclaiming my time because I
only have a minute left, I agree with you that diversity and
heterogeneity in the banking system and diverse business models
actually diffuses risk, and FSOC should consider that as they
consider Basel III Endgame.
So to my final question, continuing with this topic of
consolidation, which I believe Basel III would accelerate, the
OCC's recent proposal on mergers and acquisitions would ban
mergers for nationally-chartered banks, even if it is a
transaction for a smaller community development financial
institution (CDFI) or adding essential technology expertise.
Even the smallest banks would face new scrutiny and prolonged
delays of mergers that could threaten their viability. The
OCC's proposal will increase the likelihood of costly and
disorderly bank failures and decrease competition for G-SIBs.
Secretary Yellen, won't this proposal increase systemic risk
and reduce banking services?
Secretary Yellen. I'm sorry. I think this is a question for
the Acting Comptroller of the Currency rather than----
Mr. Barr. My time has expired, but I think it is an FSOC
issue, the fact that you would not have orderly consolidation
and resultant bank failures. That is a systemic risk issue for
you, Madam Secretary.
With that, my time has expired, and the gentleman from
California, Mr. Vargas, is now recognized.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
very much, Madam Secretary, for being here. I appreciate it
very much. I am going to try a couple of questions here. First
question, a trivia question, who was the last Republican
President who ran a budget surplus?
Secretary Yellen. I can't think of one, but----
Mr. Vargas. Think hard, because I don't remember, but every
time I hear----
Secretary Yellen. I certainly remember that Bill Clinton
did.
Mr. Vargas. Oh, Bill Clinton. Was he a Republican?
Secretary Yellen. I don't believe so.
Mr. Vargas. I don't believe so, either. Yes, it is
interesting that every time you get up here, you hear these
guys on the other side start touting their fiscal
responsibility, and yet, every time they have a President, they
either jack up the deficit, ruin the surplus, or destroy the
economy, and then we come in and we fix it, and then they are
upset, and once again, they become fiscal hawks. I do have
something I have to get off my chest, though, about you, and
that is, I think you are probably the smartest person who comes
and testifies before us, and I think most people would agree
with that.
Secretary Yellen. Thank you.
Mr. Vargas. And yet, every time you used to come and they
used to beat you up on inflation, you never put it in the
context of what was happening in Europe and the rest of the
world. You would simply try to explain inflation within our own
country, and it used to drive me nuts, because we are doing
better than the rest of the world.
Secretary Yellen. We are.
Mr. Vargas. You never said that, and I was too far down the
totem pole here to ever be able to get to ask you that
question.
Secretary Yellen. If you look at the United States vis-a-
vis other advanced countries, we have by far the strongest
growth. Inflation has fallen more in the United States than in
any of these other advanced countries, with the exception of
Japan that has a different set of issues. And importantly, real
wages, inflation-adjusted wages--I believe we are the only
country that, since the pandemic, has seen those increase. And
I think, according to our calculations, if you compare today
with 2019 before the pandemic, the typical American household
has enjoyed wage increases large enough that the median worker
is able to buy the same basket of goods as in 2019 with $1,400
left over to spend or save. So, we have gotten ahead in the
United States. It has been an equitable recovery, and includes
even the strongest gains for low-income people.
Mr. Vargas. I agree with all that, and I wish you would
have said it before, because it always used to annoy the heck
out of me because you would lead with your chin. Again, I think
you are the smartest person here, and maybe the good thing is
that you are not political, and that is why I think you would
lead right into their questions, which were political
questions. They were really sophist, if you study the Bible.
They were really asking you questions to try to do a,
``gotcha,'' and it always used to annoy the heck out of me that
you never explained it this way. I am glad you did today.
I do want to talk about climate. That is the issue that has
also driven me mad these last 2 decades. I have been preaching
this for a long time, saying we have to do something about it.
I did work in the insurance industry for a while, and whenever
you had a big event, we called a cat or catastrophe, and you
numbered them by a year, catastrophe: 5-year, 15-year, 20-year,
25-year, 50-year or 100-year. We just had what they would call
a thousand-year in San Diego, and now we are having what we
call a hundred-year event again in San Diego. There are no
longer cats of 100 years. They are happening all the time, and
it is the weather. This is a real risk.
Secretary Yellen. Absolutely. It is clear that is exactly
what we are seeing, and vulnerable parts of the country,
whether it is California or Florida, in some cases in New York,
or Louisiana, we are getting priced out of insurance. Either
the rates are becoming unaffordable or insurance companies
don't want to bear the risk, can't reinsure adequately and are
pulling out.
Mr. Vargas. There is a line in insurance----
Secretary Yellen. And it is causing tremendous problems.
Mr. Vargas. ----Madam Secretary, that you should know.
There is never a bad risk, only a bad price, and when they take
a look at this and they see what it is going to cost them,
these actuaries, they are soulless people. They sit in a room
and they find out what it is going to cost them, and they are
not in the business of losing money. And they look at Florida,
they look at these places and say, we are not going to lose
money. That is why they don't want to insure there.
Secretary Yellen. Absolutely.
Mr. Vargas. They are soulless people. I am not saying they
are bad people. They just don't have a soul.
[laughter]
Secretary Yellen. They don't understand insurance.
Mr. Vargas. My time is up. Again, I thank you very much.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. There is bipartisan laughter at
actuary humor. We will now go to the Chair of the House Small
Business Committee, Mr. Williams of Texas.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you very much. I am a car
dealer, not an insurance guy, so let me put that out there.
The crisis at our southern border has spiraled out of
control, and the Biden Administration has done little to
nothing to secure the border and keep Americans safe. This
increase in illegal immigration raises concerns on how the
increase in migrants coming down across the border is impacting
our financial network and opening the door to financial crimes.
Money laundering, drug and human trafficking, and financial
fraud will continue to plague our communities if nothing is
done.
I recently introduced the Evaluating Financial Impacts of
Illegal Immigration Act, which requires FSOC to include illegal
immigration risk, an emerging threat to our financial system,
in their annual report and provide recommendations to mitigate
these risks. Our States and cities are not equipped to deal
with the influx of millions of migrants who put a significant
strain on our public resources. We must hold government
agencies accountable to report on how illegal immigration
impacts Main Street and the larger financial system.
So, Secretary Yellen, this will be easy. Just yes or no, do
you agree that illegal immigration is a potential threat to our
financial system? Yes or no?
Secretary Yellen. I can't answer it just yes or no. You
have pointed out some risks that are associated with
immigration, and whether or not that is a threat to our
financial stability is a complicated determination.
Mr. Williams of Texas. So, you would say, yes?
Secretary Yellen. I would not say, yes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. You would say, no.
Secretary Yellen. I say it requires further analysis.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. As I previously mentioned, we
have seen the strain that illegal immigration has and will
continue to have on our public resources. Therefore, I think it
is necessary to see how far these impacts reach, and I request
that you use your power as the Chair of the Financial Stability
Oversight Council to investigate this emerging risk, okay?
Over the last year, our nation's Federal banking agencies
have been bombarding our financial system with excessive
regulations and dangerous proposals like Basel III Endgame,
which will dramatically affect the banking community and have
other broad impacts on Americans' ability to access reliable
credit. These increases in costs will make it harder for
Americans to obtain a loan. Whether they want to start their
own business, expand current business operations, or buy their
own home, small businesses and everyday Americans rely heavily
on loans and credit lines from banks of all sizes to access the
capital they need to do so.
Multiple regulators, including Chairman Powell, have come
before this committee and testified that our banking system is
already well-capitalized and resilient, and FSOC's 2023 annual
report stated that banks continue to have sound levels of
regulatory capital. So, Madam Secretary, if FSOC and Federal
banking regulators have repeatedly identified the U.S. banking
system as capitalized and resilient, then what is the need for
the proposed massive increases in regulatory capital called for
in the Basel III Endgame proposal? And also, how can we ensure
proposals are good public policy when they lack a rigorous
cost-benefit analysis?
Secretary Yellen. I believe that the banking agencies, in
putting out their rule, have pretty clearly articulated what
their concerns are with the way in which operations risk and
market risk are handled, and some of the ways in which internal
models are used to evaluate credit risk. And I know they have
received many comments, and we will take those seriously in
coming up with a revised final rule proposal.
Mr. Williams of Texas. In the time that I have remaining,
in 2023, FSOC listed climate change as a vulnerability to our
financial system. Under the Biden Administration, financial
regulators are calling for climate policies to be included in
banking regulations, which extends the Federal banking system
beyond its intended purpose and threatens the agencies' long-
term independence. This sets a dangerous precedent that could
lead to overall polarization of our financial system. Quickly,
Secretary Yellen, is FSOC exploring nature-related financial
risks, and will they urge Federal banking agencies to issue
guidance to financial institutions on how to manage purported
nature-related financial risks?
Secretary Yellen. The banking agencies are evaluating what
the impact of climate change is on the institutions they
regulate and working with them to make sure that they are
adequately evaluating the risks that climate change pose, and
those are important supervisory activities that bear on safety
and soundness.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Illinois, Mr. Foster, the ranking member of our Financial
Institutions Subcommittee, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Secretary Yellen, as I discussed in my opening
remarks, I am happy to see FSOC identify artificial
intelligence as an area of concern for the financial system.
While there are clearly benefits of certain applications of AI
in areas like customer service, credit underwriting, and
certain forms of fraud detection, I am worried that we are
heading for a disaster when it comes to generative AI and
deepfakes. Just last week, a finance worker at a multinational
firm was tricked into paying $25 million to scammers following
a multi-person video conference call with whom they thought
were their colleagues, but were, in fact, deep fake AI
impersonations. Not only did the scammers simulate the voice
and likeness of the chief financial officer, they simulated
several of the employees' colleagues at the same time.
Now, I believe that the clearest and cleanest solution to
this issue would be to have a simple but reliable form of
digital ID built in the United States, built off of the
Transportation Security Administration's (TSA's) Real ID
system, and based on National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) technical standards that are already built
into all modern cellphones, then, U.S. citizens could use this
to prove they are who they say they are online and verify their
identity remotely. Several States are rolling out these Mobile
IDs for things like keeping children off porn websites, and
several European and Asian nations have already taken steps to
offer their citizens this form of digital ID backed up by
secure device and biometrics. The EU is moving rapidly towards
a standard, and they are using it from the start to be useful
to verifying financial transactions.
First question, are you aware of the steps that other
nations are taking not only to offer a digital ID but to make
it usable for verifying financial transactions, and do you
believe it would be a useful component in preventing deepfake
AI impersonations here in the United States?
Secretary Yellen. I think you are making a very valuable
suggestion. I know that FSOC and Treasury are engaging on this
issue with financial institutions. Our staff are planning to
issue a report on AI-specific cybersecurity and fraud risks. I
believe they plan to issue that by the end of March. I have not
seen the work myself that they are doing on this report or what
recommendations they will come up with, but I know they will be
doing follow-up work with the financial sector, and I think you
have made a very good suggestion.
Mr. Foster. Yes. Many financial firms I talked to just told
me that a reliable form of digital ID would really simplify the
Anti-Money Laundering/Know Your Customer (AML/KYC) process, and
make it faster, cheaper, and more reliable when they have to
confirm the identity of customers. And you also mentioned the
difficulty with having this spread out in many agencies. For
example, the TSA and the Homeland Security Committee in
Congress sort of are in charge of the mobile ID, the Real ID
system. On the other hand, it is FinCEN and Treasury that would
supervise its use for financial transactions. The actual
technical standards are done by NIST, which is the oversight of
the Science Committee. So, we have at least three congressional
committees that are all siloing this whole thing.
Is there encouragement that you need to get FinCEN, TSA,
and NIST to all work together to deliver a product that can
eliminate deep fake impersonations in financial transactions at
least?
Secretary Yellen. My suggestion would be that my staff
contact you and work with you on the specifics of this and give
you some specific information on exactly what our thinking is
on this. I am not knowledgeable enough to----
Mr. Foster. If you find you need any specific encouragement
from Congress, I think there will be bipartisan support for
that, really, on all the----
Secretary Yellen. Of course, this is a significant risk,
and it is----
Mr. Foster. Okay. Now, in my last 42 seconds here, last
January, I introduced the Strengthening Cybersecurity for the
Financial Sector Act that would give the National Credit Union
Administration (NCUA) and the Federal Housing Finance Authority
(FHFA) the authority to oversee third-party vendors that are
employed by the entities under their purview. Other prudential
regulators already have this authority. However, NCUA's and
FHFA's authority was allowed to expire, and this left a
dangerous gap that leaves consumers and our system at financial
risk. In fact, last November, a cybersecurity breach of third-
party service providers disrupted the operations of 60 credit
unions across 40 States. Can you explain why this authority is
important and the kind of risk that this lack of authority
presents to the financial system?
Secretary Yellen. It is critical to oversee these
providers, and FSOC has recommended that the NCUA and the FHFA
be given these authorities. We appreciate your legislation and
would be glad to work with you on it.
Chairman McHenry. We will now recognize the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam
Secretary, thank you for being with us. It's good to see you
again.
I want to start off by asking you about the nonvoting State
Insurance Commissioner seat on FSOC. While I support the
longstanding idea of State-based insurance regulation, I
recognize that the insurance industry is critical to the
overall stability of our financial system. Nearly every aspect
of our financial system is represented by its primary regulator
on FSOC with a voting seat, but without a voting seat for State
Insurance Commissioners, the Council is missing the direct
input from the primary regulators of the industry. My question
is, do you agree that we should have State insurance regulators
with a voting seat, and if not, why?
Secretary Yellen. I absolutely agree with you that the
insurance sector is critical and needs to be represented. I
would note that there is a voting member of the Council who is
an independent member with insurance expertise. That person is
confirmed to that position, and in addition, there is a State
Insurance Commissioner, a nonvoting member, but someone who
serves a 2-year term designated by the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). So, there is a good deal of
understanding of the insurance industry represented on FSOC,
and I think that is totally appropriate.
Mr. Loudermilk. Do you not feel that it would be better
representing of the primary regulators of the insurance
industry if the nonvoting member from the State Insurance
Commission was actually a voting member?
Secretary Yellen. I don't have a position on this. Congress
set up FSOC in this manner, and what I can tell you is that all
of the members, voting and nonvoting, contribute importantly to
the work of FSOC. I have really never seen an issue that I have
dealt with where the voting status of a person who is part of
FSOC would have made a critical difference.
Mr. Loudermilk. So it would be fair to say that if Congress
did seek to change this, you would not oppose it?
Secretary Yellen. I would look at the specifics, but I
would agree that we do need to have insurance expertise and I
would be happy to look at something specific that you are
considering.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Well, thank you. Earlier, you were
asked about the Federal Insurance Office's (FIO's) plan to
collect 6 years' worth of granular data on climate-related
financial risk. FIO expects hundreds of property and casualty
insurers across the country to assume the burden of compiling
this data. You asserted that FIO looks to work with State
insurance regulators as required in the Dodd-Frank Act, but FIO
claims that the data they had initially requested was, ``not
available or could not be attained in a timely manner from
State regulators.'' Secretary Yellen, how did FIO define,
``timely manner,'' for the purposes of collecting this data?
Secretary Yellen. My understanding is that the NAIC intends
to conduct its own survey and recognizes the desirability of
collecting this more granular data, and given that both FIO and
NAIC want to collect this data, there clearly exists
opportunities to collaborate. I believe they are certainly
trying to do that.
Mr. Loudermilk. I guess I am a little bit confused, because
they defined that they needed the data within 30 days of the
request. Now, you are talking a significant amount of data, but
they were obscure as to what they needed the data for, so why
did FIO anticipate needing this data within 30 days? You are
asking these insurance questions that are very detailed and
giving folks 30 days to respond, and it was kind of obscure in
the question. I am just wondering why such a short time frame?
Secretary Yellen. Okay. I must admit I don't understand if
that is the time frame, or what the logic was, and maybe I can
get back to you on that.
Mr. Loudermilk. With the remaining time I have left, in
your view, was FIO's limited effort of trying to obtain this
data within the short time frame and then claiming that they
weren't able to get it actually consistent with the Dodd-Frank
requirement to coordinate with State regulators, not just ask
them, can you get this data, and they say, we really don't have
time, and then say, we couldn't get it. To me, it seems like
working with them is coming up with a reasonable plan to get
the information they need and to be clear as to why.
Secretary Yellen. I believe they intend to do so, and it is
appropriate.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Gottheimer, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters. Hello, Secretary Yellen. Thank you for being here.
Secretary Yellen, are you aware that from 2014 to 2019, 200
American colleges and universities illegally withheld and
failed to report information on $13 billion in undisclosed
contributions from foreign and authoritarian regimes?
Secretary Yellen. I don't believe I am. I'm sorry. What
happened? The college, something about colleges?
Mr. Gottheimer. Colleges receiving and didn't report
funding from foreign and authoritarian regimes. I have sent you
a letter, which I will make sure you get a copy of, urging
Treasury to coordinate with the Department of Justice and
Department of Education to investigate these American colleges
and determine whether any of the foreign and authoritarian
regimes contributed to the funding of antisemitic protest
groups on our college and university campuses. And I will also
enter the letter into the record, if that is okay, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Gottheimer. And, again, thank you for reading it, and
if you can get back and determine whether there are financial
connections between those foreign entities making large
donations to our institutions of higher learning and the
outside funding of antisemitic protests on campuses, I would be
grateful.
Secretary Yellen. We will respond to your letter, and try
to do it in a timely way.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you. Madam Secretary, the last time
you were in front of this committee in June, you agreed with me
that the State and Local Tax (SALT) deduction has had a
disparate impact on different States, including New Jersey,
where I am from. You have also committed to finding a fair
solution for the misguided limit that leaves double taxation on
many of my constituents, especially middle-class, hardworking
families. There may be a potential vote on SALT legislation as
early as next week. The bill would double the SALT deduction
for married couples in 2023 from $10,000 to $20,000. Do you
believe, following on the question when I saw you last time,
that this legislation will help ease the disparate impact of
SALT on married couples in New Jersey?
Secretary Yellen. I agree that SALT has had a
disproportionate impact on different States. There are also
fiscal implications. The legislation that you discuss, I
haven't had a chance to examine, and it is really up to the
White House and the President to decide whether or not to be
supportive of this.
Mr. Gottheimer. My concern from a Treasury perspective, is
the IRS preparing for such a change, should the bill be
enacted, because they would have to move pretty quickly.
Secretary Yellen. This would be for 2023?
Mr. Gottheimer. Yes.
Secretary Yellen. I would have to look into it.
Mr. Gottheimer. Okay. If you can get back to me on that, I
would be grateful. We know that Hamas relies on support from
the Iranian regime, the leading state sponsor of terror. As
Iran deepens its ties to China and Russia, we are reminded that
they cannot be trusted and must be held accountable. Iran is
directly or through their terrorist proxies, including Hamas,
Hezbollah, and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, killed hundreds
of Americans, attacked our bases and our allies in the region.
Treasury has implemented several rounds of sanctions on Hamas
in Iran in the aftermath of October 7th. Madam Secretary, do
you believe that the U.S. should impose sanctions on China
because of its ties to Iran?
Secretary Yellen. I'm sorry, on China because of its ties
to Iran?
Mr. Gottheimer. Yes.
Secretary Yellen. That is really a question for the State
Department and the interagency, and I am not aware that that
has been considered. I don't have a position to offer you on
that.
Mr. Gottheimer. Okay, because I am concerned that Treasury
hasn't enforced Iran oil sanctions, especially sanctions
targeting China and its dozens of teapot refineries that are
responsible for practically 100 percent of Chinese oil imports
from Iran.
Secretary Yellen. Look, what I can tell you is that the
Treasury Department and the Office of Foreign Assets Control
(OFAC) are doing everything that they possibly can to crack
down on illegal Iranian shipments of oil, and we have recently
had actions in that regard and, I believe, seizures of illicit
material as well.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you. I know Treasury's OFAC publishes
a list of individuals and companies owned, controlled by, or
acting on behalf of individual groups and entities such as
terrorists. Their assets are blocked, and U.S. persons are
generally prohibited from dealing with them. In recent weeks,
it has been reported widely that United Nations Relief and
Works Agency (UNRA) employees have engaged in terror activities
and materially supported Hamas in the massacre and in other
depraved atrocities committed against Israel. Is Treasury
considering terrorism designations for UNRA employees who have
been found to be materially supporting Hamas or engaging in
terror activities themselves?
Secretary Yellen. We have engaged, as you mentioned, in
numerous actions against Hamas and a wide range of supporters.
Mr. Gottheimer. While the U.S. gives millions of dollars to
UNRA every year, the organization doesn't screen for known
terrorists and terror affiliations the way U.S. agencies like
USAID would do. Do you believe that, at a minimum, U.N.
agencies that receive U.S. aid should at least vet employees
against U.S. terrorism lists?
Secretary Yellen. I don't know the details. I am happy to
look into that. That certainly seems reasonable.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I will follow
up with your office. Thank you so much.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Davidson, is
now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary,
thank you for being here today, and I just want to highlight a
couple of the activities of FSOC. For the last 2 years, FSOC
has made digital assets one of its top priorities. Do you
believe that it is appropriate for FSOC to list digital assets
among its top priorities, given the relative size of the
market?
Secretary Yellen. The market is relatively small, and I
believe the annual report states that, and the connections are
not enormous to the banking system, although rule involvement
in digital assets did play some role in the banking problems we
had last March, particularly with respect to Signature Bank and
to Silvergate Bank, so there are concerns along those lines.
Mr. Davidson. And that is----
Secretary Yellen. But there is the potential for, for
example, stablecoins that we have made recommendations to
Congress, require regulation. They could----
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman will suspend. If the
Secretary will suspend. If you could please exit the dais,
Members. Thank you. We can continue. Thank you.
Secretary Yellen. There is no appropriate regulatory
framework for stablecoins.
Mr. Davidson. We have certainly been working on that. It
would be great to get it across the finish line.
Secretary Yellen. I appreciate that, and we have tried to
work on a bipartisan basis with the committee to see
legislation enacted.
Mr. Davidson. So, the concern would be that there is some
systemic risk to the market because of the introduction of
digital assets, and you referenced Silvergate. They didn't pose
a systemic risk to the market. In fact, they wound down in a
very orderly fashion with no risk to the market. That's not
true of Silicon Valley Bank, but that was interest rate risk,
not digital assets. Signature, on the other hand, there was an
FSOC meeting on Saturday, and on Sunday, the assets of
Signature Bank were seized, and former Congressman Barney
Frank, whose portrait hangs right there, a former Chair of this
committee, said that it was because they were banking crypto,
not because they were insolvent. So it kind of highlights, is
there a coordinated effort because there is a disfavored
industry, like digital assets, or is there a coordinated effort
because there is actually systemic risk?
Secretary Yellen. FSOC has recommended to Congress that
stablecoins require a regulatory framework. No stablecoin at
this point may yet have achieved the scale that would pose a
systemic risk, but certainly that could happen if a stablecoin
were widely used for payments. And you have the classic run
risk that is associated with that if the stablecoin proceeds
are not invested in a secure and utterly safe manner.
Mr. Davidson. Well, this is the case.
Secretary Yellen. And we have seen this happen with similar
types of, it is essentially a banking type of----
Mr. Davidson. It is not fractional reserve banking, and
those banks are regulated. Stablecoins certify that they have
$1 of government-backed securities for every $1 of tokens
issued.
Secretary Yellen. They don't always certify that.
Mr. Davidson. No. The three that are regulated in the
United States by the New York Department of Financial Services,
or four actually, do certify that, and they are State-
regulated. The one that doesn't, that the Treasury Department
and others seem unwilling to address by providing clarity in
our market, don't certify that. Tether is a time bomb, and it
is offshore, and it is the only thin functional, frankly.
Everyone is moving offshore because we can't agree to regulate
our own markets, and, frankly, there are people who really
would love to regulate the market. There just always seems to
be an excuse not to.
I would like to change topics here briefly to the
Government-Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs). There was a report
that was due to Congress on September 30 of 2021, so quite a
while ago that report was due, as to what is the plan to end
the conservatorship, which has gone on longer than Britney
Spears' conservatorship went on at this point. So, it would be
great to get the plan, whether we agree or not, but could you
commit to give us the plan?
Secretary Yellen. That was a promise made by the previous
Administration, and it is----
Mr. Davidson. It is a statutory requirement, Madam
Secretary.
Secretary Yellen. And we are committed to working with
Congress to clarify what a reasonable strategy is for the GSEs.
Mr. Davidson. Whatever the plan, it is already the law to
give us the plan. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. We will
now go to Mr. Casten of Illinois for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Chairman McHenry. It's a pleasure to
see you, Madam Secretary. I want to touch on a couple of
things, but first, I don't know if you had a chance, and it
doesn't matter if you read it or not, but there was a
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) report that came out on
January 18th about demographic trends in the United States that
has been rattling in my head for a while, and I think it was 2
weeks ago, but it said, among other things, that net
immigration, which some of my colleagues have mentioned, is
running twice as high as was expected, and that the population
of folks immigrating to the United States is unsurprisingly,
overwhelmingly of working age, 25 to 54. I think that is the
sort of demographic trend that keeps Tucker Carlson awake at
night, that our population is aging and we are a country that
is getting more diverse.
But what I am wondering is f you could speak to the
conversation with Mr. Vargas. We talked about the fact that
this economy is doing things that economies aren't normally
supposed to do. Gross domestic product (GDP) is rising, we keep
creating jobs, unemployment rates keep falling, and how much of
that is directly attributable to the fact that our workforce is
growing so much faster than we anticipated?
Secretary Yellen. Part of it is due to the fact that labor
force participation has increased.
Mr. Casten. I don't mean just the participation rate,
though--the actual number of workers.
Secretary Yellen. Yes. Partly, it is immigration, but it is
also we are seeing a big pickup in adult labor force
participation in the aftermath of the pandemic. Some of it is
the availability of jobs, which has been amazing, and some of
it is the ability to work, at least partially, from home, may
be drawing people into the labor force who otherwise wouldn't
do so.
Mr. Casten. Okay.
Secretary Yellen. But that is one way in which we continue.
Just in the last 3 months, we have an average of 290,000 jobs a
month being created, which is quite remarkable.
Mr. Casten. Yes. I think about a comment that Jay Powell
made, I think a year ago, that the growing workforce, not just
workforce participation, was helping to rebalance the economy.
I think his words were that it was tilted too much in the favor
of workers. I know some workers who might disagree, but
nonetheless.
Secretary Yellen. Yes.
Mr. Casten. You had mentioned in your discussion with Mr.
Vargas that our growth on all of these metrics, from GDP, to
job creation, to recovery from COVID is outpacing all of our
other peers. You mentioned Japan being an exception that
famously is not as open to immigration as some other countries.
Secretary Yellen. That is true.
Mr. Casten. And maybe it is too soon to say this, but can
you speak to what the United States has done that has led to
our outperformance relative to other industrialized economies
since COVID?
Secretary Yellen. We have supported the economy in
difficult times, and, particularly, the households and workers
who were most affected through programs, including the American
Rescue Program, that made sure we didn't have permanent
scarring of individuals who lost their jobs and remained out of
work, and may be discouraged and, essentially, scarred to the
point where they can't participate in the workforce. We made
sure people had a roof over their heads and food on the table,
helped them take care of their children, provided emergency
rental assistance, and then put in place a series of programs
as the economy, as people got back to work, that are investing
in people. The bipartisan infrastructure program, the CHIPS and
Science Act, and the Inflation Reduction Act are stimulating a
tremendous amount of investment and the creation of good jobs,
especially in parts of the country that haven't seen
opportunity for a long time.
Mr. Casten. I think we have a lot, on this side of the dais
and in your office, a lot to be proud of, of what we did to go
through, and maybe we can follow up offline. When so much of
the growth in the working-age population is from the foreign-
born population, and when so much of the conversation over here
on the Hill is using immigration as a political football, I
want to make sure we don't cut off our nose to spite our face
and understand how that contributes.
Secretary Yellen. I agree. I think it has been a plus.
Mr. Casten. I see that I am out of time. I had wanted to
follow up with you on the FIO and climate risk, but I will
follow up with you offline on that one. Thank you. I yield
back.
Secretary Yellen. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Rose,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman McHenry, and Ranking Member
Waters, for holding this hearing, and thank you, Secretary
Yellen, for taking the time to be with us today.
Secretary Yellen, I have been following news of insurers
pulling out of States like California, and as a former State
official myself, I am confident that the culprit is a terrible
State-based regulatory environment. Given the focus of this
Administration and the Treasury Department on the solvency of
the financial system and our financial institutions, what would
be the impact of insurers underwriting the risk of their
policies at levels that are lower than actuarily sound?
Secretary Yellen. They would tend to lose money over time
and it is not commercially viable for them to do that----
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
Secretary Yellen. ----without some other government
support.
Mr. Rose. I completely agree, and what would happen to the
fiscal stability and solvency of insurers who were forced to
issue policies at rates that do not reflect the risk they
cover?
Secretary Yellen. They would be financially challenged in
the event that a risk event materializes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I completely agree with that. Thinking
back a couple of years ago, actually go back to the fall of
2021, as you will remember, some of us on this committee were
concerned about the overly-aggressive spending of the Federal
Government. We were concerned about early signs and signals of
inflation, and in a hearing at that point, I asked you if you
had concerns about the national debt. And as I recall, and I am
paraphrasing your words, but you expressed the view that the
interest payments as a percent of GDP were particularly low and
that maybe that was a more reasonable way to measure the
Federal debt. Shortly after that, I asked the Fed Chair whether
he would commit to keeping interest rates at near zero so as to
make sure that the cost of financing the burgeoning Federal
debt remained low. He answered correctly that he would not, in
my view, and he has not. The Fed has not kept rates low.
Fast forward a couple of years, and we find the cost of
financing the Federal debt ballooning. The Congressional Budget
Office has recently stated that the higher interest rates could
lead to the government's net interest payments spiking to 6.7
percent of GDP and beyond, and, of course, current estimates
this year is that net interest may exceed $800 billion, just a
stone's throw away from exceeding the cost of national defense.
I wonder, in light of these changes, has your assessment of how
we measure the capacity of this country to finance and to
continue to incur additional debt changed?
Secretary Yellen. I still believe that real net interest is
an appropriate metric for judging the path to decide whether or
not a fiscal path is sustainable. Real net interest in, I
believe, the most recent Biden Administration document, the
mid-session review, I believe that it remained over the 20-year
window, given the proposals in that budget, at around 1
percent, which is historically normal, but the budget included
$2.5 trillion of deficit reduction that Congress hasn't acted
on. Now, that is a low level and with higher interest rates.
We have always projected that interest rates would rise
from extremely-low levels to more normal levels, but if the
interest rate path moves up, that does imply, of course, higher
real net interest.
Mr. Rose. Pardon me. In the interest of time, if we assume
that rates remain at historic long-term norms, which would be
at or above the current levels, is the current fiscal situation
sustainable?
Secretary Yellen. It depends on the actions that we take,
and----
Mr. Rose. So, new debt would be difficult to support----
Secretary Yellen. ----we are preparing a----
Mr. Rose. ----at these interest----
Secretary Yellen. We are preparing a budget for the next
fiscal year that will contain proposals to make sure we are on
a fiscally-sustainable path.
Mr. Rose. I am deeply concerned about it. I fear we are
nearing a tipping point where this country cannot sustain the
fiscal levels that we see now and cannot service our debt and
continue to honor obligations to the American people. Thank you
for being here, and I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from New York, Mr. Torres,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Torres. Thank you. Madam Secretary, I have concerns
about the signs of volatility at the New York Community Bank.
The New York Community Bank is the largest multifamily
portfolio lender in New York City, with more than $37 billion
in multifamily loans. By way of contrast, Signature Bank had
far less, $15 billion in multifamily loans, so a crisis at New
York Community Bank would not only destabilize the banking
system, it would destabilize the largest multifamily housing
market in the United States. Do you share these concerns, and
how closely are you monitoring the situation at New York
Community Bank?
Secretary Yellen. We are in touch with supervisors, and we
are monitoring current banking stresses carefully. I don't want
to comment on the situation of an individual bank, but
commercial real estate is an area that we have long been aware
could create financial stability risks or losses in the banking
system, and this is something that requires careful supervisory
attention.
Mr. Torres. Is it fair to say, as U.S. Treasury Secretary,
that you are prepared to do whatever is necessary to prevent a
second wave of bank failures?
Secretary Yellen. I don't want to get ahead of where we
should be given what is happening, and I don't want to comment
on the individual situation here, but as Treasury Secretary, I
would work with the banking supervisors to make sure that we
addressed anything that looked like it could create systemic
risk.
Mr. Torres. There has been considerable reporting about the
rise of private credit. I am wondering if we are seeing in the
American financial system the paradox of more regulation having
the unintended consequence of causing less regulation.
Specifically, to what extent has the intensive regulation of
banking in America led to the emergence of a largely
deregulated shadow banking system?
Secretary Yellen. That naturally happens when one carves
out an area to regulate, that there is an attempt to move
activity outside that regulatory system, and perhaps private
credit is an example of that.
Mr. Torres. If that is true, to what extent will Basel III
accelerate that trend?
Secretary Yellen. It is conceivable that it could, but it
is important, and FSOC, in part, exists to make sure that we
are looking not only at banks, but----
Mr. Torres. Are we managing risk or are we transferring
risk?
Secretary Yellen. We are making sure that there is adequate
regulation to address risks that could have spillovers that
threaten economic performance in the entire financial system.
Mr. Torres. The PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) report
proposes something resembling banking regulation for stablecoin
issuers. Unlike a bank, a stablecoin issuer has no lending and
no fractional reserves, so if a stablecoin issuer operates
differently from a bank, why not regulate it differently from a
bank?
Secretary Yellen. Perhaps, it should be regulated
differently from a bank, but nevertheless, it is necessary to
regulate the risks to make sure that the deposits are channeled
into safe assets. Perhaps, the capital standard should be
different and other features of its regulation should be
appropriate and different. It is something more like a narrow
bank, but it should be regulated because it inherently has run
risk very similar to banking organizations.
Mr. Torres. The single greatest powder keg in the world is
the Taiwan Strait, where a People's Republic of China (PRC)
invasion of Taiwan or a blockade could conceivably cause the
gravest global catastrophe since World War II. According to
Bloomberg Economics, the cost of a war over Taiwan would cost
$10 trillion, 10 percent of global GDP. It would exceed the
cost of the global financial crisis and the global pandemic.
Does the Treasury Department conduct economic and financial
simulations or war games to determine the impacts of a possible
conflict and determine what actions that we as a country should
take in advance to mitigate those impacts?
Secretary Yellen. The National Security Council and the
interagency--I don't want to detail steps that they have taken,
but certainly the risks from the Taiwan Strait have commanded
their attention and preparation.
Mr. Torres. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. Before we continue, we have approximately
25 minutes remaining. There is a clock for both Members and for
the Secretary. We have a hard stop at 1:00 p.m., and we intend
to honor that within a minute or two or three or so. So with
that, the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Timmons, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary Yellen, for being here today.
You have stated that FSOC believes a congressionally-
approved regulatory structure would help improve the digital
asset sector. This year's FSOC report also outlines several
vulnerabilities in the digital asset sector, including the lack
of consumer protection. Does the current lack of regulatory
structure make it harder for consumers to tell the difference
between quality products and crypto scams, and how do you
believe regulatory clarity will help mitigate risk to the
consumer?
Secretary Yellen. I believe there are some risks to the
consumer. We haven't made recommendations to Congress about
those. I am not sure. I think the CFPB and other agencies--the
SEC has some regulatory authorities in this space that they can
use.
Mr. Timmons. But it seems that there is some confusion, and
there is a lack of clarity. Do you believe that if Congress
were to act, it would improve consumer protections?
Secretary Yellen. I really need to know more about the
specifics.
Mr. Timmons. Okay. The FSOC report repeatedly states the
health and resiliency of our banking sector, yet our Federal
regulators have arguably proposed the largest increase in
capital requirements since Dodd-Frank. My colleague, Vice Chair
Barr, has already hit on concerns related to Basel III.
However, the regulators have also introduced several other
proposals, such as the long-term debt proposal and resolution
planning requirements. Given such vast proposals, there must be
a potential for negative impacts on our financial systems and
their ability to operate in a safe and resilient manner, so my
question is this: Has FSOC reviewed the long-term debt proposal
as well as the numerous proposals the banking regulators have
put forward?
Secretary Yellen. FSOC does not engage in regular reviews
of banking regulations that are within the authority of the
banking regulators. They are charged with achieving safety and
soundness and putting appropriate rules in place, and FSOC, of
course, is supportive of those general efforts but not involved
in a review of agency proposals.
Mr. Timmons. I think the agency proposals are missing the
mark across-the-board, but we will move on to China. This
Administration seems to be so focused on regulating the
American economy out of existence in the name of climate
change, yet it is completely turning a blind eye to clear and
present dangers presented by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).
In fact, the FSOC report mentions the word, ``climate,'' 136
times, which is close to 10 times more than China.
Additionally, two subsections of the report are dedicated to
climate risk. You failed to mention China in your testimony
while citing climate risk as the second-highest priority issue
for FSOC. On top of all that, this past summer, you visited
China in yet another signal of this Administration's meager
approach towards our communist adversaries.
I just feel like we are asleep at the wheel with the
biggest risk to the system barreling toward us. It is
unfathomable to think that we are allowing the CCP to expand
its footprint in our financial sector. Whether it is allowing
CCP-backed broker-dealers to operate in the U.S., allowing
federally-registered agents to be based in mainland China, or
simply encouraging broad foreign investments, we are empowering
the same country that seeks to undermine us at almost every
step of the way. Imagine the security risks or threats that
could be developed utilizing American financial data or trading
trends. It is a national security concern that could undermine
the stability of our financial sector, and it is not being
talked about enough, and your report is only further evidence
of this.
My colleague across the aisle just mentioned the impact of
China invading Taiwan--$10 trillion, a huge hit to the global
economy--and I just think that this is a concern that we need
to take seriously. And if we are going to be talking about
climate risk, China is the number-one polluter on this planet
by far, and we need to hold them accountable if we are going to
tell our economy that it needs to take precautions as well
because at the end of the day, we need to be competitive in the
global economy. And by adding additional layers of regulation
onto U.S. businesses, it impedes their ability to impact in the
global economy. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I going to yield
back. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. We now go to
the gentlewoman from Massachusetts, Ms. Pressley, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you for joining us, Secretary Yellen.
On August 23rd of last year, I sent letters to the CEOs of the
five largest banks in the United States: JPMorgan Chase, Bank
of America, U.S. Bank, Wells Fargo, and Citi. I sought detailed
information on the status of the pledges they announced in
response to the global movement for Black Lives in 2020
following the murder of George Floyd. Collectively, the five
banks pledged more than $32.5 billion towards investing in
racial equity. Although the racial wealth gap is over $10
trillion, it was encouraging to see the banks take this step.
For generations, there has been the intentional refusal of
mortgages to Black residents, the systemic denial of loans to
Black entrepreneurs, and the wholesale redlining of Black
neighborhoods. I truly believe that the banking industry has
long contributed to the problem and must now work toward a
solution. When I told this to the CEOs and requested an audit,
I received a response from each of the five banks.
For months, my team poured over hundreds of documents. It
is clear that the banks have made progress in fulfilling their
racial equity promises in many areas. Unfortunately, there has
been little to no progress in the category of institutional
policy changes. This category is focused on the internal
policies of a bank, not just the external investments. It
includes things like eliminating overdraft fees, expanding
language access, opening physical branches in Black
communities, and promoting Black people to the highest
leadership levels of the bank. Our final analysis is that steps
have been taken, but not enough. We need long-term change, not
just one-time investments, to root out racial injustice in the
banking industry.
Secretary Yellen, when financial institutions perpetuate
and benefit from racism, discrimination, and the exploitation
of Black communities, they exacerbate systemic risk in our
financial system. The FSOC Analytic Framework for Financial
Stability Risk, published last November, pointed out that risk
to low-income, minority, and underserved communities can become
serious enough to pose a threat to financial stability. For
example, in the 2007 to 2009 financial crisis, we saw how
decades of redlining made Black communities more vulnerable
targets for subprime mortgages.
In light of this, and I hope this is a simple yes-or-no
answer, Secretary Yellen, do you agree that racism and racial
inequity is a threat to the financial system?
Secretary Yellen. It could be, and it is one of the factors
that Dodd-Frank told us to take into account in considering
designations.
Ms. Pressley. I will take that as a, yes. Very good. And to
follow up on that, what steps is FSOC taking to monitor and
mitigate the threat that racist practices and policies
perpetuated by banks can pose to the financial system?
Secretary Yellen. Individual supervisors of banks are
responsible for ensuring, for example, that Community
Reinvestment Act (CRA) requirements are met by banks, and the
CFPB has authority to make sure that our fair lending and other
laws are obeyed.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. As I close here, Chair McHenry, in
previous Congresses, this committee held hearings with the
largest financial institutions in order to allow Members to
directly ask them questions on the record. This, of course, is
in recognition of the banks' outsized role in our economy and
our congressional responsibility for proper oversight for the
American public. Mr. Chairman, will you convene a hearing with
the CEOs of the largest banks?
Chairman McHenry. Will the gentlelady restate her question?
Ms. Pressley. Yes. I wanted to ask if you would follow the
esteemed tradition and efforts of Ranking Member Waters and do
a hearing with the largest banks so that we could ask them
questions on the record and conduct proper oversight, given the
outsized role they play in the economy.
Chairman McHenry. It was the Chair's decision that it was
easier just to watch the Senate do that hearing rather than to
hear the second day of the same testimony. So, that is why the
Chair did not do that this year.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. Well, that is my time. Thank you, and I
yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back. We will now
go to the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Steil, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
for being here, Secretary Yellen.
Over the course of the next year, it is estimated that
about $10 trillion in U.S. debt will be reissued, most likely
at a higher interest rate. Have you calculated the financial
impact that reissuing that $10 trillion at a higher interest
rate would be?
Secretary Yellen. I don't have a number for you at my
fingertips, but----
Mr. Steil. But you do model that, I assume, at the
Treasury, the implications that would have?
Secretary Yellen. Yes, and I think the Office of Management
and Budget (OMB) does, and it would be part of the projections
that would be included in the budget.
Mr. Steil. And the United States reissues in the
neighborhood of $10 trillion in debt. Do you have concerns at
all about the ability to find buyers for that debt?
Secretary Yellen. We have very deep, robust markets and
very robust demand for our debt.
Mr. Steil. So, you do not have concerns about a weakening
demand with the volume of issuance of $10 trillion at this
time?
Secretary Yellen. We take steps to make sure that we issue
in a way that is predictable and orderly and keep the markets
well informed about our plans, and we have had great success in
issuing our debt and maintaining liquidity in a deep Treasury
market.
Mr. Steil. But $10 trillion would be the largest issuance
of debt the United States has ever seen in a given year by a
significant amount. Is that accurate?
Secretary Yellen. I believe so.
Mr. Steil. I appreciate your comments. I would hope that
you keep us abreast if you have any concerns as it relates to
the demand on the issuance of debt at the volume that the
United States is doing, then the carry costs associated with
higher interest rates as this new debt is issued.
Let me shift gears. I am concerned about U.S. enforcement
of sanctions with Iran. Not only is it the number of sanctions
that are in place, but it is also our ability to actually
enforce those sanctions and take action upon them. That can
actually alter the behavior of countries, and, in particular,
in this case, Iran. I am uniquely concerned about the lack of
enforcement as it relates to oil sanctions with Iran, and as we
look at the target of Iranian oil revenues, has Treasury
sanctioned any of the Chinese entities purchasing Iranian oil
products, and if so, how many?
Secretary Yellen. I am not aware that we have, but we have
certainly tried to stop those oil shipments by sanctioning
shippers and others involved with them.
Mr. Steil. You sanctioned some. Should we be looking at the
ultimate purchaser of the oil, which in many cases is China?
You said you haven't implemented any sanctions vis-a-vis China,
which is obviously one of the largest buyers of Iranian oil. Is
that something of concern?
Secretary Yellen. I will need to get back to you on that.
Mr. Steil. I would love to have you follow up. I have grave
concerns about the amount of money flowing into Iran, and, in
particular, we have----
Secretary Yellen. We certainly do.
Mr. Steil. Right. I appreciate you sharing that concern. I
think we look at the sanctions that have been put in place by
the United States, but it is truly the enforcement of those
sanctions, in large part at Treasury under your leadership,
that is so essential to be able to change the behavior of Iran,
which continues to threaten U.S. troops in the region as well
as our ally, Israel. Treasury officials are in China this week,
and reports indicate that you are considering a visit later
this year. Would you be willing to raise this issue with
Chinese officials, either through people who currently work at
Treasury or through yourself if you choose to make a visit to
China?
Secretary Yellen. I will discuss it with people at
Treasury.
Mr. Steil. Would you be willing to discuss it with your
Chinese counterparts?
Secretary Yellen. I want to understand the issue and
concerns around it before I make any such promise.
Mr. Steil. That's fair. I would appreciate you looking into
that, because I think it is something that is absolutely worthy
of your time, and you have been vested great power by Congress
with the ability to enforce a lot of these sanctions, and our
ability to deter Iran from their continued funding of terrorism
is really dependent on the action of Treasury under your
leadership. How would you respond to concerns that China should
not receive a high-level visit if it is purchasing oil from
Iran?
Secretary Yellen. We are----
Mr. Steil. Do you think that should alter a decision by you
or others from Treasury to engage and visit China?
Secretary Yellen. We have many differences with China and
concerns about its behavior, but President Biden and President
Xi agreed that we should talk to one another and create
channels for exchanging information and sharing our concerns
and discussing them. It is a way to stabilize our relationship,
and my dialogues with my Chinese counterparts are intended to
do that. I have very honestly and thoroughly in past
engagements explained many issues that concern us about China's
economic behavior.
Mr. Steil. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Horsford,
is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you to the chairman and to the ranking
member. It's good to see you, Secretary, and I appreciate you
appearing here to discuss the recent report from the Financial
Stability Oversight Council. It is a great opportunity to have
you here today because since we last spoke about your
leadership and how it was instrumental in successfully
restoring stability to our banking sector, promoting economic
growth far beyond expectations, and adding a staggering 225,000
jobs a month, 3.1 million total in 2023 alone, the year covered
by your report.
Critically, there was not just growth in the number of jobs
created, but the quality of the jobs is rising as well.
Americans are finally seeing their incomes climb, and now not
only is the level of real annual earnings higher than before
the pandemic, but in 2023, the growth of real wages was faster
than it was during the pre-pandemic trend. Everyday working
families, those earning in the bottom 25th percentile of
workers, saw the fastest expansion, with a 3.2-percent jump in
their inflation-adjusted incomes.
So, I want to commend you and the Treasury Department for
your invaluable efforts in contributing to this strong growth
as your efforts to mitigate the contagion of a bank run earlier
in the year were largely successful. Importantly, the growth in
real wages was also concentrated in communities that have
historically fared poorly during times of economic recovery,
with specific gains being made for Black and Hispanic workers,
who saw their earnings grow 4 percent, and 2.4 percent,
respectively. As you mentioned earlier this year to the
Economic Club of Chicago, and according to the Treasury
Department's October Equitable Recovery report, this may have
even been the most equitable recovery in recent history.
Now, while I recognize that these gains were far better
than forecasters predicted, I hope you will agree with me that
there is still more work that needs to be done. While House
Democrats and President Biden are working to ensure we all have
a chance to succeed, recently we have seen an extreme
conservative movement begin a new assault on the lending firms
that aim to expand access to historically-underserved
communities.
Far broader and equally as sinister has been the rapid
escalation in attacks on diversity, equity, and inclusion
initiatives throughout our economy in the wake of last June's
Supreme Court ruling on affirmative action. Given these actions
against institutional efforts to address longstanding
inequities, it is more important than ever that we speak up to
protect Black and minority entrepreneurs and their access to
the limited capital that is available to them in the first
place.
The organizers of the latest attacks are organized, and
they are determined, as they work to undermine our efforts to
make a more inclusive economy, but rest assured, we will be
equally as resolute in our defense, and we will not be silent.
The baseless attacks on these efforts harm everyone. Diversity,
equity, and inclusion are a business imperative. In fact, I
want to enter into the record a report from McKinsey & Company,
entitled, ``Diversity Matters Even More,'' where they report
that the companies with the most diversity in their management
team in the top quartile have 39 percent better performance
than those that are not diverse.
Chairman McHenry. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you.
Secretary Yellen, as Treasury weighs key policy priorities,
such as the Community Reinvestment Act, the Inflation Reduction
Act, and CHIPS implementation, and other determinations, do you
agree with the McKinsey report findings that companies and
financial institutions that refuse to incorporate diversity,
equity, and inclusion practices into their businesses perform
worse than their peers and, thus, may be riskier?
Secretary Yellen. I am aware of the research that you
cited, and it strikes me as being well done. So while I have
not looked at this issue myself, I see very good reasons for
the findings you mentioned.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you. And do you believe that these
renewed attacks on diversity, equity, and inclusion efforts may
lead financial institutions to lower the availability of credit
to low-income, minority, and underserved communities, and could
these pullbacks increase systemic risk within those communities
if those institutions are a main source of credit for those
underserved populations?
Secretary Yellen. I think access to credit is critically
important for these communities, and it would be a devastating
thing to see a pullback. As you know, Treasury and the Biden
Administration have been highly focused on adding, through many
different programs, including CDFIs and the State Small
Business Credit Initiative (SSBCI) program, access to capital
in minority, low-income communities.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you. And for that reason, Mr. Chairman,
I join with my colleague and call on you to bring a hearing on
this important issue. This is an attack that must be addressed,
and this committee should be at the center of it. With that, I
yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Meuser, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It's great
to see you, Secretary Yellen. A little while ago, you had an
exchange with Mr. Casten about the employment numbers and
unemployment numbers, and you stated, I believe, if I heard it
right, that the situation of the number of illegal migrants
coming into our country--I believe you said it was a positive
thing. Did I hear that right?
Secretary Yellen. Did you say illegal immigration?
Mr. Meuser. Yes.
Secretary Yellen. I didn't speak to illegal immigration.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. Well, that is what he was referencing. He
was referencing the level of migrants coming into the country,
and----
Secretary Yellen. I simply said that immigration that is
added to our----
Mr. Meuser. Because legal immigration is great.
Secretary Yellen. I am really----
Mr. Meuser. Drugs, human trafficking----
Secretary Yellen. ----not weighing in on that.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. Thank you, Secretary. The FSOC's recent
guidance on climate change, nonbank SIFI designations, and the
Basel III Endgame proposal, have received wildly overwhelming
criticism by the financial industry for being unclear, overly
broad, all kinds of descriptions--creates confusion, not being
data-based, and we have had conversations with Vice Chair Barr
and many others, Chairman Powell related to this, so that is
certainly nothing new. Yet, the regulators are not conducting
cost-benefit analyses for each rule they implement.
The guidance on nonbank SIFI designations, climate change,
and the Fed's Basel III Endgame omits any cost-benefit
analysis. So, Secretary, why do you believe any business
subject to nonbank SIFI designation should not receive a cost-
benefit analysis to determine the effects on the business?
Secretary Yellen. FSOC was given by Congress the ability to
designate a nonbank whose material distress would pose a risk
to the financial system, and, most clearly, FSOC did not
require a cost-benefit analysis in association with that,
something that they could have done and chose not to do. And
there are very good reasons not to do it because what we are
talking about in terms of the benefits of designation is a
reduced chance of a financial crisis, and to try to quantify
exactly what are the costs of a financial crisis is not a
useful exercise.
Mr. Meuser. Okay.
Secretary Yellen. Even in the aftermath of financial crises
we have experienced, like the 2008 crisis, people can't agree
what the cost of it was.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. Just because it is not in the rule,
doesn't mean it wouldn't be worthwhile, and they could pursue
it anyway to gain a more accurate finding and outcome, but
let's just talk about Basel III Endgame for a moment. No cost-
benefit analysis, not much data to support it, small businesses
across the country will suffer from it because there will be
less lending taking place. Nobody can argue with that. Some
people say it could be as much as 20 percent from the big
banks, and then all kinds of pressure is put on the smaller
banks where they will have, instead of 20 small businesses
coming to them, they will have a hundred because there is less
funding and capital available from the large banks, yet some
people argue those very basic, simple, fundamental points.
So I ask you, on Basel III, are you concerned about the
overwhelming feedback regarding the problems and potential risk
to our economy that the Basel III Endggame proposal will cause?
Secretary Yellen. The banking agencies put out this
proposal. This is not something that I have been involved with,
and they have received many comments and expressions of concern
along the lines that you have just indicated, and it is their
job under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) to review
those comments and to respond appropriately.
Mr. Meuser. Okay.
Secretary Yellen. My understanding is that they believe
that changes in some of the proposals are going to be
appropriate and necessary to address the commenters.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, and as Secretary of the Treasury,
and all of the things you have done in the past, is there a
plan in place to help American business become more competitive
besides spending in an excessive manner, which some argue
creates an artificial growth initiative?
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. The
Secretary can respond in writing for the record.
We have one final questioner. In consultation with the
Secretary's team, she is game for it. It's been a nice day of
endurance here. With that, we will now recognize the gentleman
from Wisconsin, Mr. Fitzgerald, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you. Madam Secretary, I am the last
Member, I guess.
When Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were taken into
conservatorship in 2008, Treasury received warrants that give
it the right to buy common stock in each of the GSEs equal to
80 percent of the total outstanding shares, and those warrants
expire on September 7, 2028. In August of 2020, the
Congressional Budget Office issued a report that estimated
Treasury could receive the $190 billion for its senior
preferred shares, in addition to $110 from exercising its
warrants in the GSEs. FHFA Director Thompson said in a hearing
last May that the two of you have not discussed these warrants.
The conservatorship has gone on, I think you could agree, for
probably too long now, and I am concerned that the
conservatorship of the GSEs and the warrants could be used to
further politicize the entities. Have you or your staff given
any consideration to the monetization of Treasury's warrants in
the GSE?
Secretary Yellen. This is not a matter on which I am up to
speed. I am not knowledgeable about this. I have a staff who
spends a great deal of time thinking about it, but I have not
had a discussion with them about this. I would appreciate it if
I could get back to you on this matter.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Absolutely. I appreciate it. Thank you.
Secretary Yellen, last May, you said, ``This might be an
environment in which we are going to see more mergers, and that
is something I think the regulators will be open to if it
occurs.'' But I think as a member of the committee, the
perception out there is that regulators review kind of the
proposed bank deals at a slow pace, and there is also a
relatively high degree of uncertainty about the outcomes, both
of which have kind of this chilling effect that we have had
reported right here in the committee. So, given that regional
banks are subject to constant onsite supervision--we have heard
from the bankers about this numerous times--can you think of
any reason why it should take the Federal Reserve more than the
statutorily-prescribed 90 days to decide if a merger is
appropriate under the Bank Holding Company Act?
Secretary Yellen. I can just say, based on my own
experience in the Fed, that often issues are raised in
connection with the community performance of banks that need to
be investigated, and these investigations can involve a lot of
back and forth and be time-consuming. So, I share your
frustration that it often took a good deal of time, but
sometimes there are difficult issues that need work to respond
to before a proposal can be presented to, in the Fed's case,
the Board.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. Thank you. Saudi Arabia pricing
their barrels of oil in dollars has played a large role in the
U.S. dollar building and maintaining its status as the global
reserve currency. The Saudi minister of finance stated that
they are open to trading oil and currencies other than dollars,
and has held talks with China. I am not sure if you are aware
of that. I am not asking you that question. Combined with the
de-dollarization efforts by adversaries like China, Iran, and
Russia to evade sanctions, the potential weakening of the
dollar as a global reserve currency is concerning. What are
some of the actions Congress can take to maintain the dominance
of the dollar and ensure we can maintain effective sanctions?
Secretary Yellen. The dollar is valued as an asset because
of the deep and liquid Treasury market that we have, the
strength of the U.S. economy, the strength of our currency, and
the fact that we keep inflation under control and it is a good
investment. We have rule of law, we have open capital markets,
and protecting these fundamental assets that give rise to the
strength of the dollar is critical to its role. But the
important role of the dollar also enables us to levy sanctions
against countries that act against our interests, and by
depriving them of access to the dollar financial system, we can
really exercise some control over their behavior. And it should
be understood to be natural that when we use sanctions, those
who are sanctioned are incented to try to figure out
workarounds. I have not seen anything that I believe poses a
deep threat to the dollar, but those incentives exist, and our
ability to sanction countries' activities that threaten our
national security, I think is very important.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. Secretary Yellen, I ask for your
forgiveness. We are now 8 minutes past the time. In order to
have partisan balance, Ms. Tlaib is here, and I think it would
be appropriate if we can allow her to ask questions for 5
minutes.
Secretary Yellen. Mr. Chairman, I am certainly willing to
do that.
Chairman McHenry. We did start a few minutes late, so thank
you for that, Secretary Yellen. We will go to Ms. Tlaib for the
final set of questions for today, then we will adjourn
immediately after.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. As you know,
Secretary, nonbank financial companies like AIG and Lehman
Brothers played a large role in the 2008 financial crisis, and
that crisis decimated the U.S. economy, causing millions of
families to lose their jobs or homes or both. And I know in my
district, including Wayne County, and broader Southeastern
Michigan, we saw employment fall 51 percent for low- and
moderate-income households. The median home value for low and
moderate homes plummeted about 53 percent.
Countless families, as you know, lost their homes to
foreclosure. We had the worst tax foreclosure crisis in Wayne
County. When the pandemic hit, another financial crisis emerged
seemingly overnight, and, again, liquidity pressures on
vulnerable and overleveraged shadow banks contributed to the
market volatility. The risks posed by such companies have not
been addressed. Today, nonbank financial intermediaries, I
think they are called, broadly defined, are responsible for 60
percent of the credit provided to the U.S. economy.
And so, Secretary Yellen, can you discuss the size of the
so-called shadow banking sector and its interconnections with
the traditional banking sector?
Secretary Yellen. The shadow banking sector is very large,
and we are very focused on potential risks. I agree with your
assessment that much of the damage, not all of it, but much of
it during the financial crisis arose from this so-called shadow
banking system, and in part, FSOC was created in order to try
to address those risks, so it is very high on our agenda. We
have a variety of tools to do so, and we have identified a
number of areas that give us concern.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes.
Secretary Yellen. Some of those were the areas, as you
mentioned, in March of 2020, where we saw problems and there
were open-end bond funds.
Ms. Tlaib. But given the size of nonbanks, their
interconnectedness, and the incentives they face, I greatly
appreciate your leadership in establishing FSOC's new guidance
on the designation of nonbanks as systemically important. I
completely agree. The question now turns to implementation, and
implementation matters. Zero nonbanks are currently designated
as systemically important. Do you believe that no nonbank
financial institution is systemically important?
Secretary Yellen. Very often, the financial stability risks
are not created by an institution, but rather, by market
practices within a market. For example, money market funds have
been a problem both recently and in the crisis, and to deal
with those risks, it is not appropriate to just choose one or
two large money market funds to designate. I don't think
designation is the right tool. I think an approach that
regulates the practices in the industry is appropriate.
Ms. Tlaib. What is----
Secretary Yellen. The so-called activity-based approach,
that is what the SEC has been pursuing in that space.
Sometimes, it is appropriate to designate a firm when it
creates risks, but in other situations----
Ms. Tlaib. What I hear is the different regulatory
environments that we are creating. What does it mean? What is
regulatory, what is it, arbitrage? What does that mean?
Secretary Yellen. ``Regulatory arbitrage'' means that when
one sector is regulated, that a kind of activity that becomes
more expensive to conduct through that sector moves to a less-
regulated part of the economy.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes.
Secretary Yellen. But this isn't always about individual
firms. It is often about a group of firms or an industry----
Ms. Tlaib. Or maybe a culture.
Secretary Yellen. It might be a culture, but often, it is
many firms and not just one or two firms that are responsible
for the problems.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. And I just want FSOC, of course, it was
important for you, and thank you for your leadership on that,
but it has to fulfill its total responsibilities when it talks
about protecting our residents, especially our low-income and
underserved communities, from the systemic risk, as you know,
and financial instability that results from the failure of the
megabanks. Describe what specific actions--maybe you talked to
some of my colleagues about this already--has FSOC really taken
or plans to take in full responsibility in protecting those
families. Again, I am looking at these and trying to learn
about these process and the culture as I create it, I call it--
--
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired, and if
the Secretary could answer for the record in writing, that
would be sufficient.
Secretary Yellen. Okay. I will answer for the record.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. I want to learn more. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. Thank you, Secretary Yellen, for your
testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place her responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
I want to thank you again, Secretary Yellen, and please
respond to these questions, if you would, no later than March
30, 2024.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:14 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

A P P E N D I X

February 6, 2024
