- OVERSIGHT OF THE SEC

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE SEC

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 22, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-35

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-201 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan, Chairman

PETE SESSIONS, Texas                 AL GREEN, Texas, Ranking Member
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee, Vice Chairman  SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
June 22, 2023................................................     1
Appendix:
June 22, 2023................................................    21

WITNESSES
Thursday, June 22, 2023

Barbero, Megan, General Counsel, U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC)...............................................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Barbero, Megan...............................................    22

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Barbero, Megan:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Huizenga....................................    25
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Sessions....................................    29

OVERSIGHT OF THE SEC

----------

Thursday, June 22, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:02 a.m., in
room 2220, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bill Huizenga
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Huizenga, Sessions,
Wagner, Rose, Meuser, Ogles; Green, Garcia, and Williams of
Georgia.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Chairman Huizenga. The Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Oversight of the SEC.''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement. Article I, Section 1 of the United States
Constitution vests, ``all legislative powers,'' in Congress.
However, even after the landmark decision in West Virginia v.
EPA, some agencies continue to act well outside the bounds that
Congress instructed them to follow.
Inherent in those constitutional powers is the power to
conduct oversight. The Supreme Court has held and reaffirmed
that Congress has the power to conduct oversight to, ``secure
needed information in order to legislate.'' Let me remind
everyone paying attention this morning that our subcommittee
should and will continue to conduct oversight where needed.
And with all due respect to Ms. Barbero, it is not up to
the General Counsel's Office or SEC Chair Gensler to decide
what those investigations will be. Ms. Barbero, ultimately the
buck stops with you, and Chair Gensler as well. And as chief
legal officer, it is your job to make sure the SEC complies
with our requests.
Given your extensive experience sitting on this dais, I
frankly suspect that you would never have allowed an agency to
stonewall Congress or you or your bosses the way that it
appears it has been done for the last 6 months.
But let's not for a second pretend that this
unresponsiveness has always been the case for the SEC. Under
Chair Gensler, the SEC's unresponsiveness to committee requests
has been extremely slow and limited in comparison to that of
previous Chairs. Where past Chairs have been quick to respond
to Congress, in contrast, Chair Gensler, and by extension, you,
have continued to miss deadlines, offer no accommodations, and
blame staff shortages, budget deficiencies, and bureaucratic
obstacles.
When committee staff received documents claiming to be,
``responsive,'' as the Chair put it a couple of weeks ago, the
SEC either failed to acknowledge the questions actually being
asked or provided mostly publicly-available documents. To put
this in perspective, let me provide you with some statistics.
For our request in the SEC's climate disclosure rule, 80
percent of all of the documents that you produced to date are
publicly available. In fact, a portion of those documents were
previously provided to Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
requesters.
But wait, it gets worse. In response to the committee's
request to better understand the charges against former FTX CEO
Sam Bankman-Fried, 100 percent of the documents that you
provided are publicly available.
And to be sure, the SEC's slow and limited responses to
congressional requests isn't for a lack of resources or
experience. The SEC oversees 24 national security exchanges, 9
credit rating agencies, 7 registered clearing agencies, and the
activities of 29,000 registered agencies--including investment
advisers and broker-dealers--that collectively employ over 1
million people in the United States.
To imply that they cannot respond to Congress in a timely
manner is an insult to our institution, and frankly,
embarrassing for yours.
It should be noted that during the failure of multiple
banks which they oversee and while working to manage the
fallout, the Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and other regulators
have been perfectly capable of providing important documents,
testimony, and access to documents.
The SEC is an outlier. Under Chair Gensler, the SEC has
prioritized rewriting every corner of our capital markets,
proposing 46 rules since the start of his tenure, many with
far-reaching implications that will upend decades of precedence
and have little economic analysis to justify their existence.
Under Chair Gensler, the SEC has prioritized regulation-by-
enforcement in the name of protecting investors. Under Chair
Gensler, the SEC has completely ignored its mission to promote
capital formation, instead opting to create confusion that will
ultimately hurt innovation and entrepreneurs who seek access to
our markets.
At today's hearing, you will hear of countless instances
where Chair Gensler and his staff have failed to respond to
Member inquiries, often with complete disregard to the
questions being asked. These aren't unique requests that have
come from myself or Chairman McHenry; these issues have
persisted on both sides of the aisle.
Ms. Barbero, this hearing could have and should have been
avoided. But what other choice do we have when the SEC, your
boss, and you, by extension, continue to be uncooperative and
unresponsive?
In May, I sent you a letter which indicated that this
committee was prepared to take the necessary steps to get the
information we have sought as part of our constitutional right,
our obligation I would say, to provide oversight of the
Executive Branch. Rest assured that if these obstructions
continue, we will be seeing many more of your colleagues before
our subcommittee in the future.
So, I look forward to hearing your testimony today. I hope
that you will be open and transparent with us. And I yield back
the balance of my time.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for a 5-
minute opening statement.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, the Republican hearing memo has styled this
hearing as, ``Oversight of the SEC.'' Given the Republican
overreach we have seen, and I dare say we will see today, a
better title for this hearing would be, ``Republican
Micromanagement of the SEC Run Amok.''
The same Republicans who recently could not manage to pass
a rule--something that had not happened since I have been in
Congress, I might add--to bring bills to the Floor of the House
of Representatives are attempting to micromanage the SEC, which
has a Chair, along with four other Commissioners, six
Divisions, and 36 central and regional offices, together with
approximately 4,500 employees.
While we could be spending this time focusing on the many
issues that are thwarting American families in their efforts to
achieve economic security, Committee Republicans would rather
use this hearing to micromanage an agency tasked with
monitoring and addressing bad behavior on Wall Street.
From the global financial crisis of 2008, to the recent
collapses of cryptocurrency firms because of criminal activity
or negligence, we have seen time and time again that our
constituents are well-served by an active SEC. Instead of
seeking to empower the SEC to do its job more effectively,
Committee Republicans are attempting to micromanage the SEC's
ability to go after bad actors.
Micromanagement run amok by House Republicans is putting at
risk the SEC's ability to regulate the likes of FTX and other
bad actors who destroy investors' dreams with ignoble schemes.
If my dear colleagues had a sincere desire to properly
manage, we would have invited the head of the SEC here today;
he is the person who is best capable. The current witness is
very capable, but Chair Gensler has been chosen to be the lead
person. He is the person who is the most capable of addressing
the many concerns that may be raised. But I invite all who are
watching or within the sound of my voice to pay close attention
and you will witness micromanagement. You will witness
micromanagement run amok as the SEC makes every attempt to
fulfill the requests that have been made. Let's let this be a
hearing and not an inquisition.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman yields back.
And just for clarification, the Securities and Exchange
Commission Chair was here on April 18th. His last appearance
prior to that was October of 2021. It took 17 to 18 months for
him to appear in front of this committee. We have been trying
to get him to appear more often. And if you can help get him
here, I would love that help.
Mr. Green. I would like to answer your question and ask for
equal time.
I will help you. I have no problem working with you. You
and I met and agreed that we would work together. I would like
to see us do that. So, let's work together. And let's try not
to micromanage an agency that is designed to be the cop on the
beat.
Chairman Huizenga. We are going to let Ms. Barbero open
with her testimony. And I would suggest maybe we send a joint
letter requesting his appearance.
With that----
Mr. Green. If I may respond? Since you have addressed me, I
will respond. Why not send a joint letter that we can agree
upon, not a joint letter that is a take it or leave it?
I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. With that, Ms. Barbero, you are
recognized to give an oral presentation of your testimony. And
without objection, your written statement will be made a part
of the record. You are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF MEGAN BARBERO, GENERAL COUNSEL, U.S. SECURITIES
AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)

Ms. Barbero. Good morning, Chairman Huizenga, Ranking
Member Green, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to testify today. I know that my testimony is
provided in my official capacity as the Commission's General
Counsel, but does not necessarily represent the views of the
Commission, the Commissioners or other members of the staff.
The Securities and Exchange Commission is an independent
Federal agency headed by a bipartisan, five-member Commission
which is charged with a three part mission: protecting
investors; maintaining fair, orderly, and efficient markets;
and facilitating capital formation. The agency's work is
critical to the functioning of the U.S. and global economies,
as well as the financial well-being of millions of American
households.
Since I started at the agency nearly 2 years ago, I have
been in awe of the dedicated staff who show up every day ready
to serve the public in pursuit of the agency's three-part
mission. Today, I have the privilege of appearing before you as
the SEC's General Counsel, a position I have held since
February of this year. As General Counsel, I am the agency's
chief legal officer, responsible for advising the Chair, the
Commissioners, and staff throughout the agency on a variety of
legal matters that touch on all aspects of the SEC's
activities.
Serving as the SEC's General Counsel is a tremendous honor.
And I am fortunate to be able to observe firsthand the
incredible contributions of my Office's nearly 150 talented and
diverse employees. The staff has impressed me daily with their
expertise, dedication to the mission, and incredible sense of
camaraderie and teamwork. The Office of the General Counsel
(OGC) is generally organized into four groups: our appellate
group; the general litigation group; the legal policy group;
and the adjudication and oversight group.
The appellate litigation group represents the Commission in
the Federal courts of appeal in certain bankruptcy matters and
in conjunction with the Solicitor General in the U.S. Supreme
Court. The general litigation group provides legal advice to
agency management on a broad range of issues and defends the
Commission in civil and administrative litigation relating to
the performance of the Commission's official function.
The legal policy group provides legal and policy analysis
and advice to the Commission and staff across the agency on
enforcement and regulatory matters. Within the adjudication and
the oversight group, the adjudication staff advises and assists
the Commission in issuing opinions in administrative
enforcement proceedings and appeals from decisions by self-
regulatory organizations.
The oversight and investigations staff advises and assists
the Commission with a variety of functions, including
responding to congressional correspondence and oversight
inquiries. The dedicated oversight function is a recent
addition to the Office and reflects a decision by the agency to
hire a specialized team of attorneys to improve the
Commission's oversight response capabilities, among other
things.
I appreciate that I am here today because of this
committee's interest in the Commission's work in responding to
oversight inquiries. I am familiar with the Commission's recent
inquiries and I want to assure you that my team and others are
working diligently to respond to the committee's requests. We
are committed to working with committee staff to provide the
committee with the information that it has requested.
The creation of OGC's oversight team and the resources we
have dedicated to it, including at the highest levels within
OGC, reflect that commitment. I share Chair Gensler's respect
for this committee. Our work at the Commission is made better
every day by input from individuals outside of our building,
including investors, issuers, the entities we regulate, and
this committee and its members.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and for the
committee's continued support of the SEC, its mission, and its
people. I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Barbero can be found on page
22 of the appendix.]
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlelady yields back.
We are now going to turn to Member questions and I will
recognize myself for 5 minutes. And Ms. Barbero, I want to dive
right in.
Is it true that the SEC employees in the Office of
Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs have prior experience
in congressional oversight and investigations?
Ms. Barbero. Thank you for the question. Just to clarify,
that is not my office, but----
Chairman Huizenga. I understand.
Ms. Barbero. ----yes, that is correct.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. And is it true that the SEC
employees in the Office of the General Counsel have prior
experience in white collar litigation and congressional
investigations?
Ms. Barbero. I think that question refers to the oversight
function that we have recently stood up, and yes, they do have
significance.
Chairman Huizenga. Yes, okay. These aren't trick questions.
It is just yes or no.
So, it is safe to say the SEC has hired some good staff who
know the ins and outs of congressional oversight, and certainly
you have been at this for a long time. Yet, frankly, we have
not received substantive responses to most of our requests. And
it seems like you and the rest of the SEC staff are well-versed
in congressional oversight and responsibilities are very well-
equipped.
We know you have a great, stellar reputation for being a
very, very good lawyer, a tough lawyer. And you know how to
respond to congressional requests because you certainly have
put those out in your previous capacities. But some might
suspect that the SEC is using your congressional oversight
experience as a weapon to block us at every turn, and I
sincerely hope that is not true. But on February 10th of this
year, we sent a request related to Sam Bankman Fried's charges
with a deadline of February 24th. Are you familiar with that
request?
Ms. Barbero. I am familiar with that request.
Chairman Huizenga. It is my understanding that your Office
does an initial assessment within 24 to 36 hours of first
receiving a letter, is that correct?
Ms. Barbero. I don't know the exact timeline, but they are
reviewed expeditiously, as soon as we receive requests in our
Office.
Chairman Huizenga. We will expand it to a generous 24 to 48
hours, okay? On what day did your Office begin to actually
search for documents and communications responsive to our
February 10th request?
Ms. Barbero. Thank you for the question, because my Office
is committed to responding to that request and the committee's
other outstanding requests and we take all of those requests
in----
Chairman Huizenga. Do you know what date you started that
process?
Ms. Barbero. I know that each request is reviewed
expeditiously. I can say with respect to that particular
request, that staff engaged with your staff to understand the
committee's priorities.
Chairman Huizenga. Hold on. It was not before the deadline,
because during the first conversation between committee staff
and your Office, which happened to be a week after the
deadline, your staff was asking questions, and attempting to
narrow the scope of the request in order to start a search for
the documents. Are you familiar with the briefing that the
Division of Enforcement provided to the committee?
Ms. Barbero. Yes, I am aware we offered that.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. In your professional opinion, do
you think a briefing about how the SEC and the Justice
Department work together is sufficiently responsive to our
request for records and communications?
Ms. Barbero. Thank you for the question. I do think that
the briefing is responsive and the reason is that the request
looks at and is asking for information about a parallel
investigation conducted by our staff at the SEC and the
Department of Justice (DOJ).
Chairman Huizenga. So, am I now supposed to send all of our
SEC inquiries to the Department of Justice?
Ms. Barbero. Congressman, we have been responsive to your
staff with respect to the documents.
Chairman Huizenga. That is not my question. You are telling
me that while you can't answer anything, and you were slow to
start--you seem to acknowledge that--you now had to kick it
over to DOJ. Are you familiar with the production your team
made at the briefing on March 15th? That is a yes-or-no
question.
Ms. Barbero. The 232 pages of documents that staff
produced?
Chairman Huizenga. Yes.
Ms. Barbero. Yes, I am familiar with that.
Chairman Huizenga. Yes. Do you think it is responsive or a
productive use of anyone's time to print public complaints in
your own enforcement manual and treat it as if it is responsive
to our request? Is that a good use of your very-qualified,
highly-paid staff? Because it is not of mine.
Ms. Barbero. Many of the committee's requests, including
the FTX request, are broad and encompass----
Chairman Huizenga. You are stalling now. Let's turn to
February 22nd, the climate-related request. Are you familiar
with that request? Yes or no?
Ms. Barbero. Yes, I am.
Chairman Huizenga. Yes. Okay. The SEC produced 29,000 pages
pulled straight from the public comment file. One of your
productions even included a letter that I sent to the Chair
congratulating him on his chairmanship. Are aware that to date,
80 percent of the documents in response to our climate request
are publicly available? I will let you answer, then my time is
up. You are aware that 80 percent of it is publicly available?
Ms. Barbero. As our rulemakings are conducted in the public
view, they are very transparent. The documents produced are
responsive to the requests and we are working on reviewing----
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. I am going to take that as a, yes.
Ms. Barbero. ----internal priorities.
Chairman Huizenga. My time has--I will try to be as
respectful of everybody's time. That was a stalled out,
``yes.''
With that, per tradition, the ranking member of the
subcommittee defers to his members. And the gentlewoman from
Texas, Mrs. Garcia, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you. And that is Ms. Garcia.
Thank you for being here with us today, Ms. Barbero. And I
wanted to first start by just giving you a chance to finish
answering the question that was asked about the March document
request. You are a lawyer, and I am a lawyer, and I was used to
getting a lot of interrogatories and document requests, and I
was quite bombarded. And it wasn't a lawyer gone amok like this
investigation.
Oversight groups are used to amok with so many requests. Is
your statement here today that you did comply and were
responsive to that March request?
Ms. Barbero. If I could just clarify the question, if it is
the February proposed climate request that Chairman Huizenga
had asked about, I very much appreciate the opportunity to
answer that, and we have been responsive.
My staff has collected over 2.7 million documents
internally from 53 different custodians in response to that
request. They are in the process of working with committee
staff to identify priorities and reviewing and producing on a
rolling basis the internal documents that the committee staff
have prioritized. So yes, I do believe we have been very
responsive, and I have instructed staff to continue to work
with the committee on that request.
Ms. Garcia. Right. And 2.7 million seems like a lot--that
even beats some of the major personal injury trials that have
occurred all over this country. How long have you been in your
position?
Ms. Barbero. I have been the General Counsel since February
1st.
Ms. Garcia. February 1st. And have you ever seen this kind
of constant and somewhat obtrusive document requests made by a
congressional committee?
Ms. Barbero. We do have, in addition to the climate request
for which we have collected 2.7 million--and that is not pages
of documents, just to be clear; that 2.7 million is the number
of documents--we have also collected on the order of 700,000
documents in response to the committee's request about digital
assets. We have provided briefings, and staff has answered
interrogatories. We have certainly done everything we can do to
be responsive and respect the committee's oversight priorities.
Ms. Garcia. Can you explain some of the burdens the agency
faces when responding to these document requests?
Ms. Barbero. When we get a document request, one of the
first things we have to do when we get the request is scoping
interviews with agency personnel across the various Divisions
and Offices in the agency to determine who might have
information that is responsive to the interrogatories or who
may have responsive documents. And those interviews take time.
We then need to collect the documents. When the documents
are collected, they have to be reviewed by our staff and keyed
up for production, and then, part of the reason why the
production to date has been public documents is that those do
not require a Commission vote for us to turn them over, so we
are able to more quickly provide responsive information that is
in the public record. But we then need to tee up for the
Commission to vote to release internal records to the committee
in response to the request. So, it is a significant process and
undertaking.
Ms. Garcia. Right. As the, ``the cop on the beat,'' who is
it within your organization that decides which requests need
referrals to the Justice Department? Is it you or someone from
the Commission?
Ms. Barbero. It is our Enforcement Division generally that
would be working with the Department of Justice on a parallel
investigation, and working on collecting information and facts
and working with Justice, that is the Division of Enforcement.
Ms. Garcia. I, for one, want to thank you for the good work
that you and Chair Gensler have done in enacting common-sense
regulations and policies, despite this investigation gone amok
and despite this document request gone amok because I think it
is important work that you are doing for consumers and
investors.
And I want to just ask you, is there anything we can do in
Congress to further improve the work that you are doing at the
SEC?
Ms. Barbero. Thank you, Ms. Garcia, for your support, which
is very much appreciated by me, and I feel comfortable saying
on behalf of the Chair and the Commission, we really appreciate
this committee's support and commitment to the agency. I will
just say thank you.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you.
And Mr. Chairman, it looks like my time has run out. I
yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. Ms. Garcia yields back.
With that, Mr. Sessions from Texas is recognized.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Ms. Barbero, welcome to the subcommittee. Is it true that
you deal with civil litigation?
Ms. Barbero. The SEC handles civil, not criminal
litigation.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you.
Chair Gensler evidently met with major, major, major
Democratic donor, Sam Bankman-Fried. Where was that meeting
held?
Ms. Barbero. I don't have any of the details relating to
that meeting, but I would be happy to get back to you with any
information if you have specific questions.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much. As a matter of fact, I
do have some. I would like to go to one of the basic tenets of
what the SEC is there for, and that is the formation of
capital. And the concern I have, and I am going to speak here
for a minute so that we are very clear, because I have said
this to Chair Gensler point blank in the Full Committee, that I
believe the SEC has weaponized their discretion that they use
against the formation of capital.
My father served as Director of the FBI during the time of
President Reagan, President Herbert Walker Bush, and President
Bill Clinton. When he first came to the FBI, the FBI, by and
large, had an operational way of doing business where they
would investigate, investigate, and investigate and go around
people and then, at some point, indict them. And it was very,
very, very difficult for people who were under investigation to
engage the FBI for months and months and months and months.
And my father, as a result of his service as U.S. Attorney
to the Western District of Texas and Chief Judge of the Western
District of Texas attempted to and did change that policy. And
that policy is one that I would like you, as General Counsel--I
have already tried to go to Chair Gensler and it fell on deaf
ears. I believe that where there is someone who's under
investigation, where you have requested documentation, that
that person, if they hire competent legal counsel, I believe
that competent legal counsel should be able to work with the
SEC on the most in-depth questions that could materialize.
And instead, what happens is the SEC comes and weaponizes
themselves to come in and give no feedback, no information,
just ask for information without regard for any filing millions
of dollars of assets that perhaps they have up. And they use
their discretion and they hide behind someone and they hide
behind this, their purity, well, we are the SEC. Rather than
allowing someone to engage them on a professional basis, who is
a member of the bar, and a court could hold them accountable
for their behavior.
And I want you to know that I find it unprofessional and
disingenuous that this Administration would have a Chair of the
SEC meet with a man--perhaps we are going to find out where he
met with him--only to find out that personal access and yet
someone who has millions of dollars and who is being handled by
that agency for a long period of time for the Chair to tell me,
upon investigation, Congressman, we are not going to say
anything, we have an average of 214 days before we generally
engage someone, before we say something. That is just an
average. And I find that very unprofessional.
And I intend and I have been trying to engage and will
engage the law to say that whomever it is, if the SEC is going
to go and investigate someone, they are entitled to what I
believe is the Bill of Rights, to some bit of opportunity to
have professional counsel to handle that and engage your
agency.
I just want you to know that I find the answers that have
come out of the SEC wholly unprofessional, and that the actions
that they take are to hold people at bay rather than allow
them--if you get in trouble, you ought to be able to get out.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentlewoman from Georgia, Ms. Williams, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you, Ms. Barbero, for joining us today.
I walked in and didn't expect it to be a hostile situation
in here. So, my apologies for some of the ways that you're
being questioned today. But I sit on this committee to make
sure that the most-marginalized people in our society have a
champion when it comes to financial and economic policy in
Congress.
I am here to make sure that my constituents have access to
affordable housing and credit, that consumers are protected
from predatory actors in financial markets, and to work towards
closing the racial wealth gap, and unfortunately, my home City
of Atlanta leads the nation in the racial wealth gap.
The SEC's role in protecting investors is essential to this
work because the financial system needs to work for everyone no
matter their ZIP Code. This is especially true in Atlanta,
which boasts a vibrant culture of innovation, sustained
economic growth, and leading academic institutions--all of the
landmarks and hallmarks of a thriving economy.
But again, we still have a lot of work to do. And even when
people in my district get a good job or start a business, we
know that people of color are more likely to be targeted by
financial scams or to lack sound investment advice, and there
needs to be a transparent, safe, and equitable environment for
all people to invest in and grow their wealth, not just those
who have access to an expensive financial adviser.
And this is where the SEC comes in. Each part of the SEC's
mission: protecting investors; ensuring fair, orderly, and
efficient markets; and facilitating capital formation helps
level the playing field for marginalized people who are looking
to invest their hard-earned money. And each of these duties is
a full-time job and I am sure you are well aware of that.
We have seen time and time again that the Majority of this
committee is focused on slowing down the important work that
the SEC is doing through excessive investigations and document
requests.
Ms. Barbero, the SEC has continued to comply no matter how
overreaching. And I understand that the Office of the General
Counsel plays an important role in answering these requests, so
thank you. But I worry that these excessive and overreaching
requests are exposing my constituents to harm by taking
precious time away from the other functions of your Office,
functions that are crucial to the SEC's core mission that I
just mentioned.
Ms. Barbero, can you expand on the role the adjudication
oversight group plays in the broader operation of your Office
and the SEC in general?
Ms. Barbero. Thank you for the question. The oversight and
adjudication group within my Office plays multiple functions
and roles within the Office, the adjudication group assists the
Commission in decision-making in preparing its opinions. The
oversight and investigations group works closely with attorneys
and staff across my Office and the Commission.
Currently, that group is fully engaged in responding to
working with the committee to ensure that we can respond to the
committee's various oversight requests. That is a new function.
I am very proud that we stood up that group and that we have
very talented staff in the group to be able to respond quickly
and efficiently to oversight requests.
But I would also note, as you noted in your question, that
the group works with lots of other attorneys and staff across
our agency who perform, in the ordinary course of their duties,
rulemaking functions, enforcement functions, and legal policy
work. And the oversight group does look to them for their
substantive expertise in responding to interrogatories.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. It sounds like you all are doing a
lot with this group, which leads me to my next question: How do
large-scale investigations and document requests, even these
very broadly overreaching ones from the Majority of this
committee impact the group's ability to pursue those other
functions that you just mentioned?
Ms. Barbero. We do try very hard to prioritize the work
that the group is doing, so when the group and other staff
across the agency are prioritizing responding to oversight
requests, which very much is a priority for us right now, that
is time that otherwise would be spent on rulemaking,
enforcement, and other functions. But we are committed to
responding to the oversight requests and staff is working hard
to do that.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you.
Proper congressional oversight is necessary to make sure
that our government works for the American people. But I think
that the time and resources used on these disruptive and
overreaching requests would be better spent maintaining a safe
and fair financial environment for our constituents so that we
can all thrive.
Thank you. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Rose, who is also the
Vice Chair of this subcommittee, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Huizenga, for holding the
hearing. And Ms. Barbero, thank you for you being here with us
this morning.
Ms. Barbero, as Chairman Huizenga mentioned, the SEC has
produced thousands of pages of nonsubstantive documents to the
committee. And a portion of those documents were previously
produced under the Freedom of Information Act to other
individuals. Ms. Barbero, the Commission has rules that allow
the release of non-public information to FOIA requesters,
correct?
Ms. Barbero. That is done through a delegated authority, so
it is the Commission's authority that is delegated to
principally the FOIA Office and ahead of the FOIA Office.
Mr. Rose. So yes, you can release non-public information.
Ms. Barbero. Through a Commission action on delegated
authority, assuming that all of the legal requirements for FOIA
are satisfied, yes.
Mr. Rose. Isn't it true that the Commission's FOIA rules do
not require a Commission vote prior to the release of each set
of non-public information to every FOIA requester?
Ms. Barbero. That is true, but the reason it is true is
because the way the Commission has structured its delegation of
authority under FOIA, assuming the requirements of FOIA are
met, the FOIA offices are authorized by the Commission to
handle those requests and produce those documents.
Mr. Rose. Isn't it true that the Commission's rules allow
the Chair to authorize the Office of the General Counsel or the
Office of Legislative Affairs to send an action memo asking the
Commission to approve the release of responsive, non-public
information to the committee on a rolling basis?
Ms. Barbero. That is both true and what I--where we are
going in terms of responding on a rolling basis. The committee
has prioritized internal emails. Those would go through an
action memo to a vote of the Commission for production to the
committee on a rolling basis.
Mr. Rose. Given that that is true, why hasn't the Office of
the General Counsel or the Office of Legislative Affairs
started that process?
Ms. Barbero. We have, in fact, started that process. We
worked closely with staff on the committee to understand the
committee's priorities. I understand those priorities are
13,000 Division of Economic and Risk Analysis (DERA) emails.
Mr. Rose. Just to clarify, you have proactively asked for
permission from the Commission to start releasing that non-
public information on a rolling basis. You have initiated that
process.
Ms. Barbero. Thank you for the opportunity to clarify that.
It is the end of the process. We have to collect the emails,
and review the emails in order to advise the Commission about
voting to release those documents. So, that process is ongoing.
And we will continue to work with committee staff as we are
making those productions to continue to understand the
priorities.
Of course, I can't sit in here and commit to what the
Commission will do or how they will vote when that goes up to
them. I only have control over our part of the process within
the Office of the General Counsel, but yes, that is the
process.
Mr. Rose. So, you are saying you have to look at the emails
before you proactively ask the Commission to authorize a
release on a rolling basis? You are going to have to assess
every one of these documents before you proactively ask the
Commission; only after you have reviewed all of the documents,
would you seek their approval for you to release documents as
you come to them?
Ms. Barbero. Thank you for the question. My role as the
General Counsel is, of course, to provide all five of our
Commissioners with my best legal advice and the legal advice of
my Office. And we do that through gathering the facts,
understanding the facts, and then advising the Commission----
Mr. Rose. We see that FOIA requests get blanket approval
but not Congress?
Ms. Barbero. I understand the distinction between FOIA and
the oversight requests. For the FOIA Office to release
documents, the statutory requirements under FOIA have to be
satisfied. There is the delegation of authority to the FOIA
Office. It has in fact allowed us to produce documents to this
committee that otherwise would be non-public documents.
Mr. Rose. And as we have seen, you are giving us documents
that have already been produced publicly. I would just strongly
encourage you in your next meeting with Chair Gensler to get
him to approve the release of non-public, responsive
information to the committee on a rolling basis. And he should
know that what the SEC has provided to the committee so far is
not enough.
Mr. Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Rose. And I would ask that we put in the record a memo
from 2001 to 2002.
Chairman Huizenga. A memo from 2001 to 2002. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
Chairman Huizenga. With that, the ranking member of the
Full Committee, the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
Ms. Barbero, there has been an ongoing and extensive
comment period for the SEC's proposed climate-related
disclosure rule, which would require U.S. publicly-traded
companies to disclosure annually how their businesses are
assessing, measuring and managing climate-related risk. This
rule would include disclosing greenhouse gas emissions as a
measure of exposure to climate-related risk.
Has the SEC received comments or any other indications that
the information that the proposed climate rule would require to
be disclosed is, in fact, materially important for making
investment decisions in a company? If so, would you please
identify those comments?
Ms. Barbero. Thank you. We received a record number of
comments in response to the climate proposal. And any number of
those comments are supportive of the proposal and the exposure
of greenhouse gas emissions.
In terms of specific comments and what specific commenters
have raised, we would be happy to get back to you if there is a
question on that, that we can answer. But again, we have
received a record number of comments, and staff are actively
reviewing and processing those comments as we move forward to
any final rule that would be adopted by the Commission on the
climate risk disclosures.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. I think that clarifies my question.
Let me move on, Ms. Barbero.
As you know, last Congress I initiated a bipartisan
investigation into the collapse of FTX, which Chairman McHenry
has continued in this Congress. It is my understanding that the
SEC is concerned that some of the materials requested by
Committee Republicans would prejudice the parallel ongoing
criminal prosecutions, as well as its civil enforcement action
of Sam Bankman-Fried and possibly other FTX employees.
I recognize that there is a delicate balance between
providing Congress the information it needs and being careful
not to negatively impact any ongoing investigation or
enforcement action. I believe the members of the committee are
sensitive to that potential problem and want to seek a
resolution that accommodates both the concerns of the Executive
Branch and the information needed by Congress.
Therefore, it is important for us to understand what
efforts are being made by the SEC to provide as much
information as possible to Congress without creating a problem
for Executive Branch enforcement actions. Please tell us how
the SEC is balancing the legitimate enforcement concerns with
this obligation to provide Congress with information? And when
do you expect to resolve this matter?
Ms. Barbero. Thank you for the question. And that is very
much what we have endeavored to do in terms of providing the
committee with the information that it needs and balancing the
important interests that we, and I assume the Department of
Justice, have in not releasing information that could prejudice
the criminal trial, which is scheduled to begin in just a few
short months, in October.
We have worked closely with the committee to provide a
briefing by experienced staff from the Division on Enforcement
on how we work with DOJ in parallel investigations. We have
provided a timeline on the FTX matter. We have provided the
documents that we could publicly release.
The challenge here in balancing the concerns is that
committee staff has identified as the priority the Commission's
action memo, which is the very document that contains the
information that could prejudice our civil enforcement action
and the parallel criminal investigation. And that really is the
challenge. But I would certainly invite the committee to reach
out to DOJ directly. They have equities as well in the criminal
case and have their own information as well. So, I think that
is an avenue that could be pursued.
Ms. Waters. I would like you to continue with your work as
you have defined it. I am concerned that some of the
Republicans are basically following the leadership of the past
President of the United States, and they want to defund the
Department of Justice. So, I want you not to be concerned.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Waters. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlelady's time has expired.
With that, the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. I want to thank the Chair very much. And thank
you, Ms. Barbero.
I think we should all be able to agree that just because an
agency is run and directed by Democrats appointed by the Biden
Administration, that doesn't automatically mean they are doing
a wonderful job. As a matter of fact, that is the whole reason
for this Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee.
Ms. Barbero, unfortunately, the circumstances that led to
your appearance today are troubling. Chairman Gensler has shown
a pattern of incomplete responses that is completely
unacceptable. Yet, the SEC's interaction with my office over
the last few months exemplified this.
In March of this year, I was made aware of issues
surrounding a merger between a certain special purpose
acquisition company (SPAC) and its target company. On March
28th, a letter was sent requesting a briefing. And we had that
briefing--on April 21st, 24 days after the initial request, the
SEC did in fact meet with us. The briefing was helpful.
However, there were many questions that went unanswered. On
April 24th, my staff emailed the SEC requesting written
responses to specific questions. On the 26th, a confirmation
was made, and the SEC requested a formal letter, which was sent
that same day. The letter requested that the SEC provide
responses by May 5th.
On May 8th, the SEC said they were finalizing the letter
and would expect completion on May 12th. On May 12th, we were
informed that it would be the following week. And the following
week, on May 23rd, I asked for a call with the Office of
Legislative Affairs at the SEC, because there was a serious
delay happening.
I finally received, on May 27th, a response that only
raised more questions. On June 1st, I personally sent an email
to the SEC staff. And on June 13th, my staff sent follow-up
questions. And again, to this day, we have yet to receive a
response from your agency to these questions.
Can you appreciate why I am a little bit critical and a
little bit dubious as to whether or not you are even attempting
to handle this particular request properly?
Ms. Barbero. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. I am
aware of the back and forth that you referenced and the
timeline. If there are specific questions that I am able to
answer, I can do that or we can get back to you with
information.
Mr. Meuser. I will ask a couple of specific questions. On
average, an S-4 review takes 130 days. Prior to you folks being
there, it was 100 days. Would you say that 401 days is a little
long, a little bit of an outlier, a little unusual, a little
special, maybe deliberately special, deliberately targeted?
Ms. Barbero. In terms of the S-4 process, I know there has
been a significant increase, that your question referenced, in
the average number of days. I know there has been an increase
in the number of S-4 forms filed that has contributed, I
understand, in part to that increase.
Mr. Meuser. Respectfully, 401 days--the average is 130. You
are aware that that length of time can kill a SPAC, and SPACs
are owned by millions of individual investors? They will lose
their money because you refuse to have any review or response,
yea or nay, on a standard S-4 application--401 days.
And here's a little bit of data to help out, in 2021, there
were 11, over 340 days. That is when I asked for these
questions, 60 days ago--11 out of over 1,000. In 2022, there
was only one that was over 340 days out of over 1,000. Okay.
Now, it is 401 days with no response. Do you think that is
reasonable?
Ms. Barbero. I understand that our Directors of our
Division of Corporation Finance and our Enforcement Division
have provided some----
Mr. Meuser. I'm sorry, ma'am. What does a citizen need to
do to get a response to a standard question that should be run-
of-the-mill, standard operating procedure for you?
Ms. Barbero. There are any number of reasons why review of
an S-4 may take longer than average in any particular case. I
can't talk about a specific review or a specific issue.
Mr. Meuser. I am going to have to follow up again and maybe
I can get an answer. I will yield the remainder of my time to
the Chair.
I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. I appreciate that. I want to revisit
where Mr. Rose was going and follow up.
Are you aware that your staff has informed committee staff
that it will take 10 weeks to review an initial tranche of
documents that are responsive to a single question? By the way,
that was narrowed down, and even then, they will not be ready
to produce it to the committee?
Ms. Barbero. I don't know the specifics----
Chairman Huizenga. Ten weeks.
Ms. Barbero. But I do know the review depends on the number
of documents, and this is----
Chairman Huizenga. Ten weeks. Okay. Are you aware that
previously, the Commission and the SEC Chair did not have to
review or vote on every single document released, but rather
gave blanket authority, much like the FOIA that you so aptly
described, to committee staff to provide necessary documents?
Ms. Barbero. I am aware of----
Chairman Huizenga. You are aware of that?
Ms. Barbero. ----the other models of providing authority.
Chairman Huizenga. Time has expired--excuse me. I do want
to submit for the record an additional action memo that dates
back to the Enron era, which shows that there was this blanket
authority given to release information to a congressional
inquiry, and I will submit that for the record, without
objection.
Mr. Green. No objection.
Chairman Huizenga. With that, the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam General Counsel,
would you explain to us whether you have other committees that
send you requests, or whether you have many Members sending you
requests?
Ms. Barbero. We sometimes receive requests from Members,
but the requests we have been discussing today have come from
the committee, from the Majority of the committee.
Mr. Green. And you do have Members who will ask for
information as well?
Ms. Barbero. That does sometimes occur, yes.
Mr. Green. And have you tried as best as you can with the
resources you have--and they aren't many, I confess--to satiate
the desires of the members of the committee who are asking for
information?
Ms. Barbero. We are very committed to providing the
committee with the information that it needs. We respect the
committee's oversight priorities and oversight interests, and I
am really proud of my staff who have worked tirelessly to
respond to the committee's requests.
Mr. Green. Let me move on to another subject. If time
permits, I will come back to this, but in 2003, investors and
banks with $136 trillion in assets under management requested
thousands of companies to disclose climate-related information
for their investing and financing decisions. I have many
colleagues, my Republican colleagues, who claim that climate-
related information is not material to investors.
Why is disclosure of climate-related information material
to investors, Madam General Counsel?
Ms. Barbero. Our disclosure rules at the SEC are aimed at
providing investors with the information that they need to make
informed investment and voting decisions. That information can
change over time, and it often does. It relates to developments
in the market, and to risks that companies are facing and our
registrants are facing.
And as we have heard from investors, many companies are
providing information about climate-related risks, but we don't
currently have that information in a comparable form that is
useful to investors.
That is what we have heard from investors. And climate-
related risks can be just as important to businesses, to the
nature and health of businesses as other things we might
traditionally think about, like physical assets or material
contracts. And the climate-related risk disclosure proposal
that's out there walks through in detail the reasons why the
Commission voted for the proposal and believes that the
disclosures are necessary to the protection of investors and
the public interest.
Mr. Green. Is it safe to say that it is about investor
protection, Madam General Counsel?
Ms. Barbero. It is about investor protection. That is a
core piece of our mission and a core piece of our disclosure
requirements.
Mr. Green. And to this end, do you make every effort to
acquire this intelligence so that you can share it with these
investors who are going to suffer as a result of climate
change, whether or not my colleagues believe that it exists?
Ms. Barbero. We have received, as I mentioned earlier in my
testimony, a record number of comments from members of the
investing public, issuers and other interested members of the
public on our climate rule, and we are taking all of those
comments into account as we think about and the staff prepares
recommendations for the Commission on how to move forward with
any finalization of the climate rule.
Mr. Green. Earlier, when you gave your testimony, you
indicated that a large number of documents--would you repeat
that number for the record, please?
Ms. Barbero. In response to this committee's request to the
Commission, my staff have collected 3.3 million documents. And
as I mentioned earlier, that is not pages of documents; that is
3.3 million documents.
Mr. Green. I would leave you with, this is not oversight;
this is overreach run amok.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman yields back. The
gentlewoman from Missouri, Mrs. Wagner, who is also the Chair
of our Capital Markets Subcommittee, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Barbero, what is your role in drafting responses to
congressional inquiries?
Ms. Barbero. I oversee the staff in the Office of the
General Counsel who work on oversight and investigations. That
staff works closely with our Office of Legislative and
Intergovernmental Affairs (OLIA), the Office that handles
interactions with the Hill.
Mrs. Wagner. How big is your staff?
Ms. Barbero. I have about 150----
Mrs. Wagner. Yes or no, do you have final approval of the
SEC responses to letters from Members of Congress?
Ms. Barbero. I would have final----
Mrs. Wagner. Yes or no?
Ms. Barbero. I wish I could answer yes or no, but it
depends on whether the letter is coming from me under my
signature or whether it is a letter coming from----
Mrs. Wagner. Who has the final approval?
Ms. Barbero. If the Chair is sending a response, it would
be Chair Gensler who would have that approval. If his staff is
sending responses or another officer is sending a response----
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Ms. Barbero. What factors do you
consider when deciding to simply submit our letters to the
comment file of rulemaking instead of providing substantive
responses?
Ms. Barbero. In responding to the committee's request, the
staff correctly prioritized information that we could produce
quickly and that was responsive to the request. Because our
rulemakings are conducted in the public view in a transparent
fashion, the comment file is, in fact, the record that the
Commission considers in finalizing the rule.
For inquiries about the climate rule, that administrative
record, that is the key information that the Commission is
considering in deciding how to finalize the rule.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Ms. Barbero. Many of the letters my
colleagues and I have sent to the SEC include very specific
questions, but receive very generic responses. Are there
internal policies or regulations that dictate how the SEC can
respond to these letters? And if not, how is that determination
made and by whom?
Ms. Barbero. A lot of thought goes into how to respond to
those. My staff will consult with subject matter experts across
the agency----
Mrs. Wagner. They are very generic responses. One response
to Mr. Huizenga was one paragraph long. Please proceed.
Ms. Barbero. I don't know offhand the particular response
to Mr. Huizenga. It depends on--I had in mind our responses to
the seven interrogatories, which are quite detailed, and are
done and prepared in consultation with subject matter experts
across the Commission.
Mrs. Wagner. Okay. Ms. Barbero, what is a reasonable
timeframe for your Office to respond to congressional
correspondence?
Ms. Barbero. We engage with the committee right away when
we receive correspondence.
Mrs. Wagner. In a reasonable timeframe?
Ms. Barbero. The reasonable timeframe is to engage, and if
you are----
Mrs. Wagner. Days? Months?
Ms. Barbero. I know that this answer may not give you
comfort, but it does depend on what the congressional inquiry
is and what the----
Mrs. Wagner. Okay. Let me move on. Chairman McHenry and I
sent a letter on April 13th regarding the SEC's failure to
focus on capital formation in its rulemaking agenda. In that
letter, we included the response deadline of April 27th. The
SEC responded to our letter just 2 days before your testimony
here on June 20th. The letter from the Chair of the Full
Committee included six questions, none of which were answered.
What is it about this particular letter that took you over
2 months to answer?
Ms. Barbero. As is the case with all of the letters we
receive, there is a process. What we are aiming to do in
getting back to the committee is ensuring that we can provide
accurate information, that we have consulted with the
appropriate expert in the Commission----
Mrs. Wagner. You didn't answer the questions with accurate
information but, as I said, with generic responses. You don't
answer the questions. And I have to say, Ms. Barbero, it was
very disappointing to receive your one-paragraph response to
the letter Mr. Huizenga and I sent on April 17th regarding the
legal authority for the SEC's regulatory agenda. One paragraph.
You are telling me you are doing this in-depth study and this
work, and you have 150 lawyers, and this is the kind of
response we receive. It is wholly, wholly inadequate.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I do appreciate the witness being here today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place her responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
And with that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:08 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

June 22, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
