- OVERSIGHT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN THE UNITED STATES (CFIUS) AND OTHER EFFORTS TO STRENGTHEN NATIONAL SECURITY IN THE UNITED STATES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE COMMITTEE ON
FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN THE
UNITED STATES (CFIUS) AND OTHER
EFFORTS TO STRENGTHEN NATIONAL
SECURITY IN THE UNITED STATES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 13, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-44

[GRAPHICSNOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-872 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
September 13, 2023...........................................     1
Appendix:
September 13, 2023...........................................    49

WITNESSES
Wednesday, September 13, 2023

Rosen, Hon. Paul, Assistant Secretary, Investment Security, U.S.
Department of the Treasury.....................................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Rosen, Hon. Paul.............................................    50

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Lucas, Hon. Frank:
Letter to Chairman McHenry and Ranking Member Waters in
support of H.R. 3378, dated September 20, 2023.............    53
Luetkemeyer, Hon. Blaine:
Wall Street Journal article, ``A DuPont China Deal Reveals
Cracks in U.S. National-Security Screening,'' dated August
12, 2023...................................................    54
Rosen, Hon. Paul:
Responses to questions for the record from Representative
Fitzgerald.................................................    62
Responses to questions for the record from Representative
Lawler.....................................................    65
Responses to questions for the record from Representative
Lucas......................................................    64
Responses to questions for the record from Representative
Meuser.....................................................    67
Responses to questions for the record from Representative
Waters.....................................................    69

OVERSIGHT OF THE COMMITTEE ON
FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN THE
UNITED STATES (CFIUS) AND OTHER
EFFORTS TO STRENGTHEN NATIONAL
SECURITY IN THE UNITED STATES

----------

Wednesday, September 13, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:11 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick McHenry
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives McHenry, Sessions, Posey,
Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Wagner, Barr, Williams of Texas, Hill,
Loudermilk, Davidson, Rose, Steil, Timmons, Norman, Meuser,
Fitzgerald, Garbarino, Kim, Donalds, Flood, Lawler, Nunn, De La
Cruz, Houchin, Ogles; Waters, Velazquez, Sherman, Meeks, Lynch,
Green, Cleaver, Himes, Foster, Beatty, Vargas, Gottheimer,
Gonzalez, Casten, Pressley, Horsford, Tlaib, Garcia, Nickel,
and Pettersen.
Chairman McHenry. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Oversight of the Committee
on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) and Other
Efforts to Strengthen National Security in the United States.''
There are a few housekeeping items before we begin. The
hearing notice for this hearing identified two panels, and the
only witness in the first panel, Assistant Secretary Rosen,
will testify this morning in an unclassified setting in this
hearing room. And there will be a second witness panel that we
anticipate will occur after the first series of votes to
discuss the classified portions of the CFIUS report.
So, we are going to do this in two different settings, two
different rooms, two different panels, but one hearing.
However, pursuant to clause 2(g)(2) of House Rule XI, the
committee must take a vote to move into a classified session to
discuss testimony that has the potential to endanger national
security. We will take that vote now in order to expedite the
hearing later this afternoon.
With that, pursuant to House Rule XI, clause 2(g)(2), I
move that when we return from the first series of Floor votes
this afternoon, the remainder of the hearing will be closed to
all persons other than Members of the House, staff of the
committee with TS/SCI clearances, the official reporter, and
the witnesses and their counsels and representatives with
appropriate TS/SCI clearances. We will close that portion of
the hearing because the testimony we expect to receive may
include material designated as classified, the disclosure of
which would endanger national security.
The question is on closing the remainder of the hearing to
the public. The clerk will call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Hill?
Mr. Hill. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Hill votes aye.
Mr. Lucas?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Sessions?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Posey?
Mr. Posey. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Posey votes aye.
Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Huizenga?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mrs. Wagner?
Mrs. Wagner. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Wagner votes aye.
Mr. Barr?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Williams?
Mr. Williams of Texas. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Williams votes aye.
Mr. Emmer?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Loudermilk?
Mr. Loudermilk. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Loudermilk votes aye.
Mr. Mooney?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Davidson?
Mr. Davidson. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Davidson votes aye.
Mr. Rose?
Mr. Rose. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Rose votes aye.
Mr. Steil?
Mr. Steil. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Steil votes aye.
Mr. Timmons?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Norman?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Meuser?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Fitzgerald?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Garbarino?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mrs. Kim?
Mrs. Kim. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Kim votes aye.
Mr. Donalds?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Flood?
Mr. Flood. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Flood votes aye.
Mr. Lawler?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Nunn?
Mr. Nunn. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Nunn votes aye
The Clerk. Ms. De La Cruz?
Ms. De La Cruz. Aye.
The Clerk. Ms. De La Cruz votes aye.
Mrs. Houchin?
Mrs. Houchin. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Houchin votes aye.
Mr. Ogles?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Ms. Waters?
Ms. Waters. Aye.
The Clerk. Ms. Waters votes aye.
Ms. Velazquez?
Ms. Velazquez. Aye.
The Clerk. Ms. Velazquez votes aye.
Mr. Sherman?
Mr. Sherman. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Sherman votes aye.
Mr. Meeks?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Scott?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Lynch?
Mr. Lynch. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Lynch votes aye.
Mr. Green?
Mr. Green. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Green votes aye.
Mr. Cleaver?
Mr. Cleaver. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Cleaver votes aye.
Mr. Himes?
Mr. Himes. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Himes votes aye.
Mr. Foster?
Mr. Foster. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Foster votes aye.
Mrs. Beatty?
Mrs. Beatty. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Beatty votes aye.
Mr. Vargas?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Gottheimer?
Mr. Gottheimer. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Gottheimer votes aye.
Mr. Gonzalez?
Mr. Gonzalez. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Gonzalez votes aye.
Mr. Casten?
Mr. Casten. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Casten votes aye.
Ms. Pressley?
Ms. Pressley. Aye.
The Clerk. Ms. Pressley votes aye.
Mr. Horsford?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Ms. Tlaib?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Torres?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Ms. Garcia?
Ms. Garcia. Aye.
The Clerk. Ms. Garcia votes aye.
Ms. Williams?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Nickel?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Ms. Pettersen?
Ms. Pettersen. Aye.
The Clerk. Ms. Pettersen votes aye.
Mr. Chairman?
Chairman McHenry. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman votes aye.
Mr. Sessions. Am I recorded?
The Clerk. Mr. Sessions, you are not recorded.
Mr. Session. Please register me as an ``aye'' vote.
The Clerk. Mr. Sessions is recorded as aye.
Chairman McHenry. Mr. Huizenga?
Mr. Huizenga. Mr. Chairman, I would like to be recorded as
an aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Huizenga is recorded as aye.
Chairman McHenry. Mr. Barr?
Mr. Barr. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Barr is recorded as aye.
Chairman McHenry. Are there any other Members who wish to
record their vote?
Mr. Ogles. Mr. Ogles as aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Ogles is recorded as aye.
Chairman McHenry. Any other Members not recorded who wish
to be recorded or wish to change their vote?
[No response.]
Chairman McHenry. If not, the clerk will report.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, on this vote, the ayes are 34.
Chairman McHenry. A majority having voted in the
affirmative, we will move into a classified session later this
afternoon after the first series of votes on the House Floor.
Room HVC 301 of the Capitol Visitor Center has been prepared
for the closed portion of this hearing. If there is no first
vote series at 1:30, the Chair will announce the exact timing
of that closed portion at a later time in this hearing.
I now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Today, we will conduct oversight of the Committee on
Foreign Investment in the United States, or CFIUS, and examine
efforts to strengthen our national security. Thank you,
Assistant Secretary Rosen, for being here, and I look forward
to your testimony.
CFIUS operates under a dual mandate: to address national
security risks in foreign investments; and to maintain the
United States' commitment to an open investment climate. Five
years ago, Congress enacted the most far-reaching changes to
CFIUS in a generation. This legislation, the Foreign Investment
Risk Review Modernization Act, or FIRRMA, extended CFIUS's
jurisdiction to certain non-controlling investments as well as
real estate transactions to sensitive U.S. Government sites.
FIRRMA also made operational updates so that CFIUS officials
could complete investment reviews more effectively. This
included creating the position that you now occupy, Mr. Rosen.
These efforts were carefully tailored to legitimate national
security risks.
Yet, at the same time, FIRRMA underscored the United
States' longstanding embrace of foreign investment. In addition
to reforming how we look at inbound transactions, Congress also
strengthened national security through a major outbound policy,
the Export Control Reform Act (ECRA). This was the first long-
term reauthorization of export controls in nearly 4 decades.
This legislation, which passed with FIRRMA, now serves as a
legal basis for our export controls against adversaries like
China and Russia. Like all previous CFIUS laws, FIRRMA
recognized that an outside investor may pose a risk to the
country receiving the investment. That is common sense, but now
the Biden Administration is proposing to use CFIUS to regulate
Americans' investments into China. That is nonsense.
Congress has repeatedly dismissed this idea, and for good
reason. If you oppose Beijing's state-owned enterprises, you
want more Western investment into China, not less. And if you
are concerned about Chinese technology companies, you want more
Americans in control of them, not fewer. And if you want to
expand the reach of U.S. sanctions and export control laws, you
want Americans in Chinese boardrooms who are required to comply
with these laws, not Chinese Communist Party (CCP) cronies and
not Saudi princes. This is precisely why Xi Jinping has been
attacking Western influence in Chinese companies. The Biden
Administration's outbound investment proposal will only help
him achieve that goal more quickly. That is not in the U.S.'s
interest. And that is not in global economic interests.
Since it was first floated a few years ago, the premise of
an outbound CFIUS has lacked the basic facts necessary to
warrant such a move. If you hear of loopholes and gaps, there
is not a single real-world example. In May, I sent a letter to
Secretary Yellen asking for data to justify outbound
restrictions. Not one of my questions was answered, and that is
because there is no data.
Mr. Rosen, you have an unenviable job. Now that outbound
regulations have been announced through Executive Order,
Treasury must seek to avoid a disaster in its implementation,
and I think you are the right person to do this and make the
best out of a really tough situation. You know as well as I do
that we must use time-tested tools to get tough on China, not
novel concepts. We need clear rules of the road and action
based on data and facts, not political gamesmanship.
And as I have said all along, to outcompete China, we
cannot become more like the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). We
must double down on our commitment to free people and free
markets. That is the smart, balanced approach that is
bipartisan and time-tested. Taking concrete action is the
toughest approach to countering the generational threat posed
by the CCP. I look forward to hearing from you today, Mr.
Rosen, about how we can work together to achieve our shared
goals.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
committee, Ms. Waters, for 4 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning. My
Democratic colleagues and I have long worked in a bipartisan
way to protect our national security interests by closely
monitoring foreign investment. We all agree that the Committee
on Foreign Investment in the United States, or CFIUS, is a
critical tool towards that end. That is why I am disappointed
that once again extreme MAGA Republicans are trying to shut
down the government. If they are successful, everyone in this
country will be at the greatest security risk.
I am so deeply concerned about the legislation that
extremist Republicans here in Congress and in States like
Florida and South Dakota are jamming through to protect certain
groups of people with no connection to actual security risk
from purchasing land. Let me be clear: This approach would do
nothing for national security, would waste valuable resources,
and, in many cases, is simply racist. CFIUS and its resources
should be focused on actual legitimate threats to our nation's
security, not on barring individuals from economic
opportunities on the sole basis of their national origin.
Next, I want to discuss outbound investments and whether
American investments are being used to prop up U.S.
adversaries. I have applauded the Biden Administration's latest
actions on this issue. For years, committee Democrats and I
have sounded the alarm on how private equity and venture
capital funds are being used to finance military and
adversarial technology in the People's Republic of China. The
President's Executive Order is a good first step, but more can
be done. For instance, an outbound screening framework could
also address U.S. companies' supply chain resiliency, how
workers are treated overseas, and climate risk, all of which
deeply affect our economy and security.
In addition, the Administration could review certain
passive forms of investment, such as mutual funds and index
investments, so Americans know whether and how their hard-
earned savings support adversarial nations. We also need to
review the investments that private equity and venture capital
firms are making in China-based companies because they may also
pose ongoing threats. I hope my Republican colleagues agree
that if we are truly to confront our adversaries, we need to
ensure that CFIUS agencies are adequately funded and that
trillions of dollars in American capital markets are not
working against our interests.
Lastly, I want to be clear that as we discuss national
security, CFIUS is only one of many areas we should be
concerned about. Not only are we weeks away from an extreme
MAGA Republican shutdown that will pose grave harm to our
nation's security, but Republicans are leading the charge to
halt supplemental aid to support Ukraine in its fight against
Putin's unlawful invasion. If they succeed, this will cause
immeasurable harm to U.S. national security interests and
democratic values and only embolden countries like China. So, I
urge my colleagues to reverse course immediately before it is
too late. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman McHenry. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is also the Chair of our
Subcommittee on National Security, Illicit Finance, and
International Financial Institutions, for 1 minute.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today, the
Communist Chinese Party poses the most significant strategic
threat to the United States, both economically and militarily.
For years, based on wishful thinking, Americans have been told
that the rise of China would be peaceful, through trade and
increased business, and that American interests could coexist
with the CCP. As demonstrated by the Chinese spy balloon, which
flew directly over my district in Missouri, Americans now know
otherwise. Under Xi Jinping, the CCP seeks to undermine the
United States at every turn. As we work to maintain our
strategic advantages over the CCP, CFIUS plays a critical role
in ensuring those foreign direct investments don't end up
putting sensitive U.S. technology, data, or real estate into
hostile hands.
To that end, I am concerned about the integrity of the
CFIUS process as it is being eroded, and that the cracks in our
national security screening process are getting worse at a time
when they should be getting better and tougher. We must ensure
that CFIUS resources are focused on identifying and stopping
investments that are dangerous to our national security,
especially by the CCP switching roles, and I look forward to
discussing that with you today. With that, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The Chair now recognizes the ranking
member of the Subcommittee on National Security, Illicit
Finance, and International Financial Institutions, Mrs. Beatty,
for 1 minute.
Mrs. Beatty. Good morning, and thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
Ranking Member Waters, for holding this hearing to conduct
oversight of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United
States, or CFIUS.
I want to highlight three points. First, we must ensure
that the agencies that make up CFIUS remain fully funded with
sufficient resources to carry out their vital work. Second, we
must make sure that CFIUS remains a narrowly-focused tool that
protects the United States from legitimate threats to national
security. And third, I want to take this time to re-emphasize
the points made by Ranking Member Waters about the
unquestionable importance of CFIUS as a critical tool in our
national security toolbox. I look forward to hearing from you,
Assistant Secretary Rosen, about not only the work of this
committee, but about protecting our national security. I yield
back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back.
Today, we welcome the testimony of the Honorable Paul
Rosen, Assistant Secretary for Investment Security at the
Department of the Treasury. Assistant Secretary Rosen, we thank
you for taking the time to be here. We will recognize you for 5
minutes for an oral presentation of your testimony, and without
objection, your written testimony will be made a part of the
record. Assistant Secretary Rosen, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE PAUL ROSEN, ASSISTANT SECRETARY,
INVESTMENT SECURITY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Mr. Rosen. Thank you, and good morning, Chairman McHenry,
Ranking Member Waters, and members of the committee. Thank you
for the opportunity to provide an update on the work of the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, or CFIUS.
CFIUS, as many have mentioned here this morning, is a
critical national security tool that conducts reviews of
foreign investment for national security risks. The Secretary
of the Treasury is the Chair of the Committee, which is
comprised of the heads of nine Executive Branch departments and
offices, with additional offices playing critical roles as
national security demands. As Assistant Secretary, I lead and
help execute the Secretary's role as Chair in that regard.
Whenever necessary, the Committee takes action to address
national security risks, while maintaining the status of the
United States as the world's top destination for foreign direct
investment.
The Committee protects national security by screening
foreign direct investment from any country, and, by law, we
analyze the facts and circumstances of each transaction on a
case-by-case. Our risk analysis is robust and it is focused on
three factors: first, the potential threat emanating from the
foreign investor; second, the national security vulnerabilities
presented by the U.S. business; and third, the consequence of
the transaction to national security. For example, if the
Committee learned that an investor with ties to a hostile
foreign actor was going to gain a controlling stake in a
critical government contractor, the committee would almost
certainly take action to address that national security risk. A
few risks, however, are black and white.
It is for this reason that our case-by-case assessment and
due diligence is so important. When we identify risks, our
mandate is to resolve them, whether by mitigating through
enforceable restrictions on the parties, or, as a last resort,
by recommending that the President block or unwind a
transaction. As designed by Congress, the Committee does not
implement a blanket country or sector-by-sector prohibition.
Through our case-by-case approach, we actually gain greater
insight and the ability to address actors and activities of
concern.
Over the years, as the national security threat environment
has evolved, so has CFIUS. Most recently, Congress enhanced our
authorities with the bipartisan Foreign Investment Risk Review
Modernization Act, as was mentioned. The Committee has
dedicated substantial time and resources to the successful
implementation of FIRRMA and the efficient processing of a
caseload that is at an all-time high. Prior to the enactment,
the Committee processed 237 transaction filings in 2017, and 5
years later, we have nearly doubled to 440 case filings last
year.
Among other things, FIRRMA provided the Committee with
important authorities over certain non-controlling but non-
passive investments into sectors of particular importance,
which had previously fallen outside the Committee's
jurisdiction. It also provided the ability to review certain
transactions involving real estate in close proximity to
sensitive facilities such as military bases.
We appreciate the continued bipartisan congressional
support for our mission, which has enabled our office to
continue growing across all functions. Since I was confirmed, I
have sought to ensure that CFIUS is marshaling all available
tools to support our national security mission. For example,
when CFIUS reviews a transaction that raises national security
concerns, we can and do mitigate those transactions by
requiring certain measures to be taken. These measures are
typically formalized in what is called a national security
agreement or a mitigation agreement, which places requirements
and conditions on the parties that are enforceable.
And we do not stop in our mission after a mitigation
agreement is signed, and the parties should not stop either. In
monitoring the parties' compliance, we routinely conduct site
visits, collect documents and information, and engage with
third-party monitors and auditors to ensure that agreements are
upheld. While preventing violations from occurring is our
primary focus, the availability of robust remediation and
enforcement tools is necessary because of the potential harm a
breach could have on national security.
As I conclude my remarks, you have my commitment that the
Committee will continue to use every available tool to protect
national security in the United States. Five years after the
passage of FIRRMA, we continue to assess what additional tools
or authorities may be necessary to protect national security,
and I look forward to working with the committee on these
efforts. And while I am mindful of the strict confidentiality
obligations that Congress imposed on aspects of our work, I
look forward to answering what questions I can in the open
setting, and I understand that there will be a follow-up in a
classified and closed-door setting to address additional
matters.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you
today, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Assistant Secretary Rosen can be
found on page 50 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you. We will now move to Member
questions, and I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Secretary Rosen, the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets
Control (OFAC) has years of experience managing restrictions
related to outbound investment and other financial
transactions, correct?
Mr. Rosen. Correct.
Chairman McHenry. And that is the case even when it is not
qualified as a blocking transaction or a blocking sanction. For
instance, OFAC administers outbound investments, and
prohibitions against Chinese military companies, and does that
well. It manages those restrictions for Russian energy
entities, and it does that well. Does the Office of Investment
Security have that kind of experience?
Mr. Rosen. I'm sorry. Is your question, do we have the same
experience as OFAC, Mr. Chairman?
Chairman McHenry. Right.
Mr. Rosen. We have different experience and different
authorities, sir.
Chairman McHenry. Right. We have an agency, OFAC, that does
this well. Yet, we are trying to build a regime with an entity
that doesn't have that kind of experience. Is that a fair
assumption? Isn't what you are trying to stand up the kind of
capacity that OFAC has?
Mr. Rosen. It is similar but also has differences in many
regards. One of the similarities, as you know, is standing up
this Executive Order under the International Emergency Economic
Powers Act (IEEPA), which is obviously the same authority that
OFAC operates under, but the way the Executive Order is written
is a bit different.
Chairman McHenry. So, why not just do it through OFAC? We
have done this for generations, so why not use OFAC?
Mr. Rosen. We believe that the Office of Investment
Security has learned important lessons from operating CFIUS. In
terms of the Executive Order and what it requires, it sets up a
notification and prohibition regime, and OFAC, while not under
my jurisdiction, as you point out, is more of sort of a
blocking and sectoral-based program.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. Thank you for the answer. Mr.
Rosen, let's just drill into this, because the specifics of
implementation are going to matter. They are going to affect
industries more broadly than just what the Executive Order
says, so just let's get into specifics. We have a big
discussion on the Senate side about our artificial
intelligence. What are the specific differences between an
artificial intelligence that helps a drone operator identify a
military target on an image and an artificial intelligence that
helps a doctor identify cancer on an MRI?
Mr. Rosen. Mr. Chairman, it is a good question, and the way
the Executive Order approaches artificial intelligence is, as
you know, it identifies it as one of the categories of concern
for U.S. investments. We are in the midst of a rulemaking
process. We are working to collect information so that we can
strike the right balance, because what we want to get at is the
People's Republic of China's (PRC's) use of artificial
intelligence for military modernization. We understand it is
a----
Chairman McHenry. But that is done through companies, and
OFAC has a regime where we identify companies and people and we
target companies and people. And then, we are setting up a
regime where we are trying to identify through technology,
companies and people who target them. It seems redundant to me,
sitting on Capitol Hill and having been through the FIRRMA
reauthorization process, of which you have done a good job of
implementing huge facets. And so, in technical terms, how can
you hold these things to be mutually exclusive when you use
artificial intelligence in one company one way and in another
company in another way? It is difficult, right? So, setting up
this new expertise with this new approach as a result of the
Executive Order could be tricky and cumbersome and time-
consuming, when we should be using the time-tested tools of
OFAC.
Mr. Rosen. Mr. Chairman, these are all important questions
that you raise, and all questions that we have grappled with
through implementation and working on the Executive Order. One
of the important distinctions in this Executive Order that what
we want to get at is, in addition to the issues that you
identified in terms of companies we know about, we want to get
at the development of these technologies before they are on an
export control list, before they are on a sanctions list. We
don't want the PRC and American investments to help fund the
development of the next generation of military technology for
the PRC. That is what we are trying to get at.
Chairman McHenry. Right. So rather than using a CFIUS
process that is cumbersome already for inbound investment, we
have a capacity problem, and that is not specific to budgets.
It is not specific to this Administration. We have a capacity
problem given the amount of investment, and this is what I will
just raise. Why not use the time-tested tools of OFAC and
enhance that with budget capacity and everything else? That has
been our approach. That is what our approach was as a matter of
export controls and a reauthorization of FIRRMA, and I think
that is what we should return to. That is my clear message I am
sending to you.
And with that, I will go to the ranking member for her time
for questioning.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. Mr. Rosen, I think that we
all have so many questions and so many concerns on this issue,
and there are many that I could talk about. But I thought I
would bring up one that I and Chairman Brown of the Senate
Banking Committee sent Secretary Yellen regarding the announced
merger of the PGA Tour, the DP World Tour, and LIV Golf. This
transaction largely benefits Saudi Arabia's sovereign wealth
fund and, thus, its government.
And as you and Secretary Yellen know, Saudi Arabia has a
repressive government known for killing dissent, jailing
dissidents, and enacting draconian punishments. Under Section
721 of the Defense Production Act, CFIUS has jurisdiction over
transactions that result in foreign government control,
transactions involving companies that maintain or collect
sensitive personal data of U.S. citizens, and certain real
estate transactions, among others. I am asking now whether
CFIUS assessed the nature of this merger to determine whether
it has jurisdiction over the transaction. And if so, did you
resolve any national security risks related to the transaction,
and what did Mohammed bin Salman have to do with this merger?
Mr. Rosen. Ranking Member Waters, thank you for raising
this issue. I know this is an important issue for you and for
many others. As you point out, we do have tools at CFIUS thanks
to Congress' bipartisan effort to get, at on a case-by case
basis, risks, particularly as they relate to foreign government
control transactions, and sensitive personal data, as you have
mentioned. Those are all critical components of how we assess
and look at a review.
Of course, CFIUS and FIRRMA impose strict confidentiality.
And so, while I can't get into any specific transaction in this
open setting, I want to reiterate our commitment to making sure
that this committee knows that we look at issues that pose
risks on a case-by-case basis, particularly as it relates to
data and some of the issues that you raised. And I would
reserve the balance of the discussion for the closed-door
setting.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. Let me just ask, did the brutal
murder of Jamal Khashoggi by Mohammed bin Salman, at his
direction--was that taken into consideration at all? He was an
American citizen.
Mr. Rosen. Again, I can't address any particular case in
this context. As I laid out in my opening, we do engage in a
very robust analysis that looks at the threat posed by the
foreign acquiror and the vulnerability to the U.S. business to
assess a national security risk.
Ms. Waters. Does the Saudi Government benefit from this
merger? That is one of the issues that certainly must be
considered by us when we allow for these kinds of investments.
Does the Saudi Government benefit from the merger?
Mr. Rosen. Again, as a matter of statute, I am unable to
address any particular case, but I would welcome a further
discussion as permitted in a closed-door setting.
Ms. Waters. Let me just say that I really do appreciate the
work that you and the President have done on this issue of
foreign investments, but I want you to know that we have to be
tougher. We have to be a lot tougher. There is information that
I cannot disclose in this hearing where I believe that our
adversaries are continuing to have investments and purchases
that I think are not in the best interest of this country. So,
even though I consider what you have done to be very good, we
have to be tougher and we have to be more focused because I
think that our country, our democracy, et cetera, is at stake
unless we really, really bear down on the investments from
adversaries and others. So, I thank you for being here today,
but my message is, get tougher. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The ranking member yields back. We will
now go to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sessions, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Mr. Rosen,
welcome to the committee. We are delighted that you are here.
Mr. Rosen does CFIUS have jurisdiction and review over what
I might call real estate purchases that take place in
agricultural lands?
Mr. Rosen. Thank you, Congressman. CFIUS has three primary
aspects of jurisdiction, and we do have jurisdiction over
certain real estate transactions that involve agricultural
land, and they occur in two primary ways. One is the
acquisition by a foreign person of a U.S. business, and that
acquisition results in control, broadly speaking, of that U.S.
business, whether that is an agricultural business or
otherwise. The other way that we get at a jurisdiction of this
kind of activity is through the real estate jurisdiction that
in FIRRMA, Congress provided to CFIUS, which provides
jurisdiction for pure real estate transactions unrelated to a
business in close proximity to a sensitive facility. And we
work closely with our counterparts at the Department of Defense
(DOD) to assess what is a sensitive facility. We have recently
updated our regulations to expand the list of sensitive
facilities and now have some 875,000 square miles of coverage
in the United States for pure real estate jurisdiction.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Rosen, is that related to individuals,
because they are not a United States citizen, or is that
directly related to where there is a government entity behind
that transaction?
Mr. Rosen. On the control side that I mentioned, we look
very closely at who the foreign acquirer is, who is doing the
buying. What are their connections? What do we know about them
from a threat perspective working with the Director of National
Intelligence (DNI) and others. And in that context, we look
very closely on a case-by-case basis to determine what are they
getting and what are they going to have access to. Who are
their commercial relationships with? What do we know about
them, who sits on their board, et cetera. So, we very much look
at the identity of the purchaser in that context.
In the real estate context, we are looking at that, but
what we are also looking very closely at is the proximity
question, and we work very closely with our partners to assess,
is this a proximity concern, what is the threat based on that
analysis that I talked about, sir.
Mr. Sessions. And certainly, the control of the money. Mr.
Rosen, I have a bill with Congressman Ronny Jackson, where we
have proposed that the Secretary of Agriculture sit on your
Committee, your board that offers this analysis. How do you
receive your information from the Agriculture Secretary?
Mr. Rosen. Thank you for raising this because the United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) is one of our key
partners that I talked about. While not a member, we have a
process in place to ensure that we work closely with them, and
it is important to unpack that a bit. We share visibility to
USDA with all of the filings that we get so we can ensure, from
USDA's prospective, where there is a food security issue, where
there is an agricultural-related issue where they need to play
a part and an active role. And looking at all the filings, when
they do say, look, this filing has agriculture implications, we
bring them in just as if they were a full member of the
Committee, where they would be responsible for the risk-based
analysis as well as providing certifications at the Secretary
and Deputy Secretary level, so----
Mr. Sessions. Thank you. According to United States
Department of Agriculture, 37.6 million acres today of U.S.
agricultural land is owned by foreign investors. That is nearly
3 percent of all privately-held land in the United States. Have
you done a good review of that, and do you believe that your
purview takes that into account, and have you issued a report
or how would you issue a report on those 37.6 six million acres
of which the Agriculture Department speaks?
Mr. Rosen. We would be happy to work with USDA and look at
that question. We do through the----
Mr. Sessions. See, this is my point, Mr. Rosen. If the
Secretary of Agriculture were a regular part of your
interaction and they had a person who looked at that, you would
be able to tell me, ``Congressman Sessions, we have looked at
that 37.6 million acres because we have been working with and
they are a part of our team.'' Now, you are telling me you will
be glad to look at it, and this is, I think, the concern that
many of us on our side, meaning Members of Congress, have about
the sensitivity we have about this as opposed to looking
forward.
I hope that you will take my comments as I intended them
and that you will respond back to me, and I will accept your
fair answer. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. And if the witness will respond in
writing to the gentleman's request.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Some have argued, and I fear the Chair was
making this argument that somehow if we invest in China and
Americans are on their boards, that we will have political
influence in Beijing. As the former Chair of the Asia
Subcommittee, I am here to say that is simply not the case. The
Chinese Communist Party is not going to listen to business
lobbyists. The Chinese Communist Party does not need political
action committee (PAC) contributions in order to run in the
next election.
Since the beginning of this century when we granted Most
Favored Nation status to China, we were told that if we share
our economy with them gratuitously, they will share our values.
That is simply not the case. The problem is that we have this
enormous trade deficit with China. We have that because we do
not have adequate tariffs. We have that because Walmart makes a
lot of money importing from China, et cetera. And every year,
we ship them $300 billion to $400 billion. That is close to $4
trillion every decade, and that money is sitting there. It is
going to do something, and almost everything it can do is bad.
But we add to that our investment policy, which is closer
to the jurisdiction of this committee. Half of the foreign
initial public offerings (IPOs) here on Wall Street are from
China. We send our investment dollars to China. I am looking to
work with others to prohibit American index funds from
investing in Chinese companies because the risks for investing
in China should not be handled by paint-by-the-numbers index
investing where you just automatically invest in companies.
But even greater is the capital gains allowance. We provide
an incentive for investors. We tax investors lower than we tax
secretaries and nurses, and we do it because we want to
encourage investors to build economies and create jobs by
making investments in economies, and we provide that incentive
to those who build the Chinese economy and provide jobs in
China. So, we have this undefendable incentive for investing in
China.
Now, once the Chinese have this money, it is said, well, we
don't want them to buy American farmland. Well, they can buy
farmland in Ethiopia and upset our Africa policy. They can buy
farmland in Russia and fund Putin's war. They can buy U.S.
Treasuries, and numerous articles have been talking about how
Chinese ownership of Treasuries is a problem. They can buy our
companies. They can buy influence in Europe, or they can
repatriate the money and spend it on AI technology. Once we
incentivize investment in China, once we roll over and run a
huge trade deficit with China, they have these funds, and
perhaps the most benign thing they could do is buy American
farmland. When they buy American farmland from an American,
that American puts the money in a U.S. bank where it is
available to build the American economy. It puts the money in
the U.S. stock market where it is there to build the U.S.
economy, and if we do have a fight with China, we can simply
seize the farmland, just as they will take hostage all of our
investments in China.
My question is regarding investment in China. The argument
is we want to choke off investment to strategic sectors, but
money is fungible. How much do we accomplish by saying to an
American, don't invest in an AI company in China, invest in a
furniture factory in China, and then the Chinese investor, who
would otherwise get the best return for investing in the
furniture company, invests in AI? If we fund the non-strategic
part of investment in China, won't they have all the capital
they need to invest in the strategic party?
Mr. Rosen. Thank you, Congressman, for the question and
your interest on this important issue with regard to outbound
investment to China. As this committee knows well, the
President issued an Executive Order, and what underpins that
Executive Order is the national security concern emanating from
American investments that come with certain intangibles:
branding, expertise, and the like.
Mr. Sherman. So, the concern is that if you incentivize an
American to want to see an AI company in China do well, that
American may provide the technology and the expertise, not just
the capital?
Mr. Rosen. That is one of the bases upon which we are
concerned.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. I will
now go to the Vice Chair of the committee, Mr. Hill of
Arkansas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. I thank the Chair. Mr. Rosen, thank you for being
here and representing the Treasury Department in front of this
committee. We enjoy our engagement with your Department, and
particularly on something important like this And you have seen
strong bipartisan interest in the work of CFIUS, and that we
are, on both sides of the aisle, laser-focused on making sure
that it works well, and is effective in protecting against
national security risk potentially posed by foreign investors.
Mr. Rosen, your appearance today is ostensibly to talk
about the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act
(FIRRMA), and we are glad to have you here. It has been 5 years
since it was enacted. It is hard to believe that 5 years has
gone by. But also, the Biden Administration issued Executive
Order 14083, ensuring robust consideration of evolving national
security risk by CFIUS. Notably, the Executive Order doesn't
change the committee's existing legal jurisdiction over the
regulatory process, but it provides guidance on the national
security risk factors that CFIUS should consider. Is that your
understanding of that Executive Order?
Mr. Rosen. Yes, Congressman. The guidance coming out of
that order sharpens CFIUS's focus. It is also important from a
public messaging standpoint so the community understands the
things about which we are quite concerned.
Mr. Hill. Good, and the risk factors include supply chain
security and resiliency for eight specific industries,
including artificial intelligence and quantum computing, but it
also goes on to include clean energy and climate adaptation
technologies. Is that right?
Mr. Rosen. I believe there is a mention of that in the
Executive Order, Congressman.
Mr. Hill. Russia's invasion of Ukraine, I think, shows the
whole world just how dangerous it could be for countries to
make their essential energy dependent on a single country or a
single source, and the failure to take an all-of-the-above
approach to a diverse energy production portfolio or diverse
geography threatens countries, and we have seen that in Europe
in spades with the dependency on Russian gas, for example.
But I feel the same way about our own energy security here
in the United States. We passed H.R. 1 with an idea that we
want to have an all-of-the-above energy strategy for decades
ahead as we move to a less carbon-dependent world. So, Treasury
and CFIUS thinking about national security risk factors as it
relates to clean energy and adaption technology--what does that
have to do with national security from a CFIUS point of view?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, thank you for the question on these
factors, and as you pointed out at the top, Congress gave CFIUS
broad authority to assess, through its analysis, what has an
impact on national security. We look at all factors that may
have relevance to national security, so in FIRRMA----
Mr. Hill. Would you agree that if we had foreign investment
in this country that was only interested in renewables, but we
had no battery storage for any renewables, and that we
dislocate our baseload power, that would be a national security
risk as well, right?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, we have the benefit of looking at
the facts and circumstances presented by each transaction, and
we don't get into----
Mr. Hill. Could TotalEnergies build a new refinery in the
United States? Would you approve that?
Mr. Rosen. I'm sorry. I didn't hear----
Mr. Hill. TotalEnergies, the French energy company, would
they be able to build a refinery? Would you approve a refinery
in the United States?
Mr. Rosen. Again, Congressman, it is important----
Mr. Hill. I know it is. I am being rhetorical. I know I am
not going to get the answer I am seeking, I understand, and I
respect you for that. But you have to understand that Chairman
McHenry and I write frequently to the Office of International
Affairs at Treasury about making sure that an all-of-the-above
energy policy is critical to the U.S. for our own domestic
needs, but also for projecting America's influence around the
world. For example, the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD) does not finance nuclear. That is not smart,
and they are very reluctant to finance the Romanians' or the
Bulgarians' efforts to develop natural gas in their own Black
Sea. I think that is shortsighted, and I think that is
shortsighted at the World Bank and at the other international
lending organizations. Do you agree that energy security is
national security?
Mr. Rosen. Certainly, energy security can be national
security, but, again, we focus on the facts of a specific
threat----
Mr. Hill. I understand that CFIUS also considers foreign
investments that might expose personal data. I know that is in
the Executive Order as well. Can you tell us how you are
protecting health and biological data in your work?
Mr. Rosen. We are focusing on this very closely. The PRC
has a demonstrated intent and capability to get access to
troves of American personal data for espionage and other
purposes. And any time a situation comes up in a case that
presents potential exposure and other tools are not available
to deal with it, CFIUS looks very closely at that, and----
Mr. Hill. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has
expired. With that, we will go to the gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Rosen, for your willingness to testify before the committee and
help us with our work.
This past August, Executive Order 14105 was also released.
This Executive Order directs the Treasury to draft regulations
that require disclosure of or prohibit certain outbound foreign
investments into mainland China, to Hong Kong, or to Macau.
Some argue that the scope of this Executive Order is too
narrow. They actually point out that it only covers certain
aspects of advanced computing, quantum information
technologies, and AI, and that other activity, including
financial investment, might not be covered.
So, I would like to just get your assessment and your view
of how efficiently Executive Order 14105 would address U.S.
policymakers' concerns about U.S. investments in Chinese
technology and their capabilities, and if there are gaps, and I
realize any Executive Order cannot be full spectrum over every
concern, but if there are any gaps that you recognize that
might be covered, just to give Congress an idea of what
direction we might be looking at. Thank you.
Mr. Rosen. Thank you, Congressman, and thank you for
raising the important issue of outbound investment. As you
point out, this is the President's Executive Order, and really
what underpins the Executive Order is a concern that is
squarely rooted in national security, that the PRC in this case
can use not just American investment dollars, but the know-how,
expertise, and branding that comes with those dollars, to help
make their surveillance capabilities, their military
applications, and intelligence more successful, more quickly,
in a way that directly threatens American national security.
So, we share concerns about supply chain resilience and
supply dependence on China, but the purpose of this Executive
Order is to focus on a narrow set of national security
objectives with the clear mandate by the President to revisit
on an annual basis to assess, to your point, what gaps may
exist, and how we can improve it. And I think also, the benefit
of the notification scheme is to collect more information and
more data, as one of the issues that the chairman pointed out.
And that is what underpins this Executive Order.
Mr. Lynch. And I know we are going to revisit this over and
over again, but any advice in terms of direction where you
think Congress should be looking next?
Mr. Rosen. We think that the right policy balance was
struck in this Executive Order. We think that we are going to
learn more over time. We think these three sectors are critical
to the modernization of the PRC's military and intelligence
state apparatus, and that is why we started with that focus.
But of course, as we learn more, we would look forward to
working with this committee to enhance the order and any
follow-on legislation.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. Congress also passed the Foreign
Investment Risk Review Modernization Act, as you mentioned
earlier in your testimony, which was intended to strengthen and
modernize CFIUS and enhance its ability to address concerns
involving non-passive, non-controlling investments in
technology, critical infrastructure, and personal data business
and real estate transactions in close proximity to military
installations or are a part of maritime ports or airports. What
is Treasury's approach to protecting U.S. critical technologies
in ways that promote U.S. competitiveness? You have this
balance here, but how do we balance those needs for security,
but also, we are trying to promote U.S. competitiveness in
those areas when we have these outstanding concerns about
China's investment in U.S. industrial policies related to
tactics that acquire sensitive U.S. capabilities?
Mr. Rosen. Thank you for that, Congressman. You raise a
very important issue because, the wisdom of FIRRMA and what
this Congress did in its enactment is to make clear that we
need to look at transactions on a case-by-case basis, and we
need to act as a scalpel as opposed to a sledgehammer to make
sure that we are doing what we can to attract all sorts of
investment, and addressing the particular and acute national
security risks that arise, and then either mitigating those
risks or, if they are unmitigable, referring to the President
for a block. And I think the way Congress set up FIRRMA gives
us the ability to be tactical in that regard.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you very much, Mr. Rosen. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Florida, Mr. Posey, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Chairman Luetkemeyer. Mr. Rosen, why
did the Biden Administration file an amicus brief saying that
the current Florida law prohibiting anyone domiciled in China
from purchasing agricultural land in Florida is discriminatory?
Mr. Rosen. I'm sorry, Congressman. I am having a hard time
hearing you. Could you repeat the question, please?
Mr. Posey. Why did the Biden Administration file an amicus
brief saying that the current Florida law prohibiting anyone
domiciled in China from purchasing agricultural land in the
State is discriminatory?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, thank you for that question. In
terms of litigation, I would respectfully refer you to the
Department of Justice in that regard, but I would be happy to
sort of talk about how we deal with threats from certain
countries on a case-by-case basis, which was the----
Mr. Posey. Okay. The last time CFIUS was in committee, I
asked him how many Americans own land in China, and if there
were any, how much they owned. That was months ago. They said
they didn't know and would get back to me. You have had a few
months to get up-to-date on that. Would you please tell me?
Mr. Rosen. This is the first time I have heard about that
question, so I can commit to you that I will take that back and
I will be happy to get back to you with an answer, sir.
Mr. Posey. Do you believe there are any benefits to letting
people domiciled in China own agricultural land in this
country?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, it is an important issue, and I
know one that this Congress is looking closely at. Again, the
wisdom of FIRRMA and my mandate, as Congress has prescribed, is
to look at the particular facts and circumstances of a
transaction. And I can tell you that what we know about the
conduct of our adversaries, including the PRC, we take a very
close look at in connection with any----
Mr. Posey. But can you give me one benefit to China buying
up land in our country?
Mr. Rosen. Again, Congressman, it is an important issue. My
job is to look at the----
Mr. Posey. So, you can't. Okay. Thank you. That is okay. I
will take that. On September 21, 2022, the Senate, in a 96-to-0
vote, approved an amendment declaring that China is not a
developing country and should not be treated as such by the
international community, yet China continues to get loans from
the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank in spite of
carrying on a questionable program of foreign investments in
other countries. Do you know if the Administration will support
Senator Barrasso's bill to help end such loans to China?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, when we look at a threat, as the
analysis requires, we look very closely at the intent and
capability of our adversaries. In the case of the PRC, what we
see is very concerning, but we look at that on a case-by-case
basis.
Mr. Posey. Okay. Will the Administration work with Congress
so that Members can get summary reports of foreign ownership by
country for sectors of the economy based on their survey
completed on June 30th, without violating any confidentiality?
Mr. Rosen. I'm sorry. You cut out, sir. I didn't hear the
full question.
Mr. Posey. Will the Administration work with Congress so
that Members can get summary reports of foreign ownership by
country for sectors of the economy based on their survey
completed on June 30th?
Mr. Rosen. I would be happy to work with this committee on
questions or follow-up that you have. We put together an annual
report that answers questions that Congress has asked. If there
is more data or information that we can be helpful with, we
would be happy to follow up with you on that.
Mr. Posey. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Green, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the ranking
member as well, and, of course, I thank the witness for
appearing today. Is it fair, sir, to conclude from your
testimony that you believe CFIUS has sufficient authority to
address national security concerns posed by foreign persons and
foreign entities investing in the United States? I think you
have spoken well. I think you have been very clear. Is it fair
to conclude that you believe that you have sufficient
authority?
Mr. Rosen. Thank you, Congressman, and thank you for the
question and your attention to these important matters. I do
think, thanks to the good work of this committee and Congress,
we have a robust set of authorities that I outlined earlier,
control jurisdiction, but also what was expanded upon in
FIRRMA, non-controlling, non-passive investments and certain
real estate jurisdiction. Those are important authorities. We
are always looking at our docket, we are looking at what is
happening, and we are always assessing and reassessing where we
may be able to improve, but I think the Committee has a strong
set of authorities to be able to protect national security.
Mr. Green. Thank you. I mention this because the
legislature in my State proposed restrictions that would be
directed toward specific persons, and it created quite a stir,
because the people who pass these laws don't have to interact
with the people who can suffer from some of the consequences
that may not be intended, persons of Chinese ancestry, for
example. When you start using specificities of this type, there
are people in this country who suffer. They suffer in terms of
how people approach them generally, but they also suffer in the
sense of consternation as to what they will do with land that
they currently hold, or will they be able to purchase
additional property.
I think that allowing 50 States to enact laws regulating
land purchases by foreign-born persons puts our entire country
at risk of retaliation because of actions taken by a single
State legislature. We have had one legislature conclude that no
one who is a noncitizen can purchase real estate. Fifty
legislatures acting independently on issues that can have
foreign policy implications, in my opinion, is a very dangerous
thing for us to allow. We cannot allow persons whose motives
may be less than honorable to pass laws that can impact the
entirety of our country in just one State. This is why I and
the Honorable Judy Chu introduced H.R. 3697, a preemption bill
that will prevent States from acting in what appears to be an
arbitrary and capricious fashion. I will not speak for her, but
I am honored that she would support the legislation.
I believe that we have a duty and an obligation to allow
CFIUS, at the executive level, to deal with these issues
because you have a broader view. You have a better
understanding of the geopolitical implications of allowing one
State to make a decision that can impact the entirety of the
people in the United States of America. I am grateful that you
believe you have the authority, and I am grateful that you are
flexing your muscles, and I would concur with the ranking
member; if you can flex even more, I think we will have a
better result. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. With that, I
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Rosen, for being here today. I would like to
start out my discussion this morning with you by letting you
know I sit on the China Select Committee as well, and we had an
interesting discussion the other day with two dissidents who
were at the Tiananmen Square protests years ago. One wound up
in jail for 7 years, and another one for 16 years. And we asked
those gentlemen the question: What can we, the United States,
do for the Chinese people, because our argument is not with the
Chinese people. It is with the Chinese Government and the
Chinese Communist Party. And five words is what we got back:
``Quit helping the Chinese Government.'' You could have heard a
pin drop. That is what our mission should be, to stop helping
the Chinese Government.
I made that comment to, I think, our Deputy Secretary of
Commerce the other day in our hearing. She had no idea what I
was talking about because they don't understand, and Mr.
Sherman was very articulate about this, and Ranking Member
Waters also made comments to the fact that we have to stop
investing in and helping China.
To that end, let me begin my discussion this morning, Mr.
Rosen, with a comment that was made in August 2023. The Wall
Street Journal published a troubling article exposing the
internal divisions and flaws in the CFIUS review process that
ultimately gave the Chinese Communist Party access to sensitive
technology that Defense Secretary Austin warned could fuel
cutting-edge weapons systems.
And with that, I ask unanimous consent to submit a copy of
that article for the record.
Specifically, the article covered the DuPont sale of a
sustainable materials business to a Chinese company which CFIUS
approved despite intense opposition from the DOD and the
intelligence community due to national security concerns. My
question, Mr. Rosen, is why were DOD's and intelligence
agencies' warnings essentially ignored? Are the Treasury and
Commerce Departments better equipped to assess national
security risks than DOD?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, thank you for that question and
raising the issue of compliance as a general matter with our
national security agreements. When I came into this job, I made
monitoring and compliance one of my top priorities, monitoring
national security agreements. And that is because the
agreements that we set in place are only as good as those that
can be complied with. And that is why, for the first time ever,
within about 100 days, we issued our first-ever penalty and
enforcement guidelines to make clear to the public, but also to
establish----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Was there a penalty on this particular
entity, because that is my next question.
Mr. Rosen. Yes. As I have talked about earlier, I can't get
into any particular matter by statute in this open setting.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. This is already in a Wall Street Journal
article here. This is common knowledge at this point. And I
understand that you reached an agreement with the Chinese
purchaser to set up a separate entity in which the information
will be held, and everybody thought this would all work, and
within less than a month, the Chinese had the information. It
has slipped through the cracks, and off they went. The question
then is, did anybody at CFIUS get fired over this, because
where is the accountability? Where is the ability for CFIUS to
hold people accountable for these sorts of things? You made a
deal, and you just said this. Is somebody going to be held
accountable for this deal here?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, again, thank you for raising the
important issue of compliance and monitoring. What I would say
is Congress prescribed a very specific and robust analysis to
assess national security consequences to transactions. Congress
also made nine members a part of CFIUS, and we engage in a very
robust risk analysis in every single case, putting aside any
particular transaction.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Along that line, Mr. Rosen, I would hope
that you learned your lesson from this situation. Number one,
don't trust anything that the Chinese Government is involved in
or may be even touching. But you mentioned a while ago in your
testimony that there are three separate threats that you look
at, and one of them is the potential threat emanating from a
foreign investor.
Well, the Chinese Government has a plan, a 100-year plan to
take over the world, and it includes taking over the United
States. That is an imminent threat, I would think. Look at all
of the actions that they have taken over the last 25, 30 years,
and what they are doing right now is even more concerning, and
yet we don't look at that as an imminent threat, and say, no,
no, no, no, no. To me, if I was in your shoes, if it had the
word, ``China,'' in any sort of proposal, it would be an
automatic no, absolutely, positively. Do we now want to help
China in any way whatsoever? Imagine, for instance, if instead
of, ``China,'' that you are talking about, it was, ``Nazi
Germany.'' Would you be approving it then? I think not. Why
would we be helping our enemy? That is the question, and
remember what those folks said, quit helping the Chinese
Government. With that, I yield back.
The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Cleaver, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
ranking member for this hearing, particularly because all
around the country--certainly, I can speak for my congressional
district, although I think it is of significance all around the
country--it has been, I think, crystal clear for some time now
that foreign actors are using social media to sow discord and
even present divisive information, trying to get us fighting
with one another, and it is reaching a large swath of America.
And my concern is that there are many people in our country, me
included, who would consider this to be a significant threat to
our national security. So, I am wondering what foreign
investment and U.S. telecommunications, such as Twitter or
Facebook, or X, Y, Z, whatever they call it in this alphabet
deal, would that trigger a CFIUS review?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, thank you for the question, and
this important topic and raising it. As I mentioned earlier,
there are sort of various aspects that we can get jurisdiction.
One is, irrespective of the U.S. business that has been
invested in, if there is a controlling investment by a foreign
person into a U.S. business, that will give CFIUS jurisdiction.
The second way, as it relates to your hypothetical, is in
the authorities that Congress granted us in FIRRMA in 2018,
expanding our jurisdiction to encompass certain non-controlling
investments into critical infrastructure, critical technology,
or companies that would have certain amounts of sensitive
personal data. And so again, it would depend on the facts and
circumstances of the transaction. But Congress was very clear
in expanding our jurisdiction to direct us to look at those
kinds of investments that would give us jurisdiction.
Mr. Cleaver. I am not sure a lot of research has been done,
but I did stumble across something from Oxford University,
which reported through research that there are over 70
countries in the world right now that are engaged in
manipulating social media, and almost any meeting I go to,
there are parents who are talking about social media in another
realm. But it is becoming at least clear to me, and I think
everyone, probably even you, that this is something that
deserves our strong attention.
And I am wondering if international companies have made and
are continuing to make significant investments in the U.S.
healthcare sector? I don't think we need to become an isolate
in the world, but they create jobs, and research leads to
significant discoveries that can prolong life in the country,
and so forth. I am not against that, but I am concerned about
the security issues. What happens with these acquisitions of
U.S. healthcare companies? Does that fall under the scope of
being a potential national security concern?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, first of all, the issue around
healthcare companies can raise a whole host of issues. One that
comes to mind is sensitive personal data and access to
Americans' sensitive personal data. We know certain adversaries
are trying to exploit that data for their own purposes, against
the interests of the United States. And it would depend on the
facts and circumstances of the particular transaction. But
certainly, investments into healthcare companies, when we have
jurisdiction, would be something that we would look at to
assess whether national security risk----
Mr. Cleaver. But can you look at it without--I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate Mr.
Rosen for being here today.
In 2013, China, the largest automaker at that time, was
given U.S. Government approval to buy a company, a Michigan-
based company called A123. That was a battery company back
then. Are you familiar at all with that case or that name?
Mr. Rosen. Not sitting here today, Congressman, no.
Mr. Huizenga. No. Okay. I would encourage you to take a
look at that. In fact, I was pulled into a classified briefing
on that and a CFIUS review of that. Earlier this year in a
hearing before the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, which I
also serve on, I had the opportunity to revisit that A123 deal
with Under Secretary of Commerce Alan Estevez. In response to
my questions, the Under Secretary noted that the A123 approval
was, and I am going to quote him, ``probably not the best
decision that CFIUS made.'' I would agree, and at the time, I
was very critical of the deal, especially after the classified
briefing that I and a few others had received. And I think the
conclusion then and now is that American taxpayers should not
be funding technology that will in turn be used in competition
against American enterprises.
Fast forward a decade, and here we are, and it seems that
we are still struggling with many of the issues that the A123
deal brought to light. And in August of this year, another
battery maker, Gotion, whose parent company is backed by the
CCP, acquired 270 acres in Green Charter Township in the middle
of the Lower Peninsula in my home State of Michigan. And at the
time, unofficial reports stated that Treasury concluded that
the Gotion deal to purchase the land was not a covered
transaction, which they define as a, ``purposed or pending
transaction with any foreign person which could result in the
control of a U.S. business by a foreign person.'' Mr. Rosen,
are you familiar at all with the Gotion deal that is happening
in Michigan?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, I am happy to sort of get into what
I can in this setting, and reserve the balance for the closed-
door setting.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes, but you are familiar with it?
Mr. Rosen. I have read public reports.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. And are you aware that some have
expressed concern about the proximity of Gotion's land purchase
to military installations in Michigan?
Mr. Rosen. I am generally aware of the public reporting on
the matter.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Does CFIUS have the ability to review
foreign purchases of land that pose a surveillance risk to U.S.
Government sites?
Mr. Rosen. As a general matter, Congress gave CFIUS real
estate jurisdiction for transactions in close proximity to
sensitive facilities, and that is as identified by the
Department of Defense and other committee members.
Mr. Huizenga. So, that is a, yes. Okay. Do you believe
CFIUS should have formally reviewed the Gotion deal?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, what I want to do in this setting,
and again, I will reserve for future settings to talk about any
particular transactions, but it is important to----
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Well, let's be more general. Should
CFIUS be able to review deals like this that have been
described?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, what I would say on this important
issue, and I know it is important to you, and it is important
to me as well, is that CFIUS has certain jurisdiction in close
proximity. There are also certain areas that Congress was very
deliberate not to provide CFIUS with jurisdiction over, for
example, greenfield investments, licensing arrangements, and
the like. And what I am trying to do is execute Congress's
mandate from a jurisdictional aspect. I share your concerns
deeply about PRC access and control to our critical
technologies, and it is something that we are very focused on.
And I would be happy to follow up----
Mr. Huizenga. Very briefly, do you believe that it is
sufficiently tight enough, that you have enough authority, that
the parameters are tight enough that you can review deals like
this Gotion deal?
Mr. Rosen. What I would say is I believe that the
authorities that Congress gave us are strong, and they are
robust, but it is not unlimited as Congress designed it.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. I am going to close with this in my
last few seconds. Michiganders and Americans, frankly, rightly
are concerned about the CCP buying up land and utilizing
taxpayer dollars in our States and elsewhere. And if CFIUS
cannot learn from past mistakes or fully understand the
adversarial nature of the CCP, I believe CFIUS needs to be
modernized even further, and we need to review that and meet
our current national security risks and the challenges that we
face today. And as you noted, we are going to be going into an
executive classified session later on today, and I will have
some follow-up questions on this specific topic that I will
hold for now. With that, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the
opportunity, and I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Foster, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. As you look at the balance you have
to do, I think it is important that we recognize the tremendous
benefit that the U.S. consumer realizes from the integration of
our economies, with not only China, but with less-developed
countries throughout the world. And anyone who says we should
make everything in the United States, I invite them to come up
with a business plan to make a microwave oven that will retail
for $42, manufactured in the U.S. with highly-paid labor, okay?
We just have to be realistic about this.
On the other hand, putting pressure on the system towards
friend shoring of these industries, I think is the right
direction. You are an important part of that. Now, you have to
evaluate these purchases or investments, both for the nature of
the foreign government involved and also for the national
security relevance of these, and this is really tough, and when
you get into dual use technologies, for example, things like
drones, which can be used to deliver groceries or deliver hand
grenades. And it gets even tougher when you talk about
technologies you mentioned, like quantum computing.
Now, how do you actually get the expertise you need to
understand whether a given quantum computing investment is just
sort of an abstract theoretical thing versus something that
actually might be of near-term use, and do you have trouble
getting the expertise you need?
Mr. Rosen. Yes. Congressman, it is an excellent question
and topic. And it is one that, as Congress set it up, CFIUS is
well-suited to address because with our nine permanent members,
in addition to access to other Executive Branch agencies, we
have access to subject matter experts across the agencies to
help us understand whether a product is dual use. Does the
business even know it is dual use, but maybe somebody at DOD
has identified a dual use. And so we leverage across the
Federal Government the subject matter experts to make those
determinations. And it is critical in our analysis to
understand what those uses are and also to understand, as you
point out, the balance. What are the commercial benefits of the
technology? How are those used? And that goes into both our
risk-based assessment about what the risk is but also what the
right outcome in the matter is.
Mr. Foster. Yes. And just what was previously mentioned
about Gotion, for example, they just announced a $2-billion
battery factory that they are going to be making as an
investment in Illinois. And it is my understanding that it will
be pretty much a copy of technology that they already use, and
there won't be, I don't believe, a big national security
downside of this. Also, we have to acknowledge the huge
benefits that we get when we get foreign investment from any
location. You know, when any individual or company comes in and
buys farmland anywhere in the United States, as Representative
Sherman mentioned, the American who sells that land gets to put
that money in the bank or into other investments that will grow
the U.S. economy. So, I think we have to look at this in a more
balanced way than we are seeing right here.
Now, back to the issue of getting the technical expertise,
because in issues like the attempts that the previous
Administration made in trying to shut down certain kinds of
scientific collaboration, they, frankly, sort of covered
themselves in shame by not having the technical expertise that
was necessary to understand what was truly a national security
risk and something which someone without the expertise thought
sounded bad. Are you getting the responsiveness that you need
and the expertise that you need from the agencies, or do you
need a bigger carrot or a bigger stick to get more responsive,
high-quality analysis of that?
Mr. Rosen. Yes, Congressman, I think one of the benefits of
having nine members is not only do we have nine active members,
but they are all quite active. We have full engagement from the
committee, which is important. We can leverage the expertise
across the members. We can get experts, for example, at the
Office of Science and Technology Policy or the Department of
Defense or the Department of Commerce. So, we are able to dig
into these issues, which provides us with very important facts
and analysis for us to come up with that determination, which
very much relies on that.
Mr. Foster. I see that as being a satisfactory
relationship. You do get the responsiveness you need because
there is always a danger if it is not the agency's main line of
business to say, okay, this is sort of a noise, we have to
respond to it, but we are not going to put our best people on
it fast. You are pretty satisfied with that?
Mr. Rosen. I am quite satisfied, and that is in part
because of the relationships that we have. There are Assistant
Secretaries at the various agencies that I engage with on a
regular basis to make sure we----
Mr. Foster. Thank you. That's good to hear. I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired. We will
now go to the gentlelady from Missouri, Mrs. Wagner, for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Assistant Secretary
Rosen, thank you for being here today. Congress enacted the
Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA) and
the Export Control Reform Act (ECRA) in 2018, which I
supported, to ensure that our export and investment control
regimes were fit for the challenge of safeguarding against
predatory Chinese investment and business practices. These laws
reflect the most comprehensive updates to CFIUS and the first,
I think, long-term reauthorization of U.S. export controls in
decades. Congress crafted these reforms to improve CFIUS's
ability to, I would say, connect the dots when investigating
and mitigating the serious national security risks posed by
countries like China. Mr. Rosen, how would you describe China's
strategy when it comes to its investments in the United States,
and how have the 2018 reforms helped CFIUS better approach
transactions involving China and other strategic competitors?
Mr. Rosen. Congresswoman, thank you very much for that
question. What we see is what the intelligence community sees.
It is what the FBI has talked about. We see a PRC with a
demonstrated intent and capability to use any and all means,
legal and illegal, seen and unseen, to gather U.S. critical
technology and anything else that it deems is in the national
interest.
Mrs. Wagner. Any and all, legal and illegal, these are
strong words. Since these laws were implemented, sir, have you
seen Chinese companies restructuring their transactions in an
attempt to prevent CFIUS from using its new authorities under
FIRRMA and ECRA?
Mr. Rosen. I want to be careful and reserve part of the
threat discussion for the classified session.
Mrs. Wagner. Yes.
Mr. Rosen. But what I would say is that we are working very
hard to stay on offense. That means understanding what our
adversaries are doing, how they are doing it, how they are
trying to evade our jurisdiction, and how we can stay ahead of
it. And that is a good portion of how I spend my day, trying to
think creatively, which this committee and Congress plays a
critical role in, in terms of coming back and regularly
reassessing our authorities, regularly reassessing where we can
be stronger.
Mrs. Wagner. Are CFIUS's current authorities sufficient to
catch and address attempts to skirt its review?
Mr. Rosen. I think our authorities are well-calibrated to
address the threat that Congress has identified and that we are
working to address and assess. That said, we are constantly
looking to assess whether we can enhance our authorities
through regulations under the umbrella of FIRRMA or even
whether we need statutory changes.
Mrs. Wagner. You need to keep us informed regarding this
because it is extremely important to our national security and
our future. Assistant Secretary Rosen, according to the CFIUS
annual report, there were 8 covered transactions involving
China and critical technologies in 2022, although it is unclear
whether this includes re-filings. Has CFIUS approved any
investment giving China access to critical technologies?
Mr. Rosen. What I would say, Congresswoman, is that CFIUS
will never approve a transaction unless it resolves any and all
national security risks that it identifies, critical technology
and the PRC being very high on our list.
Mrs. Wagner. Good. Again, Assistant Secretary Rosen, when
assessing national security risks, CFIUS seeks to know who the
ultimate owner or parent company might be. Does it prove more
challenging to determine these facts when a Chinese investor is
involved?
Mr. Rosen. It can be. Ultimate beneficial ownership is a
very important topic, as you point out.
Mrs. Wagner. Yes.
Mr. Rosen. It is critical to our work. We have ways to get
at that information. We have access to databases, public and
private. We also have a system set up where the parties are
very incentivized to provide us any and all of the information
that we need, and we have the ability to test that as well.
Mrs. Wagner. Is it as challenging when a Russian investor
is involved, sir?
Mr. Rosen. Any time you have a foreign investor with the
demonstrated intent and capability to get access to critical
technology in any and all ways, we want to be very careful. We
want to be very circumspect, and we are.
Mrs. Wagner. Lastly, if a foreign investor connected to
adversaries like Russia, China, or Iran seized control of the
U.S. business in the agriculture sector, do your current
authorities allow you to review these deals for national
security risks?
Mr. Rosen. The short answer is, yes. When a foreign person
seeks to get control of a U.S. business, that triggers CFIUS
jurisdiction.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady yields back. With that, we
go to the gentlelady from Ohio, Mrs. Beatty, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to our ranking
member, and thank you, Mr. Rosen. We have kind of taken you all
over the issues here, on this issue, so I want to try to get in
two questions, one on the outreach to the business community.
Can you tell me more about that, because I am always concerned
about whether we are doing sufficient outreach to the business
community to ensure education, awareness, compliance, and
Federal regulations in the process. To what extent have firms
indicated confusions over CFIUS procedures and determinations,
and what kind of outreach to the business community have
Treasury and your partner agencies done?
Mr. Rosen. Congresswoman, thank you for that question. We
spent a lot of time talking about risk, but this is also a very
important component to what Congress has set up and required us
to do. These regulations, these laws, are cumbersome, and they
are confusing, but intentionally so to make sure that we act as
a scalpel to address the risk. So, we spend a lot of time
engaging with the business community, engaging with our
international partners, educating on not just sort of the
nuances of the regulatory framework, but also on the risk
factors that are important.
And that is why the President's Executive Order from last
year was one of the reasons why it was important. Messaging to
the public about the ideas, the issues that we are concerned
about, critical technology and the like, how we view these risk
factors is important so that businesses can continue to
operate, they can continue to invest, and they can continue to
do so with a real-time understanding of issues that may get
CFIUS's attention.
Mrs. Beatty. It is interesting that you mentioned the
Executive Order, which almost a year ago to date, if you are
talking about the Executive Order, I think it was 14083, which
expanded the national security factors considered by CFIUS. Can
you tell me if the new factors were included: the examination
of transactions; effects on the resilience of United States
critical supply chains; and the technological leadership or
aggregate industry investment trends, cybersecurity risk, or
risk to the United States' person-sensitive data?
Mr. Rosen. Yes. That Executive Order added factors that
Congress started a very good list at Section 721(f) of our
authorizing statute. That Executive Order added to that but
also highlighted and sharpened CFIUS's focus on some of these
very important issues, for example, cybersecurity and data, a
real area where we see more and more transactions presenting
risk as it relates to U.S. personal data, which we try very
hard to keep safe and out of the hands of our adversaries and
those that would do us harm.
Mrs. Beatty. Are there any specific ways that you can tell
us that the Executive Order has had an effect on the reviews
and practice?
Mr. Rosen. Of course, Congress gave CFIUS the ability to
look at any factor that CFIUS deems and deemed appropriate. I
think one of the various benefits of the Executive Order was to
sharpen the committee's focus on some of these issues about
emerging threats and emerging technologies. It is also to be
able to show and tell to the public the issues that we are
concerned about, and so we spend time talking about it, but we
make sure that we look at the factors, again, on a case-by-case
basis, as it may raise national security risk.
Mrs. Beatty. And lastly, and maybe in part you have
answered this, but can you tell us if there are any ways that
CFIUS has improved coordination with the allies and partners in
information sharing or in the investment screening efforts
mandated by FIRRMA?
Mr. Rosen. Yes, Congresswoman, that's another very
important area. We have an entire office dedicated to this kind
of international engagement. Since FIRRMA has been enacted, we
have helped other countries stand up their own versions of
inbound screening, over a dozen of them. We engage in regular
interactions, technical exchanges, tabletops, and, of course,
we have used the accepted foreign state status that Congress
provided in FIRRMA, to bring, as of last year, all of our Five
Eye partners into that structure. And we have regular and
active engagement because we recognize that the more that we do
here in the United States--we want to prevent spillover,
backfill of these issues to our allies, and as a result, we
engage very closely with them.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you so much, and I yield back.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentlelady's time has expired. I
now recognize myself for 5 minutes. Assistant Secretary Rosen,
you are doing a good job. I appreciate the work that you and
your team are doing at CFIUS to screen malign investment,
particularly from China, but as an author of the Foreign
Investment Risk Review Modernization Act, I wouldn't be doing
my job if I didn't offer some constructive feedback, both in
terms of CFIUS being under-inclusive in its screening and also
over-inclusive.
Let me start with under-inclusive. Grand Forks Air Base:
It is disturbing that it took the Air Force commander and
Congress to motivate CFIUS to list Grand Forks Air Base in
North Dakota in its regulations and that such a glaring threat
to U.S. national security wasn't immediately on CFIUS's radar.
I do understand that CFIUS has now expanded the list of
sensitive sites, but I am worried that CFIUS could be focused
on the wrong activities, targeting benign foreign investment,
but missing such a glaring major national security threat on
our home soil. Why did it take the Air Force and Congress to
apply pressure for CFIUS to begin investigating this real
estate sale, acknowledging that, ultimately, CFIUS did block
the transaction?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, thank you. I appreciate the
exchanges that we have had on this important issue. Your
leadership on FIRRMA has been instrumental. I think you raise
important issues, and what I would say is Congress set up a
system for establishing jurisdiction in close proximity to
sensitive facilities. We have developed a list-based approach,
as you have identified, and we rely on our partners to provide
us with updates to what are sensitive facilities. There is
active engagement, and that engagement has become more active
recently, and we are in close contact with our partners at the
Department of Defense and elsewhere to make sure that we are
going to and do regularly update the list, relying, of course,
on their expertise to do so.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, and I look forward to talking about
the list of sensitive sites in the classified setting.
In terms of the other category of maybe being a little bit
over-inclusive, as you know, Congress authorized CFIUS to
exempt certain categories of foreign persons known as accepted
investors from the expanded jurisdiction and mandatory filing
requirements. To qualify as an accepted investor, that person
must, among other things, be associated with an accepted
foreign state, such as Five Eyes nations, and the practical
utility of the program has been, we think, limited by some
onerous eligibility criteria.
For example, not only must investors be organized under the
laws of and have their principal place of business in an
accepted foreign state, but an investor must also be able to
demonstrate, with respect to itself and its parents, that the
majority of its voting and economic interests are held by
nationals or entities of an accepted foreign state or the
United States, and that any individual or entity holding more
than 10 percent voting or economic interest is a national or an
entity of an accepted State.
This requirement poses challenges for publicly-traded
companies, which typically have little visibility into the
identity and nationality of under-5-percent individual
shareholders. The question is, how many, if any, investors have
qualified for the accepted investor status?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, the accepted foreign state
framework that you put into place in FIRRMA has been very
important. We have been working to implement that. In terms of
specific numbers, I would be happy to look at the annual report
and look at our data and provide updates. I do think, however,
that looking not just at who the investor is, but issues behind
that are important to our analysis to assess risk. But if you
see an issue in this area, I am happy to look at it and work
with you and continue to work with you to make sure that we are
addressing the national security risk while also achieving
Congress' intent with accepted foreign status.
Mr. Barr. You have a tough job, because we want to invite
the benign investment, but also screen out some of this more
malign investment like we saw at Grand Forks.
Final question: On the Executive Order on investments in
national security technologies and products in countries of
concern, can you describe the role of the Office of Investment
Security in CFIUS in the implementation of that Executive
Order? And this is a bit of a follow-up to the chairman's
questioning because we do believe that OFAC should be the
primary point on outbound investment.
Mr. Rosen. Yes, Congressman. Thank you. The way that I lead
the Office of Investment Security, the primary function of
which is CFIUS and leading that effort, it is envisioned that
the implementation of this Executive Order will reside outside
of CFIUS, but within the Office of Investment Security, working
closely with our partners in the Office of Foreign Assets
Control (OFAC), given the International Emergency Economic
Powers Act (IEEPA) authorities. But that is the answer to your
structural question.
Mr. Barr. What we need is clarity for investors--green
light/red light--not a bureaucratic black hole. With that, my
time has expired.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Casten, is now recognized.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Barr. And thank you, Mr. Rosen,
for your time today.
There was a report in January of this year that CFIUS was
reviewing Binance's proposed $1-billion acquisition of Voyager.
Binance has since withdrawn that proposal, but the reporting
said that CFIUS was reviewing it on the basis of national
security concerns. Are you able in this format to give us any
color on why you were reviewing it and what concerns you had
with that transaction?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, the short answer to your question
is I would reserve that for the closed-door setting.
Mr. Casten. Okay. Maybe we can follow up on that offline
then or some other more appropriate setting. I asked the
question really to make a larger point that last year there
were reports that North Korean hackers stole more than $1.7
billion of cryptocurrency. I think over the last 5 years, it
has been something like $5 billion. There have been public
reports from U.S. intelligence officials that more than half of
North Korea's nuclear missile program has been funded by
cybercrime and crypto theft. It is, of course, that we know
that there is similar crypto theft and money laundering crypto
networks that are driving Chinese production of fentanyl
compounds. And we know that Iran has been using crypto to get
around some of their sanctions.
The Wall Street Journal reported that Binance has actually
been assisting Russia in evading sanctions. Recognizing this
isn't all of it, but the public reporting is that the crypto
market has at least $20 billion in illicit transactions. My
question for you in your capacity is, if we know that North
Korea is stealing billions of dollars' worth of crypto and
using Chinese money laundering networks in order to fund their
nuclear program, is it safe to say that poses a threat to
national security?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, these issues around crypto and the
actors that you identified are very concerning and ones that we
similarly take very seriously. We would look at these kinds of
issues in the context of a particular transaction. For example,
one of the things that we look at is third-party risk, right?
You mentioned hacking activity. We may be concerned about a
foreign acquirer that may on paper not pose a particular
concern, but we know that certain entities are trying to hack
them and steal intellectual property or crypto and the like.
So, I think we really need to look at this through a lens of
the facts and circumstances of the particular case, but this
issue of third-party risk and who the investors are and where
it is coming from are issues that are very much on our radar.
Mr. Casten. Yes. I have been only half joking to some
friends recently that as long as we have anonymized wallets,
all blockchain really is, is a lousy accounting technology
because you can't track the record of transactions.
In April of this year, the Treasury Department released a
report, ``Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized
Finance,'' and they specifically flagged that there are
loopholes within the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) that need to be
closed to the extent that they allow these distributed finance
blockchain crypto companies to fall outside of the scope of the
BSA's definition of financial institutions to facilitate money
laundering and other things we would like to protect against. I
guess what I am curious about is, do you agree that we need to
strengthen the Bank Secrecy Act and fix those loopholes so that
we can prevent our adversaries from laundering money, evading
sanctions, and potentially funding terrorism?
Mr. Rosen. These issues, Congressman, are very serious and
ones that I know my colleagues at Treasury take very seriously.
The BSA, of course, as you know, is administered by the
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), which is outside
of my direct domain. I know these are issues that they are
concerned about and they are focused on, and I would be happy
to talk to them about following up with you.
Mr. Casten. Okay. I want to make sure that you all and all
the agencies have the tools to address it. And I tee that up to
thank my colleagues in the Senate, Senator Warren and Senator
Marshall, who have just introduced a bill, which we will be co-
introducing in the House shortly, to close those gaps in the
Bank Secrecy Act to make sure that we don't allow people to use
crypto to skirt anti-money laundering rules so that we can have
a robust national security presence. I would welcome any
support or guidance you have on that, and I would invite all of
my colleagues on this committee to join me in that effort to
see if we can make this bipartisan and bicameral, and close
that barn door that we know is open. Thank you very much, and I
yield back.
Mr. Loudermilk. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, Mr. Rosen, for being here today.
The United States' agricultural sector plays a vital role
in our national security, and this sector contributes
significantly to our economic stability, and is responsible for
our nation's food security. As we have talked about today, the
increase in foreign investors purchasing farm lands to try and
gain control of U.S. businesses in the agricultural sector is a
growing threat. In my home State of Texas, foreign entities
control more than 4.7 million acres of land, and that is a
concern that my constituents have, and should any hostile
nation want to cause permanent harm to our food supply chains,
this avenue provides them with the means to achieve it.
CFIUS has jurisdiction over real estate purchases, we have
talked about that, and leases near military bases and sensitive
government sites. Any acquisition of land in the U.S.,
particularly near military installations, must be handled with
caution and genuine oversight. Could you elaborate on the
current process CFIUS uses to review these deals, and how does
your committee determine if a foreign purchase of agricultural
land is a national security risk?
Mr. Rosen. Thank you, Congressman. This is a vital issue.
Issues, as you point out, like food security and our supply
chain, agricultural security and the like, are very important
issues that we take very seriously, and let me unpack that.
There are a couple of ways that we get a jurisdiction in these
challenges. One is through our control jurisdiction. Any
foreign person acquiring control, broadly speaking, not defined
as 51 percent, for example, of a U.S. business and agricultural
business, for example, would provide us with jurisdiction to
review the matter.
As you point out, our added real estate jurisdiction that
Congress provided us would also give us jurisdiction to review
pure real estate transactions within close proximity, sometimes
up to 100 miles of an Air Force base, and we have 875,000
square miles of coverage in that regard. And what we would do
when we do have jurisdiction is look to our partners at the
U.S. Department of Agriculture to provide us insights and
expertise to help us assess the transaction in terms of
assessing who is doing the buying? What is the threat from that
individual or entity? What are they buying in agricultural
business, farmland, et cetera, and what is the specific impact
to national security? That is the analysis that Congress
requires us to go through, and we would look very closely to
our partners across the committee, including at USDA, to help
assess that, and we have done just that.
Mr. Williams of Texas. That is good, the harder, the
better. There is no question that China is a hostile nation
towards the United States and that their goal is to weaken our
country in any way possible, and the interference and
aggression coming from the Chinese Communist Party poses a
significant threat to U.S. financial systems.
Our lack of information on China's economy and the CCP's
continued abuse of the system in place has jeopardized our
national economic security. There is a huge cloud of
uncertainty surrounding the Chinese financial sector, their
investments, and their industry practices. So this Congress, I
have championed legislation to address these threats by
requiring an analysis on the risks presented by the Chinese
financial sector along with a report providing recommendations
on strengthening internal cooperation to monitor and mitigate
these risks. We must hold China accountable for their abuse of
the financial sector. I think we all agree with that. The
question would be, has CFIUS ever had to recommend the
prohibition or mitigation of a real estate purchase or lease by
a Chinese investor?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, it is a good question, and I would
want to look at some statistics, but I am quite confident that
various instances of a controlled transaction or a real estate
transaction, we have had experience in terms of mitigating. I
am not sure if you said mitigate or refer?
Mr. Williams of Texas. Either/or.
Mr. Rosen. Yes. I am quite certain, although I would want
to confirm.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Will you look at that and get back
to us?
Mr. Rosen. Of course.
Mr. Williams of Texas. In the time I have remaining, can
you quickly highlight the kinds of mitigation measures CFIUS
would consider for a semiconductor deal involving the Chinese?
Mr. Rosen. PRC investment into a U.S. semiconductor
company, while I don't have the facts in front of me, would
likely raise a lot of questions and analysis in CFIUS. The
kinds of things that we would look at from the threat
perspective is, who is doing the buying? You obviously said it
is a PRC entity, so we would look at the intent and capability
of the actor. It would be very concerning.
Mr. Williams of Texas. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Loudermilk. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize the gentlewoman from Massachusetts, Ms. Pressley, for
5 minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Mr. Rosen, for joining us for this
hearing. The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United
States certainly plays an important role for our national
security by sounding the alarm on foreign control of critical
technologies and industries. I want to build upon and follow up
on Ranking Member Waters' question line regarding the
Committee's review of a country with many human rights abuses,
yet seems to have evaded significant scrutiny, and that is
Saudi Arabia.
Saudi Arabia has a sovereign wealth fund called the Public
Investment Fund, which has more than $35 billion in American
companies like Amazon, Walmart, Rideshare, and the food
delivery company, Uber Technologies, as well as the major
ticketing platform, Live Nation Entertainment. Recently, the
Saudi-backed LIV Golf announced a merger with the PGA. Mr.
Rosen, I certainly do appreciate that much of the work is
classified, but what can you share about the Committee on
Foreign Investment's posture towards Saudi Arabia, these
investments, and reviewing the potential national security
risks that are associated with them?
Mr. Rosen. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the question and
for your focus on this issue. As a general matter, I would like
to respond with a couple of points. One is that CFIUS was
enacted not to be country-specific, but to look at the specific
transaction in terms of who is doing the purchasing and what we
know about them. But Congress, in its wisdom, singled out
foreign government-controlled investments to pay special
attention to and to create additional requirements when it is a
foreign government entity or foreign government-controlled
entity doing the buying, and we look very closely at those
transactions when we have jurisdiction.
And the other point that I would make, which is really
essential in our analysis, which Congress requires, is what is
being purchased? What are we worried about? Are we worried
about U.S. person-sensitive personal data, for example? Are we
worried about the transfer of technology, like critical
technology? Are we worried about access to critical
infrastructure or a sensitive facility? These are the kinds of
factors that we look at in any analysis, but I think it is
important to highlight the foreign government control piece of
this as well.
Ms. Pressley. Right. I appreciate that. I asked the
question just because I did think that the jurisdiction was
clear and was there and really just seeking transparency. None
of us want to be caught flatfooted here, so I appreciate your
response.
But I do just want to double down on the fact that Saudi
Arabia is an oppressive regime. And in fact, just a few weeks
ago, human rights watchdogs reported that Saudi Arabia killed
hundreds of Ethiopian migrants and asylum seekers who tried to
cross the Yemen-Saudi border between March 2022 and June 2023.
Additionally, a report by the U.S. intelligence community
concluded that the Crown Prince, who oversees these
investments, approved of the operation to murder Washington
Post journalist, Jamal Khashoggi.
In light of these human rights abuses, Saudi investments in
U.S. companies, especially those in critical or sensitive
industries, clearly warrant greater scrutiny. For example,
building upon the question line of Congressman Cleaver, Saudis
hold a significant stake in Twitter, or whatever Elon Musk is
calling it now, and Twitter is within your jurisdiction to
review as a global social media giant that has sensitive
personal data on Americans, and is a major communication
platform for government officials, including the President and
your agency and the Department of the Treasury. Do you agree?
Mr. Rosen. I would agree that we have jurisdiction to
review foreign investment, controlling investment into a U.S.
business, Congresswoman.
Ms. Pressley. Very good. Bearing that in mind, has the
Committee on Foreign Investment reviewed any investments by
Saudi Arabian companies and nationals into Twitter,
specifically?
Mr. Rosen. I understand your question, Congresswoman, and
these issues are important. They present complex issues and
they require a specific case-by-case analysis. Of course,
FIRRMA put in place strict confidentiality requirements, so
whatever we can get into in a classified and closed setting, I
would respectfully defer to that.
Ms. Pressley. Fair enough. In the end, Saudi Arabia should
not be able to sanitize its image by sports washing, nor should
it be able to gain sensitive data by investing in American
companies. We need a review of these investments, and I hope
the Committee on Foreign Investment will scrutinize the Saudi
Arabian Government like the human rights abuser that it is.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Loudermilk. The gentlewoman yields back. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes for the purpose of asking
questions.
Mr. Rosen, thank you for being here today and for your long
career in national security. It is a very important topic.
Understanding some of the sensitive nature, any questions that
I ask that the answer may not be suitable for a public setting,
I understand. Please just let me know and we can address them
later today.
I first want to ask you about the CFIUS June 2023 report on
Committee activities in the prior year. That would be the
activities of 2022. As you know, Section 7(c) of the Foreign
Investment and National Security Act of 2007 (FINSA) requires
an annual report on foreign direct investments in the United
States by entities from foreign countries that comply with any
boycott of the State of Israel. In 2022, the Committee
identified 16 transactions involving investors that comply with
a boycott of Israel, including one transaction involving
investors from Iran. Can you elaborate on the nature of these
transactions at a level that is suitable for a public setting?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, thank you for the question. I think
putting in place these requirements for the annual report were
very important. We take a lot of time, we look at a lot of
data, and it is important for us, and we appreciate that.
Specifically, I am not prepared to address that here, but would
be happy to follow up with you.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. We will address that later this
afternoon. At a high level, is there any idea that, and maybe
we need to do all of this in this setting, but at a very high
level, did any of these raise significant national security
concerns?
Mr. Rosen. What I can tell you is that whether they were in
connection with these transactions or other transactions, we
would take a very robust review of, again, the purchaser, the
threat in connection with that purchaser and what is being
acquired, what is the U.S. business. So, we would very much
scrutinize any such transaction, looking at those issues that
Congress has prescribed, and, again, I will be happy to follow
up in a closed-door setting.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Thank you. And my last question on
this topic is, in this section of the report, you mentioned
that CFIUS could not independently verify the dollar value of 3
of the 16 transactions, meaning the total value of 7(c)
transactions exceeds that which was reported, I assume. What
particular barriers did CFIUS encounter that prevented CFIUS
from independently verifying the dollar values of those
transactions?
Mr. Rosen. As a general matter, sometimes we will run into
a transaction that presents a sort of odd restructuring, for
example, and it may not be your typical merger or acquisition
transaction, and in some cases, it could be that. In some
cases, it could be that the information wasn't available. But
again, with regard to these particular transactions, we would
be happy to address that in a closed setting, and if we can't,
we would be happy to get back to you.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Thank you very much. One of the most
difficult aspects of policymaking is balancing free and open
investment ideals with national security concerns. CFIUS has
the authority to lighten certain regulatory burdens on
investments from certain friendly countries. For now, CFIUS
only extends these relaxed standards to the so-called Five Eyes
countries, countries which directly partner with the U.S. on
matters of national security and intelligence. And as much as
you can, can you explain the specifics of how these standards
are relaxed for investors from Five Eyes partners?
Mr. Rosen. Yes, and thanks to Congress for giving us the
tools to be able to execute on that. As a general matter, when
a country is an accepted foreign state, what that does is
relieve investors from that country if they meet certain
qualifications and criteria from certain aspects of CFIUS, for
example, the expanded jurisdiction that Congress, importantly,
provided over certain non-controlling investments into critical
technology, critical infrastructure, sensitive personal data
companies. If you qualify as both an accepted investor from an
accepted foreign state, you might be exempt from that, for
example.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. I have the feeling my remaining
questions would probably be more suitable for the security
environment. So at this point, I will yield back the balance of
my time and recognize the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Garcia,
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
Assistant Secretary Rosen for being here and offering his
testimony today, and I look forward to the afternoon session
with him also.
Foreign direct investment has played a key role in the
Texas economy for nearly 2 decades. As of this year, over 1,700
foreign corporations are doing business in the State, and that
is no surprise since the Houston area, which is the area I
represent, is also one of the most diverse regions in our
country. It is home to many first- and second-generation
immigrants and their families representing regions from all
around the world. In Houston alone, over 5,000 companies are
engaged in international business, and approximately 1,000
Houston firms report foreign ownership. Additionally, Houston
recently ranked fifth in best cities for international business
according to the Financial Times. All of this has created more
than 110,000 jobs in Texas since 2015.
As the interagency committee that reviews these types of
foreign investments, your agency plays a critical role both by
protecting our national security and by facilitating the
approval of these major investments. National security is
critical. That has to be our top priority. The challenge for
CFIUS is ensuring its effective exercises in oversight of bad
actors without discouraging the foreign investment that creates
these jobs and boosts our economy, as it does in Texas.
My first question really is much of the concern of others
with regard to real estate transactions. The Port of Houston
and the Houston Ship Channel in Texas is home to multiple
strategic seaports. Houston is also home to a large hub
airport, a world-renowned medical center, and, as I noted
earlier, an area of much investment. Certain real estate
transactions by foreign entities in proximity to ports are also
reviewable by your organization. Does CFIUS's review authority
for real estate require additional clarification from Congress?
I ask this question because last year, there was legislation in
Texas, Senate Bill 147, that would totally ban land sales to
dual citizens and businesses associated with adversarial
nations including China, Iran, North Korea, and Russia. Is
State action like this harmful, helpful, or a distraction to
your mission, or does Congress need to step in and further
clarify any of the authority that you might have with regard to
real estate transactions?
Mr. Rosen. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the question and
for raising this important issue of real estate jurisdiction.
It is quite important, and Congress recognized that importance
in 2018 when it granted CFIUS this real estate jurisdiction for
the first time because it wanted us to have jurisdiction of
installations and facilities in close proximity to sensitive
facilities. Since that time, to execute on that mission, what
we have done is work with our partners at the Department of
Defense and elsewhere to essentially create a list and assess
what facilities around the country should sit on this list.
They can have jurisdiction of up to about 100 miles of
jurisdiction from a particular facility to get at things like
surveillance, espionage, and others. And I think that the
authorities are well-suited to address those risks in that
regard, but we also need to stay on top of it.
Just recently, we updated our list of sensitive facilities
to respond to the evolving nature of the facilities, how they
change, and to make sure that we are regularly assessing which
sensitive facilities we should have on the list to make sure
that we have jurisdiction when we need to from a national
security perspective.
Ms. Garcia. Right, but my question was specifically with
regard to any State legislative action. Is this helpful,
harmful, or a distraction, or are we just going to sit back and
let the States continue to file pieces of legislation like
this?
Mr. Rosen. Congresswoman, what I would say is my role is to
address the national security risk at the Federal level,
irrespective of what occurs in the States, and I can commit to
you and the committee that we will continue to do that. We will
continue to assess the national security risk from a real
estate perspective, from a controlling jurisdiction
perspective, and from a non-controlling perspective. And that
is what I am focused on, to make sure that we are not allowing
any transactions over which we have jurisdiction proceed unless
we have resolved any and all national security risks.
Mr. Loudermilk. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Gracia. I yield back.
Mr. Loudermilk. I now recognize the gentleman from Ohio,
Mr. Davidson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you. Assistant Secretary Rosen, I
appreciate you being here, and I also look forward to part two
of this, but in this public setting, hopefully I can stay
focused on things you can answer here. If not, obviously, we
will cover them later.
But looking through your 2023 annual report to Congress,
some interesting observations of roughly 50 percent, on average
over since 2018 of the notices and declarations wind up with
investigations, and of those, a fair number, once there is an
investigation, actually, almost half of those, 41 percent of
those actually end up being withdrawn for some factor. So, how
do you assess what you do follow up and do the investigation
on, and then what is behind that number of the percentage that
just says, yes, we will withdraw? What is going on there?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, it is a good question and I
appreciate any time somebody digs into the data in the annual
report. They are important data points that Congress has
prescribed. What I can share is that I am quite proud that
nearly 60 percent of the transactions we review clear in the
30-day declaration period or the 45-day initial review period.
It is true that many matters go into investigation and some
withdraw. The matters that go into investigation are when we
cannot determine that a clearance is appropriate at the 45-day
mark. That may be because an agency needs some additional time
to conduct a risk analysis. That may be because we have
identified a risk and that we may need to do more work in that
regard. And so, we work very closely as a committee to make
that investigation assessment, is the first part of your
question.
The second, with regard to withdraws, they can occur in a
number of circumstances. The parties may decide that they need
more time to assess what CFIUS is considering, for example. And
one of the things in that data, which is important, is you will
see a larger number of withdraws than you will of re-files
because oftentimes, when we assess that there is a risk or a
concern and we are prepared to refer a matter to the President,
the parties will just voluntarily withdraw and abandon the
transaction, or voluntary withdraw and divest the transaction
short of a Presidential referral, so there is more to unpack in
those numbers.
Mr. Davidson. Yes, thanks. And no Presidential referrals in
2021 or 2022, and as far as I know, none in 2023. Anything to
see there?
Mr. Rosen. Only to reiterate my last point, which is that
does not mean that CFIUS has assessed that a transaction cannot
proceed or needs to be unwound from a national security
perspective, because rather than face a public Presidential
order of divestment, many times the parties will voluntary
withdraw and go away.
Mr. Davidson. Okay. Thanks for that clarification. One of
the things that complements this was beneficial ownership
reporting, and, frankly, that focuses on companies that really
have 20 employees or fewer, and there is some concern that they
are shell companies. Ultimately, everyone has to report at
least once, but for the companies that a lot of the scrutiny is
on with a handful of employees, what is the status of the
rulemaking for that? When will this take effect, because
talking to my constituents, whether they are big businesses or
small businesses, or, frankly, even CPA firms, they don't
really know much about this?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, the issue of ultimate beneficial
ownership is critical to CFIUS's work. I know it is critical to
our partners and other regulatory agencies, including FinCEN,
which is working on this rule, of course, within Treasury.
Beneficial ownership is a very important part of what we do. We
need to assess who the ultimate owner is of the foreign
acquirer so that we can fully and adequately address any
potential risk, and we have the means to do that. On your
specific question about the rule and the timing, that is not
something that is within my domain, but I am happy to talk to
my colleagues at FinCEN and see if we can get back to you.
Mr. Davidson. Yes, so you are doing it now, even in the
absence of this new reporting requirement, I guess, is part of
the point that I wanted to make. And many of the members of the
committee, certainly me, felt there was a smarter, better way
to do it, in the ultimate way that it became law. And we would
certainly be open to modifying it because I think you have some
of the smallest, least-sophisticated businesses that will
ultimately be subjected to jail time and massive fines, not
that they will be targeted, but they could be.
And I think the last thing I would just like to bring up is
sensitive real estate. I think we will probably go deeper in
there. It is not like China comes and says, hey, I am from
China, I want to buy this sensitive property. How do you begin
those review processes?
Mr. Loudermilk. The gentleman's time has expired. If you
could respond in writing, for the record.
Mr. Davidson. Yes, I think in-depth will probably be in
part two, but thank you, my time has expired, and I yield back.
Mr. Loudermilk. The gentleman yields back. The gentlewoman
from Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much. Assistant Secretary Rosen,
thank you for being with us this afternoon.
We all know, and I think in your testimony you talked about
the expanded criteria factors that have been now been taken
into consideration since 2022 with the President's action. And
one of the things that kind of stood out for me is that from
2017 to now, was it double or triple the caseload? Is that
correct? Can you talk about----
Mr. Rosen. Nearly double. In 2017, we had a number of
transactions, I can get you the exact number, in the 200s or
so. And just last year, in 2022, we had 440 filings, the most
ever, in part due to our expanded jurisdiction.
Ms. Tlaib. Assistant Secretary, I don't know if you would
have the capacity, if you have the same number of folks on your
team working in this area. Again, because of the criteria
expansion, which is necessary for national security, how do you
prioritize the caseload? I'm sorry, I am a social worker at
heart, so I say, ``caseload.'' How do you prioritize what you
are going to work on first and what is a priority, especially
with----
Mr. Rosen. Well, we too call it a docket and cases----
Ms. Tlaib. Docket, there you go.
Mr. Rosen. ----and all the rest. As a former DOJ
prosecutor, I am familiar with the dockets. But what I would
say is the resources that Congress has provided have been
instrumental in making sure that we can implement FIRRMA,
building out our non-notified capacity, to identify
transactions that were not brought voluntarily to the Committee
to building out our monitoring enforcement and compliance
functions, for example, building out our staffing to address
it, which we continue to do. And we are continuing to grow to
address our broader case docket but also the broader
priorities.
We talked about accepted foreign state status, working with
our allies. We have talked today about engaging with
stakeholders, working with stakeholders. We need the capacity
to be able to do all of this. So, as we continue to grow, we do
need to prioritize the threats to national security. And that
is the genius behind FIRRMA, that the case-by-case review and
looking at specific risks arising from transactions, I think
gave us strong authorities to respond.
Ms. Tlaib. Assistant Secretary, under the expanded
jurisdiction, your authority now includes non-controlling
investment in U.S. companies that maintain or collect U.S.
citizens' sensitive personal data. That can have an adverse
effect on national security, correct?
Mr. Rosen. Correct.
Ms. Tlaib. We know that the companies have a tremendous
amount of control in collecting this data, and this is where I
am mostly interested in protecting our residents' privacy and
so forth. Is it enough to engage in what they call one-off
bands or interventions and investments, which may pose security
risks regarding that particular factor?
Mr. Rosen. When we look at bad factors, Congresswoman,
which I agree is a very important factor, what we are looking
at there is, what is the vulnerability of the U.S. business?
Ms. Tlaib. Like getting hacked into?
Mr. Rosen. Or who is going to get access, who is the
individual or entity or government that is going to get access
to that information? What do we know about their intent and
capability to exploit that data for an adverse national
security impact on the United States?
Ms. Tlaib. Okay. Yes, literally, that data is going to be
moved to another company that the constituent resident didn't
get a right to say whether or not that information can
continue. Anyway, would the national security risks facing the
U.S. from foreign direct investment be reduced if there were
stronger personal data privacy or security protections in
place, for example, if residents or U.S. consumers or users had
a say in how their data was collected, sold, and stored by
private companies?
Mr. Rosen. Congresswoman, it is an important issue. What I
think is relevant to the discussion here is that Congress
established CFIUS to be a tool of last resort. One of the
things that the President has defined in order to act under
CFIUS is that there are no other laws or adequate authorities
to address the risk identified----
Ms. Tlaib. So, you are familiar with the European Union's,
what they call the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)?
It is considered one of the strongest and the world's strongest
data protection rules. Do you agree? Are you familiar with
their rules?
Mr. Rosen. I am generally familiar with the GDPR.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes.
Mr. Loudermilk. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Tlaib. Okay. I will send you the data because I really
want your input about what the European Union is doing.
Mr. Loudermilk. The gentlewoman yields back. The gentleman
from Tennessee, Mr. Rose, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, and thanks, Assistant Secretary Rosen,
for being here with us.
Mr. Rosen, it is my understanding that the Director of
National Intelligence (DNI) is only a non-voting ex-officio
member of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United
States. Could you comment on the current role that the DNI
plays, and specifically, does she have sufficient time to be
able to review some of the transactions that come before CFIUS?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, thank you for that question and for
raising the important role of the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence (ODNI) in our work. They are indeed a
critical partner in our work, and they are a non-voting member,
as I understand, and as prescribed by Congress, but that does
not mean that they are not a very active participant and
important player in our work. What they do is they provide a
threat assessment in connection with every single transaction
that is covered under our jurisdiction, and provide us critical
intelligence so that we can assess the threat posed by the
foreign acquirer.
Mr. Rose. And would it be helpful for the DNI to play a
more active role in the CFIUS process?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, they do play quite an active role
in the intelligence function that they play. And I think, and I
don't want to get inside of Congress' head here, but my
understanding is that given the intelligence nature of what
they do, their role is to be objective intelligence providers
in connection with transactions as opposed to sort of weighing
in on policy.
Mr. Rose. How does CFIUS coordinate its activities with
other U.S. Government agencies that have a role in protecting
national security, such as the Department of Defense and the
Department of Homeland Security?
Mr. Rosen. We are synced up very closely, Congressman. Each
agency has dedicated teams. I have dedicated Assistant
Secretary counterparts that we meet with regularly, that we
review cases with regularly, and that we correspond with and
talk to on the phone, but it is not just at my level; it is at
all levels that regular meetings and engagements on our robust
case docket do occur.
Mr. Rose. The President has the ultimate authority to
prohibit or suspend a covered transaction if the President
feels there is credible evidence that the transaction would
threaten to impair national security and could not be addressed
using authorities and other laws. Mr. Rosen, what controls, if
any, are in place to ensure that a President with conflicts of
interest could not allow a transaction to go through that would
benefit himself or his family, even if it threatens our
security interests?
Mr. Rosen. In terms of what controls may be on the
President, I may refer you to the Department of Justice or
somewhere else for that. What I can tell you is that within
CFIUS, we have a very robust, fact-intensive process where we
look at the facts, we look at the law, and we look at the
intelligence, and we have a number of national security
professionals who help inform that. And then, if we determine
that a case can only be resolved by referral to the President,
we get together again as a Committee to assess the facts and
the law and the threat.
Mr. Rose. But it is safe to say that oversight of the
President's ultimate authority would rest with Congress or
outside of CFIUS. Is that a fair statement?
Mr. Rosen. I may not want to get into the separation of
powers issue, but I will say that I think there is a very
robust, objective analysis that goes into any referral to the
President.
Mr. Rose. In what ways has CFIUS improved coordination with
our allies and partners in information sharing and in
investment screening efforts as mandated by FIRRMA?
Mr. Rosen. The short answer is, a lot and very closely. We
have helped our allies and partners stand up more than a dozen
of their own inbound screen regimes since FIRRMA has come into
place. We have regularly engaged with them. We provide
feedback, we provide technical assistance, and when
appropriate, we do share information as permitted through the
intelligence process. We also engage in informal discussions
with them. And we have a whole team within the Office of
Investment Security that is charged with not just maintaining
those relationships, but growing them and making sure that our
allies and partners not just have tools and laws on the books,
but that they are executing against those laws. We want to see
action and activity associated with those laws to protect the
national security of not just the United States, but our allies
and partners as well.
Mr. Rose. FIRRMA authorizes CFIUS to impose filing fees on
transactions to cover the Committee's funding needs. Have these
fees been sufficient to cover your actual costs? I have 8
seconds left.
Mr. Rosen. I don't have that particular analysis in front
of me, but I would be happy to look at that, Congressman.
Mr. Rose. Thanks. If you could respond for the record, I
would appreciate it. I yield back.
Mr. Timmons. [presiding]. Thank you. The gentleman from
North Carolina, Mr. Nickel, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you so much. Thanks for being here, Mr.
Rosen. Safeguarding our nation's interests and preserving the
integrity of our democratic principles are among my top
priorities in Congress. I understand the need to address the
potential implications of foreign entities acquiring farmland,
particularly those from countries like China. While it is
essential to inspect foreign land purchases to ensure they pose
no threats to our national security, it is equally important to
approach any potential legislation with care and consideration.
Before I begin, I want to just draw a clear distinction
that I think is important for my role and my approach to this
issue. While we discuss our concerns about the actions of the
Chinese Government and the Chinese Communist Party and specific
corporations, these concerns should in no way reflect upon the
hardworking, dedicated, and patriotic Chinese-American citizens
who contribute daily to the fabric of our country. Our dialogue
here today and every day should be guided by facts, by the
desire to secure our national interests, and by a deep respect
for every individual, regardless of their national origin.
The rising tide of anti-Asian discrimination is very
troubling for me, and touches many of the people that I
represent in North Carolina's 13th District, and we owe it to
the Chinese-American community in the United States to be very
precise in our language, fair in our judgments, and unyielding
in our commitment against any form of racial discrimination or
ethnic discrimination. But we certainly have some concerns
about farmland, and I want to get into that. I have a few
questions. But first, I saw on your bio that you went to the
University of Colorado?
Mr. Rosen. Undergraduate at the University of Colorado,
yes.
Mr. Nickel. Have you been following the football team?
Mr. Rosen. It's hard not to.
Mr. Nickel. Did you think at the beginning of the season
they would be 2-0 right now?
Mr. Rosen. We are all very excited about the progress
there.
Mr. Nickel. It has been a real story, but back to the
questions. Given the rising trend of foreign entities,
particularly from China, investing in U.S. farmland, can you
tell me more about the measures the Treasury is considering to
ensure that these investments don't compromise our food
security and our national interests?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, thank you for raising this issue,
which is quite important, particularly this issue of food
security, agricultural businesses, when they have national
security impacts. And the Committee has various tools to be
able to address these issues, as prescribed by Congress. Of
course, our jurisdiction is not unlimited, as prescribed by
Congress, but the ways that we get at these issues are through
our controlled jurisdiction, and a foreign person acquiring
control of a U.S. business, like an agricultural business,
would give us jurisdiction to review a particular transaction.
As we have talked about here today, the jurisdiction that
Congress provided in FIRRMA to give us enhanced or new real
estate jurisdiction over pure real estate transactions in close
proximity to a sensitive facility--close proximity can mean
upwards of about 100 miles--so we have jurisdiction, in that
regard, over some 875,000 square miles of coverage in the
United States. And what we do, in either case, is look at the
nature and facts of the transaction because we need to address
specific national security risks. So, we look at what entity or
individual is doing the purchasing, and then what is being
purchased and what is the potential exposure from a national
security perspective. For example, food security, critical food
supply chains, and the like would be things that we would look
very closely at and circumstances where we have jurisdiction to
do so, and it is an issue that we take seriously. I know it is
an issue that this Congress and this committee is spending a
lot of time on, and it is an important one.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks. Users of the USDA's Agricultural
Foreign Investment Disclosure Act data have noticed
inaccuracies and underreporting under current disclosure
requirements, and limited information is available on data
covering land held by certain countries that provide tax-
neutral jurisdictions for private equity firms like the Cayman
Islands and the British Virgin Islands. Why is this data
limited or incomplete, and how is this impacting our national
security?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, it is an important question. I
think for some of it, I would refer you to USDA. But what I
would say is ensuring that we have a robust information
collection process to understand what the scope is of these
transactions that are occurring. What is the nature of these
transactions? What is being purchased? And I understand there
is some discussion about reporting requirements and making sure
that businesses are reporting transactions. The more
information that we can get to assess whether it is a
transaction that is covered by CFIUS and whether there is a
potential national security risk, is very important to our
mission.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Assistant Secretary Rosen, thank you for being here. On
September 15, 2022, Executive Order 14083, aimed at
strengthening CFIUS's ability to assess and respond to evolving
national security risks and foreign investment, explicitly
acknowledged that certain countries employ foreign investments
as a means to gain access to sensitive data and advanced
technologies, which poses a national security threat to the
United States. Furthermore, this Executive Order established a
clear link between the roles, activities, and capabilities of
CFIUS and broader national security priorities such as
safeguarding U.S. technological leadership and sharing the
protection of American sensitive data and bolstering the
resilience of the U.S. supply chain.
One of the Executive Order's goals is to harmonize and
reinforce the various tools and objectives within the United
States' cybersecurity strategy, thereby fortifying the nation's
ability to respond effectively to evolving threats. More so
than ever, and I think everyone agrees, it is clear that
cybersecurity is indeed national security. Mr. Rosen, along
those lines, how has that directive affected CFIUS's work and
protocols, specifically in relation to cybersecurity efforts?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, thank you. Issues around
cybersecurity and data security and the like are very important
and issues that we see emanate more and more, particularly in
today's age where we have technology and data flowing back and
forth between businesses. And the President's Executive Order
was important for a number of reasons, but chief among them was
highlighting these issues like cybersecurity. And while CFIUS
has the authority to look at all sorts of factors, ensuring
that CFIUS is laser-focused on cybersecurity and data has been
critical.
What does that mean in our day-to-day work? What that means
is what we are looking at is access to sensitive personal data
that an adversary or concerning foreign acquirer may get, and
making sure that we are addressing that either through
mitigation or blocking a transaction. But we are also worried
about broader cybersecurity issues like a foreign adversary
getting access to offensive cyber capabilities that a U.S.
business may have. And so, we are thinking about this issue of
cybersecurity and data quite broadly, as I know, this committee
and Congress have been doing.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you for that. How does the Executive
Order interact with congressional forums such as FIRRMA and
ECRA?
Mr. Rosen. The Executive Order is guidance to the Committee
on Foreign Investment in the United States, and, importantly,
it is the first time that there has been such guidance issued
to CFIUS. Of course, we operate under our statutory mandate of
FIRRMA. That is what determines what our jurisdiction is, that
is what determines what analysis we go through, and that is
what determines what our sort of broader authorities are, and
so they interplay together in an important way.
Mr. Timmons. And after the Executive Order, has CFIUS
placed an increased emphasis on cybersecurity?
Mr. Rosen. What I would say is, it has sharpened our focus
on these kinds of issues like cybersecurity. We had been
looking for a long time at issues like cybersecurity and data
but not just as it sort of sharpened CFIUS's focus, but also
plan outward-facing role to the investment community, to
transaction parties to understand that if they are engaged in a
transaction, they should be looking at these issues as well.
Cybersecurity, data security, what are the capabilities of the
U.S. business? So, it was important from both directions.
Mr. Timmons. In the time after the Executive Order, or just
in the last few years in general, what cyber risks has CFIUS
found to be most prevalent during your reviews?
Mr. Rosen. Congressman, again, it is a good question and it
is an evolving one. It is part of our effort to be nimble and
stay on offense and stay attuned to emerging threats as they
present themselves. And the kinds of cybersecurity issues that
we are focused on, I mentioned a moment ago, but they include
cybersecurity tools, offensive tools as well as defensive
tools. Understanding how our adversaries could acquire those
tools and use them against us is part of our analysis.
Now, of course, we are also focused on third-party risk as
it relates to cybersecurity, so we may have an acquirer that is
buying something and we may not have a particular concern about
the acquirer, but we may have information that there is third-
party risk because the acquirer has been hacked multiple times,
they don't have an adequate cybersecurity program in place, and
that is one of the issues that we focus on sometimes in
mitigation. So, this issue around cybersecurity has a whole
host of implications, and there are various ways that the
Committee can get at that.
Mr. Timmons. Sure. Thank you for that. The gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Steil, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
very much for being here, Assistant Secretary Rosen. When we
think about CFIUS, in many ways, we are making sure that we are
safeguarding the United States and balancing that with not
being overburdening in an unnecessary way on the economy. There
are a couple of things I want to dig into here on the
homestretch of this first part of the panel. The number of
cases requiring mitigation has jumped nearly 70 percent, even
in the past 2 years or so. Why are we seeing such an increase
in the number of transactions requiring mitigation, in your
opinion?
Mr. Rosen. Thank you, Congressman, and thank you for
highlighting this issue. There are a number of reasons we are
seeing more mitigation. We are seeing a range of threats that
are evolving. We are seeing a range of vulnerabilities that are
evolving. Data and cybersecurity, as we just talked about, is
an increasing challenge. When we think about the types of
transactions that occur that don't involve sensitive personal
data, those are a meaningful number, for example, and
oftentimes, we believe that we need to mitigate those types of
transactions, and the nature of the transactions are evolving.
And the other aspect is we are refining our approach. We are
taking a very, very close look at these transactions, and we
are not clearing them without mitigation or referral when
necessary.
Mr. Steil. How do you monitor that mitigation? Are people
in compliance with the mitigation agreements you strike?
Mr. Rosen. We have a good solid track record of compliance,
but we also have a growing amount of enforcement and compliance
personnel. One of the first things I did when I came into this
job is put out the first-ever penalty and enforcement
guidelines from CFIUS, both to establish a framework for how we
would look at breaches to national security agreements, but
also to send the message that we are going to actively be
looking at this. So, any time there is a breach of a national
security agreement or a violation of our authorities, we
conduct an analysis to assess what, if any, enforcement action
we should take.
Mr. Steil. And do you believe you have the resources
necessary to conduct that review and enforcement?
Mr. Rosen. We are fortunate to have bipartisan support from
a resource perspective. It is a resource-intensive issue, and
we want to make sure that we maintain robust resources to do
that, and it is an area that we are growing in right now.
Mr. Steil. I appreciate that. Let me shift gears slightly
here, and, in particular, talking about the jurisdictions where
we are seeing these filings, we have seen pretty significant
increases from places like Singapore, the Cayman Islands, the
British Virgin Islands, et cetera. And obviously, those are
small-populated countries but significant in business filings.
To what extent is CFIUS concerned about the use of third-party
countries to evade intensive scrutiny, and how do you approach
that?
Mr. Rosen. It is a good question. Ultimate beneficial
ownership is the key to much of our work in assessing and
getting behind the veil of who is doing the purchasing. And in
each transaction, we will peel that onion as far as we need to
go to make sure we understand who is behind each transaction.
For a Cayman Islands entity, we are often looking at beneficial
ownership that is not the Cayman Islands, right? So before we
make a decision, before we finalize our risk assessment, before
we figure out where we are going to take a transaction, peeling
that onion is critical to our work, and we won't do anything
until we do it.
Mr. Steil. As you are looking at that beneficial ownership
structure, you are peeling the onion, as you say, and I assume
you are working with our allies to conduct that review? Can you
comment on how that coordination with our allies operates, in
your opinion?
Mr. Rosen. In terms of the ultimate beneficial ownership,
we are relying on multiple databases, commercial and private.
We are relying on certifications under penalty of perjury from
the parties, and when necessary, yes, we are engaging with our
allies, as appropriate, to share intelligence and to consult
them, consistent with our confidentiality obligations and
otherwise. But engagement with our allies in this aspect of our
work and, more broadly, is also a key piece of what we do.
Mr. Steil. But is that a substantial piece of the work
engagement with our allies? Is that an area where we think
there should be additional effort put forth by policymakers?
Mr. Rosen. Absolutely. One of the things that Congress
wanted us rightfully to do is help stand up other regimes so
that as we get tougher, our adversaries just don't go to our
allies and partners to get the same critical technology.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much. Thanks for being here
today. I yield back.
Mr. Timmons. The gentleman yields back. I would like to
thank our witness for his testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place his responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
Pursuant to our earlier vote, we will close the remaining
portion of this hearing to Members and designated staff
identified earlier. The second panel will be conducted at HVC
301 of the Capitol Visitor Center immediately following the
first series of Floor votes.
The committee stands in recess.
[Whereupon, at 12:46 p.m., the committee proceeded in
closed session.]

A P P E N D I X

September 13, 2023

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
