- PROTECTING INVESTOR INTERESTS: EXAMINING ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL POLICY IN FINANCIAL REGULATION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING INVESTOR INTERESTS:
EXAMINING ENVIRONMENTAL AND
SOCIAL POLICY IN FINANCIAL REGULATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

JULY 12, 2023
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-37

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-376 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                   Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                           JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 12, 2023................................................     1
Appendix:
July 12, 2023................................................    53

WITNESSES

Wednesday, July 12, 2023

Allen, Ted, Vice President, Policy & Advocacy, Society for
Corporate Governance...........................................     5
Copland, James R., Senior Fellow and Director, Manhattan
Institute for Policy Research..................................     6
Cunningham, Lawrence A., Special Counsel, Mayer Brown LLP........     8
Ellison, Hon. Keith, Attorney General, State of Minnesota........    11
Zycher, Benjamin, Senior Fellow, American Enterprise Institute...     9

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Allen, Ted...................................................    54
Copland, James R.............................................    65
Cunningham, Lawrence A.......................................    85
Ellison, Hon. Keith..........................................    98
Zycher, Benjamin.............................................   102

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Himes, Hon. Jim:
Written statement of Green America...........................   119
Written statement of the Interfaith Center on Corporate
Responsibility.............................................   125
Written statement of Out Leadership..........................   126
Written statement of the Shareholder Rights Group............   132
Waters, Hon. Maxine:
Better Markets Fact Sheet....................................   138
Written statement of Principles for Responsible Investment...   147
Letter from various investors................................   154
Letter from various undersigned organizations................   157
Copland, James R.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Fitzgerald..................................   163
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Ogles.......................................   163
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   166
Cunningham, Lawrence A.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Fitzgerald..................................   168
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Ogles.......................................   174
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   177
Zycher, Benjamin:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Fitzgerald..................................   178

PROTECTING INVESTOR INTERESTS:
EXAMINING ENVIRONMENTAL AND
SOCIAL POLICY IN FINANCIAL REGULATION

----------

Wednesday, July 12, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:09 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick McHenry
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives McHenry, Sessions,
Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Wagner, Barr, Williams of Texas, Hill,
Emmer, Loudermilk, Rose, Steil, Timmons, Norman, Meuser,
Fitzgerald, Garbarino, Kim, Donalds, Flood, Lawler, Nunn,
Houchin, Ogles; Waters, Sherman, Scott, Lynch, Cleaver, Himes,
Foster, Beatty, Vargas, Gottheimer, Casten, Horsford, Tlaib,
Garcia, Williams of Georgia, Nickel, and Pettersen.
Chairman McHenry. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Protecting Investor
Interests: Examining Environmental and Social Policy in
Financial Regulation.''
I now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an opening
statement.
We are here today to ensure U.S. markets remain healthy,
vibrant, and the envy of the world. This year, our committee
has found bipartisan agreement on solutions to strengthen our
public markets and increase opportunities for all investors. I
hope we can continue that constructive work today.
Unfortunately, we have seen a disturbing trend in the Biden
Administration's approach to regulating our capital markets,
particularly the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Rather than focusing on sound financial regulation, the SEC has
turned its attention towards non-material environmental,
social, and political issues. This misguided approach has led
to increased costs and burdens for those participating in the
U.S. public markets. These politically-motivated regulations
not only discourage private companies from going public, but
also hinder the competitiveness of American public companies.
The everyday investors who rely on financial returns for their
retirement savings bear the brunt of these consequences.
Today, we will discuss a slate of proposals that provide
common-sense solutions to strengthen our public markets. To be
clear, these are not about delivering a message. They are about
making a difference and making a meaningful change to protect
investors and ensure our markets remain robust and competitive.
First, we must make necessary reforms to the proxy process
to restore its efficiency and promote long-term shareholder
value. We must prevent shareholder activism from diverting
attention and resources away from the core issues at hand. To
be clear, I support shareholder democracy, but it should be
their say, not external third parties who exploit the existing
process to impose their own social and political beliefs into
and onto American public companies. This undermines the very
principles of democracy and transforms corporate boardrooms
into political platforms, overshadowing sound financial
decision-making. Ultimately, this harms everyday investors in
our public markets.
Second, we must address the burdensome climate reporting
and other requirements imposed by the Biden Administration's
Securities and Exchange Commission. The SEC has proposed a 500-
page climate disclosure rule that would replace voluntary
sustainability reports with mandatory disclosures, and in which
the question of materiality is really thrown out the window.
This includes demanding detailed emissions data and climate
risk management strategies even when that information is not
material to the company's business or their inner workings. The
SEC is not a climate regulator, nor has Congress authorized it
to mandate environmental policy via the disclosure regime. In
fact, Republicans have consistently voiced concerns with a
multitude of existing disclosures imposed by the SEC, and
emphasized the need for simplification rather than added
complexity.
Finally, many on the left have raised concerns that we are
not keeping up with our European counterparts in addressing
environmental and social issues. They argue we should mirror
the European approach rather than protecting our interests from
the extraterritorial reach of foreign regulators. We won't
allow European bureaucrats to dictate these priorities because
they have been unable to legislate them here in the United
States on the wider economy and the wider populace. What this
really comes down to is international competition. We will not
be able to maintain our standing as the world's most-envied
capital markets by taking misguided cues from other countries.
The legislative proposals before us today aim to tackle
these issues head on. It is time to get politics out of
corporate boardrooms and discourage financial regulation from
being weaponized to drive far-left environmental and social
policy. By doing so, we can ensure that our markets remain
competitive and enable American companies and workers to
thrive.
I yield back, and the Chair now recognizes the ranking
member of the committee, the gentlewoman from California, Ms.
Waters, for 4 minutes for an opening statement.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning.
Today's hearing marks the beginning of a month-long
Republican offensive to feed the daily outrage machine of Fox
News and its extreme MAGA Republican allies. This House-wide
effort is meant to divide Americans by ripping freedoms,
rights, and opportunities away from women, people of color, and
members of the LGBTQ community. That is the true meaning of the
term, ``anti-woke,'' and that is what today's hearing is really
about. But none of this should come as a surprise to those of
us who follow the work of this committee.
In January, after assuming the Majority, Republicans gutted
Congress' first-ever Diversity and Inclusion Subcommittee, a
subcommittee I established in 2019. Since then, and despite
promises made by the Chair, Republicans have done absolutely
nothing to examine racial or gender inequality in financial
services.
In February, the committee debated its first bill of the
new Congress. Was it a bill to address inflation? No. Was it a
bill to address housing affordability? Wrong again. No, that
bill wasn't even a bill; it was a meaningless resolution
condemning the non-existent threat of socialism in America.
We have also had three of the largest bank failures in our
nation's history. In response, Republicans rushed to the House
Floor to do nothing. Instead of using Floor time to deal with
the real crisis facing the American people, Republicans stopped
the culture wars by using Fox News misinformation about a
Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) decision that was
designed to increase homeownership for the middle-class,
replacing it instead with a new, $5 billion tax on future
homebuyers. This is why I called it the, ``MAGA Housing Scam
Act.''
Today is the first of six hearings this month where
Republicans will partner with a network of dark money, climate
deniers, and conspiracy theorists to wage their latest culture
war against responsible investing, and divert attention away
from what really matters in people's lives. The Republican
effort to dismantle ESG is integral to their agenda to gut
diversity and inclusion across-the-board. Let's not forget that
after the failure of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), before even
bothering to address concerns from depositors, some Republicans
suggested SVB failed because it had one Black board director.
Let's set the record straight with data.
The research clearly shows that 80 percent of investors are
supportive of ESG information because it empowers them to do
whatever they want with their money. That is why I say that
instead of, ``environmental, social, and governance,'' ESG
should really stand for, ``empowering shareholder growth.'' ESG
isn't just about values; it is about value. Yes, investors need
to know how companies are addressing climate risk, how they pay
their employees, how diverse their workforce is, and more.
Investors want this information because it is good for the
performance of their investments, which is also good for
society. That is as capitalist and as American as it gets.
While I believe that the series of hearings this month is a
terrible use of this committee's time, rest assured that
Committee Democrats will continue to thwart this anti-
capitalist, anti-investor, anti-business, and anti-American
effort. With that, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back. I will now
recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, who is
also the Chair of our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee, and is the leader of this effort, for 1 minute.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Across our country,
investors are being held hostage by those who don't want to
maximize retirement profits, but rather seek to push a far-left
social and political agenda, forcing lower returns on Americans
who are trying to build a secure financial future. It is wrong.
This approach undermines traditional and, frankly, legal
government structures and has turned our financial system into
a political battlefield. But I am here to tell you that
Americans are waking up. They are waking up to this
Administration's assault on their retirement accounts.
In this debate, one thing is clear: Companies have a
decision to make. Will they stand by quietly and let
bureaucrats in Washington drive up costs and regulatory
burdens, ultimately harming their everyday investors, or will
they stand up to the out-of-touch, unrealistic policies being
pushed by this Administration? Republicans will continue to
stand with those investors saving for retirement and their
desire to build a more-secure future by developing policies
that prioritize their returns, promote economic growth for all,
enhance financial security, and safeguard our capital markets
for all.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to the debate. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from California, Mr. Sherman, who is also the ranking member of
our Subcommittee on Capital Markets, for 1 minute.
Mr. Sherman. Under capitalism, if through the sweat of
one's brow and the frugality of one's spending, you accumulate
capital, and you have the courage to invest it in the American
economy, you become a shareholder. And under capitalism, the
shareholders are entitled to the information they want, even if
the Republican Party doesn't think they should have it.
Shareholders should be in control, not managers who don't own
the company. And shareholders should be able to get the
investment advice they want, even if it is advice on how to
improve the world, rather than earnings per share. For over 100
years, the followers of Leon Trotsky and the Socialist Workers
Party have waged war against this capitalist model. Today,
elements of the Republican Party join them in that effort.
Ronald Reagan would be ashamed.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back.
Today, we welcome the testimony of: Mr. Ted Allen, vice
president of the Society for Corporate Governance; Mr. James
Copland, senior fellow and director at the Manhattan Institute;
Mr. Lawrence Cunningham, special counsel with the law firm,
Mayer Brown; Mr. Benjamin Zycher, senior fellow at the American
Enterprise Institute; and the Honorable Keith Ellison,
Minnesota's Attorney General, and one of our former
colleagues--welcome back to the House, it's nice to see you
again. Keith served from 2006 to 2018, 6 terms in the House, so
welcome back. It's good to see you. And we thank each of you
for being here.
You will each be recognized for 5 minutes for an oral
presentation of your testimony. And without objection, your
written statements will be made a part of the record.
And we will now start with you, Mr. Allen, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TED ALLEN, VICE PRESIDENT, POLICY &
ADVOCACY, SOCIETY FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE

Mr. Allen. Good morning, Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Waters, and members of the committee. My name is Ted Allen, and
I'm from the Society for Corporate Governance. Our members
include 3,700 corporate secretaries and other governance
professionals who collectively represent more than 1,000 public
companies of almost every size and industry across the United
States.
I am here today to share our members' concerns about the
shareholder proposal process, which is governed by SEC Rule
14a-8. The original intent of Rule 14a-8, as explained by the
SEC in 1945, was to enable shareholders to present proposals
on, ``matters relating to the affairs of the company, but not
on matters of a general political, social, or economic
nature.'' Unfortunately, the SEC has strayed from its original
intent and forced companies to include resolutions that relate
to significant social policy issues.
In November of 2021, the SEC issued Staff Legal Bulletin
No. 14L, which further reduced the ability of public companies
to exclude shareholder proposals that address significant
public policy and social policy issues, even if they didn't
relate to the specific circumstances of a company. Since that
staff legal bulletin was issued, there has been a notable
increase in the number of shareholder proposals filed. So far
this year, there has been a record number of proposals filed,
961, up 18 percent from 2021.
This increase has been driven primarily by activists
pushing environmental and social objectives. These proposals
accounted for 62 percent of all proposal filings so far this
year, and the number of environmental and social proposals has
soared by 52 percent since 2021. Many of these proposals are
overly prescriptive or not linked to long-term shareholder
value. Some resolutions raise contentious policy issues such as
phasing out the use of fossil fuels, which would be more
appropriately addressed by Congress or State lawmakers.
Our members have been besieged by proposals from across the
political spectrum. Some companies have faced competing demands
on climate risk or diversity policies, while others must cope
with proposals on abortion or other controversial topics. These
politically-inspired proposals have become an increasing burden
on investors and companies, but for companies, in a recent
survey of society members, nearly half of respondents said
managing shareholder proposals is a significant time
commitment. While costs vary by company, some companies are
spending hundreds or thousands of dollars each year to respond
to the demand of investors who are only required to own a
$2,000 stake for 3 years.
These proposals also pose a significant burden for
investors. Some institutional investors have told our members
that they do not have enough time to read proxy statements in
detail. Some institutions have hired additional staff, while
others have increased their reliance on proxy advisory firms.
In response to these trends, the society supports the following
reforms:
One, rescind Staff Legal Bulletin 14L. Companies should not
be obligated to include proposals that relate to ordinary
business or are economically irrelevant. Two, eliminate the
significant social policy issue exception under Rule 14a-8.
Companies should not be forced to take sides on controversial
social issues or preside over political debates at their
shareholder meetings.
Three, increase the economic thresholds for filing
shareholder proposals. Their current $2,000-requirement for
long-term investors is not sufficient given the substantial
costs imposed on companies and other investors.
Four, provide meaningful oversight of proxy advisors. As
detailed in my written testimony, proxy advisors have a
significant influence over proxy voting outcomes. The Society
supports reforms that would promote greater accuracy,
transparency, and completeness of proxy research. In
particular, companies should have a reasonable opportunity to
review draft proxy reports for accuracy before investors start
voting.
Five, we support limits on the use of automated proxy
voting systems. The SEC should require clients of proxy
advisory firms to verify they have received final research
reports before their shares are voted. And finally, the Society
supports the creation of a public company advisory committee of
the SEC. Public companies really have no voice at the SEC,
except for when they are commenting on proposed rules. We think
providing that voice prior to the proposal of rules would help
ensure a more balanced rulemaking process.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Allen can be found on page
54 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you. Mr. Copland, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES R. COPLAND, SENIOR FELLOW AND
DIRECTOR, MANHATTAN INSTITUTE FOR POLICY RESEARCH

Mr. Copland. Thank you. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Waters, and members of the committee, I would really like to
thank you for the invitation to testify today. My name is James
R. Copland, and since 2003, I have been a scholar with the
Manhattan Institute, where I am a senior fellow and director of
legal policy research. Although my comments draw upon such
research conducted for my employer, my statement before the
committee today is solely my own.
I am very pleased that this committee is tackling this
issue in such an extensive way. I have been studying the
shareholders proposal process since before 2011, when, under my
leadership, the Manhattan Institute launched our proxy monitor
database, which contains current and historical data on
shareholder proposals introduced at America's largest publicly-
traded companies.
I first oversaw empirical research into proxy advisory
firms and wrote about their influence in The Wall Street
Journal 11 years ago. I published research on the adverse
economic impact of public pension funds, socially-oriented
shareholder activism 8 years ago, and, of course, 7 years ago,
I presented extensive testimony to a subcommittee of this body
detailing the problems with proxy advisory firms and the
shareholder proposal process, and calling for reforms. So,
today's hearing is very welcome and a long time coming.
In my limited time here today, I want to emphasize four key
points. One is that, to an extent, most Americans do not
realize a very small number of actors exert enormous influence
over almost all of our largest businesses. These actors are
neither democratically-elected representatives, nor investing
geniuses. Rather, we are talking about two relatively small,
privately-owned proxy advisory firms--ISS and Glass Lewis--that
oversee much of shareholder voting, and three large asset
management fund families--BlackRock, State Street, and
Vanguard--that mostly make their money by passively tracking
stock market indices, but play an extraordinarily large role in
corporate governance.
Two, this small oligarchies' influence is very much a
function of our regulatory structure. Proxy advisory firms
emerged in the wake of legal guidance given by Federal
regulatory agencies on institutional and pension voting. The
shareholder proposal process itself is essentially mandated by
the Securities and Exchange Commission, even though this body
has not clearly authorized the agency to do so. As I detail in
my written testimony, the SEC has effectively preempted State
corporate law without congressional authorization and it
regularly compels controversial speech in violation of the
First Amendment.
Three, under this Administration, the SEC and other
regulators have been aggressively going beyond their statutory
missions to promote environmental and social regulatory causes.
They are effectively doing an end run around Congress to
achieve, through executive rulemaking, policy goals that go
beyond those endorsed by the legislature. The SEC has also
recently altered its staff guidance in handling shareholder
proposals, effectively doing an end run around the notice-and-
comment rulemaking process mandated by Congress through the
Administrative Procedure Act (APA). The SEC's new position is
that corporate annual meetings must permit the smallest of
shareholders to force shareholder votes on any social or policy
concerns, whether or not material to the company's business.
Four, this change in policy has predictably led to a
significant increase in socially-oriented shareholder activism.
In 2022, the first year after the SEC's new guidance, the
number of shareholder proposals faced by the large companies
tracked in our proxy monitor database jumped 33 percent over
the prior 3-year average. To date, in 2023, with approximately
10 percent of companies yet to file a proxy statement,
companies have already seen a record number of shareholder
proposals.
This increase has been driven principally by a large uptick
in the filing of proposals relating to environmental, social,
or policy issues. To date, in 2023, Fortune 250 companies have
considered 243 such proposals, more than in 2022 and more than
double the numbers seen in any of the prior 3 years. Indeed,
for the second consecutive year, more than 60 percent of
shareholder proposals at large companies have had a social or
environmental focus, which has never before happened, dating
back to 2006, the first year covered by the proxy monitor
database.
Beyond these central concerns, I have submitted extensive
written testimony for the record, in addition to incorporating,
by reference, a large number of my writings on the subject, and
I am happy to discuss these in more detail and to talk about
suggested legislation in the question-and-answer portion of the
hearing. Thanks again for including me in this hearing.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Copland can be found on page
65 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you. Mr. Cunningham, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LAWRENCE A. CUNNINGHAM, SPECIAL
COUNSEL, MAYER BROWN LLP

Mr. Cunningham. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters,
and committee members, thank you for the opportunity to
testify. I am Lawrence Cunningham, special counsel at Mayer
Brown, and emeritus professor at George Washington University,
although the comments I make today are my own.
Having spent my 35-year career in the corporate field as a
lawyer, a professor, a corporate director of public companies,
and as the author of many popular investment titles, I have
come to believe that congressional action is needed to
strengthen the protection of investors because events have
overtaken existing law. To see how, consider the changing
landscape since I began my career. Back then, individual
investors routinely owned stock directly. In corporate America,
70 percent of public equity was owned by individuals and
families, but today, most Americans invest through mutual funds
and pension funds. Such asset managers now hold 70 percent of
public equity on their behalf.
Asset managers used to pick stocks by researching
particular companies, but today most index, meaning buying all
the stocks in the market without much research. Managers used
to vote the shares by putting investor returns first, often by
following a company's board recommendations, but indexers now
use general formulas or defer to proxy advisors, reducing the
emphasis on returns. Back then, proxy advisors were policy
wonks and didn't need any oversight or to have any duties, but
today, they are for-profit powerhouses, yet still without
duties or oversight. Special interests have long tried to
insert themselves into corporate governance for their own ends,
but these changes have emboldened them to seize unprecedented
power, harming American investors.
Three topics need addressing to protect investors. First,
the Federal shareholder proposal rule, once used to improve
corporate governance to protect investors, is attracting
special interests in record numbers and reach to advance their
goals at the expense of investors. While special interests have
always tried to do so, State and Federal law historically
restricted them. But 2 years ago, the SEC staff began requiring
companies to include special interest proposals of a social
nature any time the staff deems it significant. That resulted
in far more boards being required to include those proposals,
against their fiduciary judgment.
Shareholders, in turn, have been rejecting these proposals
by record margins. This year, only 5 percent of proposals
passed. The average support was a mere 25 percent, but special
interests win publicity even when their proposals lose,
subsidized by American investors. Another data point speaks
volumes. This proxy season, more than half of all proposals
were made by five parties. All of these figures show that the
production of shareholder proposals does not have widespread
support in America.
Second, those special interests are taking advantage of the
rise of indexing, an ingenious investment strategy that
involves buying all the stocks in a market, delivering the
market return with no risk. This popular strategy is now used
by funds that manage half of American public equity. The genius
of index investing is to avoid all the costs of research and to
avoid having any particular risk. The challenge, though, is
then for those funds to figure out how to vote those shares.
One solution which many index funds used to use would be to
follow the recommendations of the company's fiduciary board.
More recently, the largest funds began publishing
guidelines about how they would vote, which are one-size-fits-
all formulas that aren't really fit for many companies. And as
social proposals proliferate, the guidelines now state views
aligning with public special interest groups rather than
focusing on the economic rationales of the particular subject
for the particular company and its shareholders.
I am honored to be here today. I would be happy to help the
committee in any way that I can, and I'm also happy to answer
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cunningham can be found on
page 85 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you. Now, we will go to you, Mr.
Zycher, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BENJAMIN ZYCHER, SENIOR FELLOW,
AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. Zycher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Both earlier and
recent regulatory actions by the Securities and Exchange
Commission have created a duopoly in the market for proxy
advisory services and powerful incentives for firms and funds
to retain proxy advisors and to adopt their recommendations,
often on an automatic basis. The advisors themselves have weak
incentives to consider the fiduciary interests of shareholders
and fund participants, thus freeing them to indulge their own
political preferences at little or no cost to themselves.
Unsurprisingly, environmental, social, and governance
political objectives have begun to heavily influence proxy
advice. The resulting economic effects borne by shareholders
and fund participants have been substantially negative and will
increase in the absence of reforms driven by Congress. A
conservative estimate is a decline in investment returns of 2
business points per year. Other factors held constant and much
greater adverse effects in the case of divestment pressures
aimed at the fossil energy sector.
This can surprise no one. ESG management and investment
imperatives impose artificial constraints on management options
and the components of investment portfolios, and, thus, cannot
be expected to yield positive investment impacts. Over time,
for the economy and the aggregate, the impacts of this
reduction in economic returns are substantial. A very simple
analysis based upon fully-plausible assumptions implies that an
ESG politicization of business management capital allocation
would yield a decline in investment returns of four-tenths of a
percent over a 20-year period, and a capital stock smaller by
over 11 percent. Annual GDP would decline by $850 billion, and
the annual labor compensation by more than 3 percent. Even if
those effects are overstated by an order of magnitude, they
still would be significant.
Current proposals by financial regulators to force the
private sector to implement climate policies in the form of
measurement and reductions in greenhouse gas emissions would
create severely-adverse impacts, while engendering climate
effects literally equal to zero. The most-prominent of these is
the SEC-proposed rule for the enhancement and standardization
of climate-related disclosures for investors, mandating that
public companies estimate their greenhouse gas emissions
defined broadly, and analyze the risks that their emissions
might pose to their current and future investors. Such
disclosures would not be material, in particular because
greenhouse gas emissions from a given firm, however broadly
defined, cannot possibly have measurable climate effects and,
thus, would have no impacts on prospective returns to
investments in that firm. Moreover, no firm or industry is
capable of analyzing the effects of greenhouse gas emissions on
climate phenomena generally, and/or in particular, on a
geographic or sectorial basis. Governments have never
demonstrated an ability to do so.
The uncertainties reported by the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) are staggering. And the climate system
is so complex and so poorly understood that the IPCC climate
models, on average, have overstated the actual satellite
temperature record by a factor of about 2.5 percent.
The central impacts of the SEC proposal will be a vast
increase in various kinds of litigation efforts by firms
subject to these SEC rules, and to implement them in ways
designed to avoid that litigation which threatens the growth of
the heavily-parasitic industry of consultants.
A similar set of problems is attendant upon the high-level
framework draft principles presented by the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System. I won't belabor that point right
here. One reality, though, has been curiously absent: the
public discussion. Climate policies, as currently promoted,
would have political effects virtually indistinguishable from
zero. A good example is the Biden Administration's net zero
proposal, which would, using the EPA climate model, reduce
global temperatures in the year 2100 by 17,100 of 1 degree.
I urge Congress not to focus on the large asset managers:
BlackRock, State Street, and Vanguard. Their incentive is
roughly efficient, however silly their public pronouncements. I
urge Congress instead to reform the SEC regulatory framework. I
urge Congress to enact legislation constraining the efforts of
regulatory agencies to pursue climate policies not authorized
in the law, uninformed by actual evidence, and justified on the
basis of fundamentally dishonest cost-benefit analysis. Such
regulatory efforts have and will continue to engender vast
costs and no benefits. Congress must make it clear that only
under new legislation can regulatory policies be expanded
beyond the limits now authorized by statute. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Zycher can be found on page
102 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. I now recognize Attorney General Ellison.
Thank you for being here.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE KEITH ELLISON, ATTORNEY
GENERAL, STATE OF MINNESOTA

Mr. Ellison. Certainly. Thank you, Chairman McHenry,
Ranking Member Waters, and members of the committee. My name is
Keith Ellison and I serve as Minnesota's Attorney General. I
was a member of this committee for 12 years, as you pointed
out, and it is certainly an honor to be back with you, and it
is an honor to see all the new members. There are a number of
new faces.
As Attorney General, I serve on the governing board of the
Minnesota State Board of Investment, which we call the SBI. The
SBI is a fiduciary for $125 billion in assets, serving more
than 820,000 active and retired Minnesota public employees.
Active public employees entrust us with a portion of their
salaries in return for a secure investment. Public employers
across the State entrust us with a portion of their balance
sheets in return for a critical future benefit for their
employees. I am proud that the SBI pays out more than $5
billion a year in benefits to our members. In many cases, these
benefits are the recipients' own most important financial
asset.
One of our values is addressing environmental, social, and
governance-related issues, and we know that they can and do
lead to positive outcomes and add long-term value to our
investments. Year-over-year, the Minnesota SBI is one of the
highest-performing public pension funds in America. ESG best
practices and high market returns go hand in hand. Minnesota's
public employees want us to invest wisely so their retirement
is secure. As their fiduciaries, we have a duty to carefully
consider all relevant investment risks and opportunities on
their behalf. Their future is our portfolio. Indeed, it is the
duty of fiduciaries in every sector to consider risks and
opportunities that could impact their investments and their
business.
The private sector is now overwhelmingly considering ESG
risk factors in investing. This why 96 percent of the largest
250 global companies now issue a sustainability report. They
don't do it out of the goodness of their hearts. They do it
because it is good for businesses, shareholders, pensioners,
and profits. ESG is nothing more than looking clear-eyed at
risks and opportunities in the real world and making sound
investment decisions on that basis. As Illinois State Treasurer
Michael Frerichs plainly stated in another congressional
hearing, ``ESG is Data,'' and data shows a positive correlation
between ESG principles and returns on equity.
Despite this data, in States across the country, there is a
concerted attack on the freedom to invest. This attack is
already leading to more costs and lower returns for businesses,
pensioners, and taxpayers. For example, according to an
academic paper published by Wharton, anti-free market
legislation may have cost taxpayers in Texas up to $532 million
in higher interest rates and costs in just 1 year. According to
Reuters, an anti-sustainable investing bill in Indiana can cut
State pension returns by $6.7 billion in 10 years. According to
a publication, Institutional Investor, Kansas could lose up to
$3.6 billion in the same timeframe based on a similar bill.
But perhaps, these bills are not about data. Perhaps, they
have nothing to do with ESG at all. Perhaps, they are about
running roughshod over the freedom to invest in order to
protect one industry, in particular, the fossil fuel industry,
the industry that bears so much responsibility for the costs of
climate change, and has waged a decades-long campaign of
deception to deflect it.
Prohibiting members, investors, and asset managers from
considering ESG factors is interfering with the free market.
Censoring relevant financial information is exactly what
Congress should not be doing. Legislation that attempts to
hijack the freedom to invest is a threat to the financial
security of retirees and families in every State, including
mine. Most Americans don't know what, ``ESG,'' means, but it is
actually a bread-and-butter issue. To anyone who wants to
ignore ESG risk, I say, bet your own money, but don't gamble
with Americans' life savings.
I urge you to join me in standing up for Americans' freedom
to invest and standing up against anti-ESG bills that interfere
with our freedom. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Attorney General Ellison can be
found on page 98 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you for your testimony. And I would
like to thank the entire panel for being here. I will now
recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Copland, last fall, the Supreme Court issued a decision
in the case known as West Virginia v. EPA. The case is
significant for a number of reasons, but particularly to the
matters of the day. Would you explain the Supreme Court's
position regarding Federal agencies' regulatory authority over
significant policy matters? Then, I would like to see how it
applies to the matter at hand.
Mr. Copland. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. The West
Virginia v. EPA decision last year formalized at the Supreme
Court what we have seen in a number of other cases, as well as
in the appellate courts, which is what is commonly called the
major questions doctrine, or at least that is what it is called
now. And the basic premise there is that when it comes to big
policy matters, this body, the Congress, makes the decision on
where the legislation is supposed to go, not a regulatory
agency, unless Congress has spoken clearly and delegated
certain authorities to that agency.
Now, there is some disagreement among the Supreme Court
Justices about what it means, and Justice Amy Coney Barrett
articulated a position in Biden v. Nebraska, the student loan
case that just came down at the end of last month, saying that,
really, this is just more common-sense analysis of reading a
statute. So, if the statute is talking about one thing, and the
agency goes off in some other direction, we are not going to
read it that way, unless the language is really clear that
Congress is making that happen.
Chairman McHenry. Can you speak to that example of those
two court cases and apply it to this specific matter today
about the Securities and Exchange Commission's ability to
require climate-related disclosures?
Mr. Copland. As I said in The Wall Street Journal last
summer, if the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is
stepping out of bounds in doing various sorts of climate
regulations, the Supreme Court determined a year ago, clearly
the Securities and Exchange Commission, which is about
protecting investors so that they know what is going on in the
companies they invest in, is going to be limited in what it----
Chairman McHenry. Has the SEC's position on climate
disclosures changed? Give an example of 2016 to today, and is
there a difference?
Mr. Copland. Yes. In 2010, the SEC came down with rules on
climate change disclosure, but they were narrowly focused to
material information, which really ought to be included anyway
in disclosures. And then in 2016, the SEC came out with a
policy statement saying, the broad issue here is off limits.
And just last year, they sort of basically reversed course on
that, and they came out with disclosure requirements extending
to vendors, non-material information, board decision-making,
and all sorts of things. I filed a common letter extensively to
the Commission----
Chairman McHenry. Let's speak to that. Mr. Cunningham, can
you speak to the question of materiality and its import with
securities disclosures, historically?
Mr. Cunningham. Yes. A fundamental principle of the
securities law of jurisprudence is that the purpose of
disclosure is to provide information that a reasonable investor
would consider important in making an investment or voting
decision, and that articulation is of longstanding Supreme
Court vintage. Now, there are some small details within the
securities framework that might be required that wouldn't
satisfy that definition, but much of the bulk of the pending
climate disclosure rule dispenses with that constraint, and I
think that is the concern.
Chairman McHenry. How does this question of materiality
benefit an average investor?
Mr. Cunningham. Because investors will only be given
information that is useful to them in making their investment
decisions. The real risk is of the floodgates opening and are
overwhelming investors with abundant information they can't
make sense of, and they can't use, so the materiality threshold
is really a good filter that is useful for them.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. So, is there a reason to deviate
from that principle in light of climate or environmental
concerns?
Mr. Cunningham. No, and it is hard to think of why an
investor would care about trivial information or an avalanche
of information that would drown them in useless detail, and I
think that is the big concern.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. Thank you for your testimony. I
want to thank the panel, and I will now recognize the ranking
member for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Attorney General
Ellison, I want to thank you for testifying, but also I would
like to apologize. Perhaps, you thought you were returning to a
committee that you once served on, the Committee on Financial
Services, but that committee doesn't exist anymore. We are now
the committee of culture wars.
In order to shine light on what is fact and what isn't, I
want to ask you a number of questions about the duties of
fiduciaries. As you know, most Americans invest their funds in
pension plans like the California State Teachers Retirement
System (CalSTRS) or the Minnesota State Retirement System
(MSRS), or in mutual funds. These pension plans, mutual funds,
and others are required by law to act as fiduciaries and work
in the best interests of investors.
So, Attorney General Ellison, I would like to ask you a
series of yes-or-no questions about how a fiduciary evaluates
the investments they make on behalf of their beneficiaries. Is
it true that a fiduciary's main responsibility is to secure the
strongest possible risk-adjusted returns where the investors
are beneficiaries?
Mr. Ellison. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Waters. If a company has significant assets exposed to
physical risk, for example, manufacturing facilities that are
in an area that experiences frequent hurricanes and sea level
rise, would a fiduciary be within their duties to consider that
risk?
Mr. Ellison. I think it would be their duty.
Ms. Waters. If a company's core product poses significant
risk to human health, and as a result, foreseeable liability
risk to the manufacturer, would a fiduciary be within their
duties to consider that risk?
Mr. Ellison. Absolutely.
Ms. Waters. Let's say a fiduciary has reason to believe
that a company's internal accountant controls and independent
board oversight are severely deficient. Do you think the
fiduciary should be permitted to offer a shareholder proposal
on behalf of their beneficiaries at a company's annual meeting,
urging that company to improve its controls and oversight?
Mr. Ellison. Yes, it would be expected.
Ms. Waters. Now, there is a bill that has been noticed for
this hearing that would prohibit making proposals like this
because they are, ``governance related.'' Do you think it
serves the interests of investors to prohibit such proposals?
Mr. Ellison. No, ma'am, I don't think it does.
Ms. Water. Attorney General Ellison, Republicans have
labeled any program they don't like as socialist, from Medicare
to Social Security. But it seems to me that by trying to block
the owners of capital investors and their chosen fiduciaries
from exercising their rights, and from trying to make money,
Republicans may need a lesson on how capitalism actually works.
What do you think, Mr. Ellison?
Mr. Ellison. I think that risk-adjusted factors and
considerations are important to advance the best interests of
the beneficiaries of the pension fund that I sit on, and I want
to know all of the information. And certainly, there are
numerous examples of how ESG factors would benefit those
beneficiaries, and, in fact, they demand it. They ask us to
factor in those risk factors.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Ellison. I want to turn to
private funds. Today, private equity funds hold approximately
$7 trillion, and venture capital funds hold $1 trillion.
However, they are not required to disclose their investments in
women- and minority-owned businesses, or in companies that
evaluate environmental, social, and governance factors. These
private funds nowadays play an indispensable role in our
economy.
Private equity and other private bonds are involved in
mergers and acquisitions, lending, and restructuring of huge
companies. Venture capital funds provide funding to startups
and early-stage companies. This lack of private fund
transparency makes it difficult for investors, like pension
plans, to value the fund, including by understanding the fund's
investments in women-owned and diverse-owned businesses, and
businesses that promote diversity, equity, and sustainability.
What are your views on the lack of transparency as it
relates to private funds? How could we achieve the types of
transparency, accountability, and really sustainable future we
want to achieve without increasing our understanding of the
investment policies and practices of private funds?
Mr. Ellison. I think groupthink is dangerous for corporate
governance. I think groupthink leads to not considering factors
that impact the company, so we need diversity. We need
different perspectives in order to have a company that can
factor in everything that impinges upon the bottom line for
whether investors are beneficiaries of a pension fund, so we
need to factor it all in.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Ellison. Thank you.
Ms. Waters. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back. We will now
go to the gentleman from Arkansas, the Vice Chair of the
committee, Mr. Hill, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I commend you, and our
Capital Markets Subcommittee for the good work and this
excellent panel.
Professor Cunningham, it's great to see you. I have read
all of your books, so I will recommend them, and there is no
need to send me a fee for that. I just think if you are
interested in investment practices, governance, or corporate
finance, you need to read Larry Cunningham's books. And it's
terrific to see my good friend, Attorney General Ellison, back
at our committee.
Mr. Ellison. Likewise.
Mr. Hill. These days, it seems like our SEC is more the,
``Securities and Environment Commission,'' instead of the
Securities and Exchange Commission. And we need to think long
and hard about that because the Commission, under its current
leadership wants to become America's green regulator, because
there is no consensus legislatively about how to fully address
climate. And mandating ESG disclosures for public and private
companies, in my view, is drifting far from the statutory
mission of the Commission.
Let me be clear: If a company wants to make climate or
other ESG disclosures, they are perfectly within their rights
to do that. In fact, as a former private and public company
director and C-suite executive, they have a statutory and
fiduciary responsibility to do that, right now under current
law, to make sure that the investment community understands
their strategies, and that they have outstanding human
resources policies, supply chains, resiliency, and capital
allocation. So if ESG factors are material to that investment
decision, our law covers that today. No regulatory mandate is
necessary.
And to my good friend from Minnesota, I think your quote
was, ``I don't believe that anyone is proposing to ignore ESG
to their peril.'' In fact, we are for crafting practical,
effective, cost-effective, particularly, responses driven by
those market participants.
Mr. Ellison, if a publicly-traded company spends an
insignificant amount of money on electricity, let's say, it is
kind of hard to think about that. I am just picking a
hypothetical example. I know lawyers don't like hypothetical
examples. And as they consider disclosing it, if it is not
material to them, is that really something they should spend a
lot of time on? Is that a practical aspect of materiality?
Mr. Ellison. If something is not material, then it need not
be considered, but so often, ESG considerations are material.
Mr. Hill. But don't you think that the fiduciary statutory
obligation of that C-suite and that board is there now to make
that determination, as opposed to it being literally a mandate
across-the-board for every public and private company that one-
size-fits-all? Really?
Mr. Ellison. Let's go back to 2008, when we had the
mortgage crisis. I think part of why we got into that crisis is
that we did not have enough people thinking about the 360-
degree risk.
Mr. Hill. Yes. Fair point. I don't want to take up my time
doing that, but I do want to thank you for our work together on
credit inclusion.
Mr. Ellison. Absolutely.
Mr. Hill. And we did that bill together during Mr.
Hensarling's chairmanship, to add additional data for rental
payments and utility payments to allow more people to have
access to credit. Do you still like that idea?
Mr. Ellison. Yes.
Mr. Hill. Good. Mr. Allen, your testimony was excellent,
with a fantastic list of recommendations. Can you talk about
the potential consequences if the SEC were to require companies
to disclose non-material climate information?
Mr. Allen. Thank you for the question. I think the biggest
consequence would be, well, there are several consequences.
First, there would be significant costs imposed on public
companies. In our three common letters to the SEC, we detail
our members' cost concerns. Another concern, and I think you
alluded to this earlier, is the impact on private companies,
small businesses, minority-owned businesses within companies
supply chains. Under the SEC----
Mr. Hill. Yes, I hear from businesses all the time that
they can't comply with the conflict mineral rule now,
technically, all the way down the supply chain. How could they
do it? Could they really be able to do this? Scope 3, is that
realistic?
Mr. Allen. No. I think a lot of these smaller ventures,
these local firms, farmers, and others would be unable to bear
this burden.
Mr. Hill. Let me switch gears. Mr. Copland, in this
committee and in the Executive Branch, we typically push back
about extraterritorial things that we think hurt American
performance, American systems, where some Europeans don't
understand that we are organized a little differently here.
What are your concerns about the potential impact and cost to
U.S. businesses from this European set of mandates that they
plan on imposing on U.S. businesses?
Mr. Copland. I am very concerned with it, and I think this
committee should be, and this Congress should be concerned.
Basically, in a nutshell, what they are talking about doing in
Europe is creating a form of climate disclosure regulation that
applies not only to subsidiaries of American companies
operating in Europe, but to the parent companies themselves.
Mr. Hill. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield back, but
if you have more, would you please respond in writing on that
question? Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. We will now go to the ranking member of
our Capital Markets Subcommittee, Mr. Sherman of California,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I agree with the gentleman from Arkansas that
these additional disclosures that so many investors want are
difficult to design. It took over 200 years for the accounting
profession to define and provide systems to tabulate, audit,
and report the information on the balance sheet, the income
statement. And I think that sometimes in our fervor to give
people information that they want about the environment, we
overlook how difficult it will be for that information to be
comparable, tabulable, and auditable.
What shocks me is that 20 years ago, it was more folks on
the conservative side who wanted shareholders to be able to
make decisions based on something other than earnings per
share, and shut up and do whatever the corporate board wants.
In this room 20 years ago, we passed legislation to allow
shareholders and pension plans to divest from companies that
were helping Iran's economy at a time when it was building
nuclear weapons. And today, many conservatives would divest
their stock holdings in a company that was about to transfer
technical, artificial intelligence technology to China.
We are told by some that materiality is 5 percent of
earnings, but I think Mr. Cunningham was correct in telling us
that materiality is what a reasonable investor thinks is
important, and some people think the environment is important.
Some people think whether the Chinese Communist Party gets the
most technical AI information is important.
Mr. Cunningham tells us that we should let the States
decide. That is a race to the bottom. It is kind of a phony
democracy, kind of a Putin's democracy: one person, one vote,
one time. You elect the board, and then they are in total
control. They go to Delaware, and they will agree to pay some
fees as long as you give them rules that make it clear that the
shareholders can't tell the board what to do, and then if
Delaware won't do that, you go to Wyoming. If Wyoming won't do
that, you go to North Dakota. If we are going to have
shareholder democracy, it needs to be protected by the SEC.
Mr. Ellison, welcome back.
Mr. Ellison. It's good to be back.
Mr. Sherman. You deal with conservatorships, guardianships
in the State of Minnesota. If somebody is incompetent to deal
with their money, a conservator is appointed. Now, look, if
somebody wanted to spend their money buying bad art or Yankee
season tickets, maybe a conservator should be appointed because
they are wasting their money on something totally unreasonable.
Would an investor be deprived of their right to decide how to
invest simply because they cared about, say, the environment?
Mr. Ellison. I certainly don't think so. I think it gives
them freedom to invest.
Mr. Sherman. And would you take away their right to invest
if they didn't want to invest in a company that was
transferring highly-sensitive technology to China?
Mr. Ellison. I don't think we take away their right to
invest.
Mr. Sherman. But how would you have a right to invest on
this basis or that basis if you didn't get the information that
you wanted? And I don't want to point out that there might be
some peculiar investor who cares how many buildings are painted
purple, and we don't have time to tell them. But the reason for
this hearing is not because investors won't vote for these
resolutions; it is because they will, and 5 percent of the time
they do, and 25 percent of them vote for them. That is the
reason for this hearing, to blind investors to the information
they want. Is there any meaningful way for an intelligent
investor to decide to invest on the basis of impact on the
environment if we don't allow the investor to have that
information, Mr. Ellison?
Mr. Ellison. I don't know how you can make an intelligent
decision about an investment if you don't have the information.
Mr. Sherman. In fact, perhaps the only thing that would be
crazy is trying to invest for the environment in a society that
deprives you of all information about how your investments are
affecting the environment. Let's see. And finally--my time has
expired.
Mr. Huizenga. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. With
that, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sessions, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Mr.
Ellison, welcome back. It's good to see you.
Mr. Ellison. Likewise. Thank you.
Mr. Sessions. The marketplace has been reacting strongly to
its viewpoints about people making decisions in the marketplace
and how consumers react to that. And I find it very interesting
and important that Mr. Ellison wanted his State to make the
decisions that they made. I respect that.
However, Mr. Copland, it has become apparent to me and
other Members, I think, of this committee that you will hear
from today, that we believe the SEC, as a government
institution, is abusing the discretion delegated to it. It is
not the customer; it is the oversight. And we believe that it
is using this discretion that is delegated by Congress to
undermine and even destroy disfavored industries and companies
that don't align with what is a political agenda of the current
Administration, particularly in this case of exercise of
investigatory discretion.
Could you please talk with me and this committee on how a
case could be made for abuse of its congressionally-designated
discretion at the SEC? Could it be made based on existing
evidence around this implementation of social policy and
financial regulations and what we in Congress should do about
that?
Mr. Copland. Absolutely. I think, as I alluded to in my
testimony, that they have been doing end runs in a variety of
ways. The colloquy I had with the chairman briefly on sort of
major questions is part of the issue here. The SEC was created
in the 1930s, and our securities regulatory regime was created
in the 1933 and 1934 Acts. And the principle of that is to put
disclosure out there so that investors can know what is
happening with companies so that we can have a robust,
publicly-traded stock market, and that generally has worked
well. It is not to engage in substantive policymaking.
So, this sort of end run around Congress going into
environmental issues--and, again, I want to emphasize, for the
interpretive guidance that the SEC gave in 2010, I am on record
as saying it is material information, and that it is reasonable
to have a disclosure for it. I was pleased to see the Attorney
General say that this information ought to be material, because
that is not what they did last year in the proposed rule that
is still pending before the SEC on climate disclosure.
The other thing we have seen is that it is not just the
rulemaking process. They are actually end running the
rulemaking process, and this is what they did in November of
2021 with Staff Legal Bulletin No. 14L. In that move, they
basically said, well, anything, even if it is not material, if
it is a matter of public concern or social concern, we are
going to allow it on the ballot. Now, as I document in my
written testimony, this is an exact inversion of the old rule,
which allowed such proposals to be excluded from ballots, and
that was the rule until the 1970s when the SEC completely
flipped its position on its head.
This is very problematic. What we are doing is the
regulator is exceeding what Congress has said it can do, and it
is trying to achieve a policy goal, and it is not limited to
just the SEC, right? We have seen the same thing from the
Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. This is something that we have
seen across financial regulators in this Administration.
Mr. Session. I agree with you. I also agree that if Mr.
Ellison or his State as a consumer, customer, investor wanted
to make that decision, then they would make that decision about
seeking someone who would give them more information. I am
concerned about the overreach of government regulators, as you
just expressed, about how they use the discretionary powers
that they have to drive down political instruction and
decisions. And I find it very interesting that we were accused
in the very beginning of this hearing of driving a political
agenda. We know who has the political agenda, because free
markets like to make their own decisions, and people who are
investors like to invest in the things that will gain them what
they are after. And when it is driven by government, I think we
make a mistake.
I want to thank each of you for being here today. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Let me just
say I have some concerns about the proposals as an emissions
disclosure, or what we call Scope 3, what effect it will have
and what it imposes on our small, family-owned farms and
ranches. I don't know if you all know, but 98 percent of all of
the farms in the United States are independent, family-owned
operations that do not have the financial resources to track
and report the emissions data necessary to meet the Scope 3
disclosure requirement. Do you realize that? Mr. Zycher--I hope
I pronounced your name correctly----
Mr. Zycher. Yes. That is fine, Congressman.
Mr. Scott. Yes. Thank you. My understanding is that for
large companies, the reporting requirements rule does not
require them to collect precise emissions data for farms and
ranches or any business from which they source. So, if enacted,
could a publicly-traded company still choose to seek data from
small farms or agriculture suppliers if it wanted to? And also,
under what circumstances could we see this happening?
Mr. Zycher. A firm can seek to acquire information from
anyone it chooses. Whether the recipient of that request is
legally required to provide it is a different question. I am
not sure about the answer to that question with respect to the
small agricultural sector. Jim Copland may know the answer to
that, but I do not.
Mr. Scott. Then, what about large publicly-traded banks or
other financial institutions which provide loans to small
farmers and ranchers? Could Scope 3 requirements have an
unintended consequence on the amount of loans or investment
activity that is made by banks?
Mr. Zycher. The Fed's draft principles, if I recall
correctly, do not break out Scope 1, 2, and 3 emissions
information-gathering requirements. They require large
financial institutions to estimate their climate risks, which
are not very well-defined. The problem is that the estimation
of those risks depends heavily on the choice of climate model,
the choice among a myriad of assumptions, and all the rest. And
the combinations and permutations of models, and assumptions,
and the rest is very, very unlikely to provide useful
information for financial regulators, but would be very
expensive for the financial institutions themselves, and would
create new litigation risks that are not to be ignored.
Mr. Scott. Let me just say that I would hope that Mr.
Gensler would not implement the Scope 3 situation before we can
carefully look at the impact it will have in our agriculture
community. A recent New York Times article did some research,
and do you know, we are losing 1,700 small farmers and ranchers
every year? We need to carefully look at this impact that this
could have on our agriculture system, especially our small
farmers and ranchers. And I trust that Chairman Gensler does
not intend for the SEC to capture the emissions data of every
farmer or rancher in the supply chain, so my hope is that he
will continue to review feedback on the Scope 3 emissions and
make the appropriate changes before any rule is finalized.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is also the Chair
of our National Security Subcommittee, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome all of
you. Mr. Ellison, welcome back.
Mr. Zycher, in your testimony you emphasized the
significance of climate policy and its impact on capital
allocation. To me, this seemed like a disguised version of
Operation Choke Point, where regulators are picking and
choosing what industries have access to banking services,
including access to financing. Can you explain how regulatory
attempts to impose policies on the private sector can affect
investment decisions and economic performance?
Mr. Zycher. Yes. Such regulatory efforts, particularly
aimed at the fossil energy industry and others as well, would
have the effect of distorting capital allocation by distorting
investment decisions, lending decisions, and all the rest.
And as I discussed briefly in my oral statement and more
extensively in my peer-reviewed statement, the aggregate effect
would be a less-valuable capital stock, producing a less-
valuable basket of goods and services, a smaller economy, less
labor productivity, less employment, and lower wages. There is
simply nothing to be gained, regardless of what you believe
about the existence or severity of a reported climate crisis.
These initiatives cannot possibly have any effect on climate
phenomena, let's say, by the end of the century, and so they
really do represent all cost and no benefit.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you. One of the concerns I have is
the fiduciary responsibility of these investment groups,
whether it is BlackRock, State Street, Vanguard, or any other
entities, big banks, whatever. One of the comments I see here
in some of the things I have been reading is that corporate
boardrooms have been turned into partisan platforms where
political agendas overshadow sound financial management. I
think in one of the articles here that we have pulled from
Forbes from about a year ago, it talked about a 14-percent
decrease in the valuation of these companies.
Mr. Zycher, in your testimony you talk about ESG funds
lagging behind other funds by 2 basis points per year. My
concern is, there is a fiduciary responsibility that these
companies have for administering these funds. And Mr.
Cunningham, Mr. Copland, Mr. Allen, if one of you wants to
answer the question, it seems to me like they have opened
themselves up to a really big problem, unless they are totally
disclosing the fact that ESG investment does not make more
money, and does not give you a better return. But if there is
an agenda here that is being forced on them from the outside,
it needs to be disclosed and investors need to know to expect
less returns. Is that a fair comment, Mr. Cunningham?
Mr. Cunningham. I do think that special interest groups
have asserted themselves and have pressured a lot of funds to
elevate the priority of ESG. There is evidence indicating that
funds have believed that they get some private advantage from
presenting themselves that way.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Even Mr. Fink, with BlackRock, made the
comment the other day that he was ashamed about his investment
policy with regards to ESG. I think Vanguard has pulled out of
the Net-Zero over in Europe, so they are beginning to
understand that there was concern. My point is they have a
fiduciary responsibility to the people for whom they are
investing this money. Are they showing this, are they
disclosing this, are you aware of this, such that they can keep
themselves from being sued?
Mr. Cunningham. Yes. It is commonly said that following ESG
practices is good for the long-term economic interests of a
company or of a fund, but the empirical evidence doesn't
support that assertion. I am sure people believe it is true,
but the data don't bear it out. There are some evidence that
there is a correlation between certain practices and certain
outcomes, like certain board compositions and corporate
performance, but there's scant evidence of any causation.
And incidentally, a lot of proponents of the shareholder
proposals don't even provide that rationalization. Under the
SEC's current approach, they are allowed to require companies
to put in proposals on any socially-significant topic. So, I
think you have pinpointed a very serious problem for the funds.
And I think they recognize the problem and they are struggling
to resolve it.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I think Mr. Fink's comment makes that
point. And I just have one other comment here. Mr. Copland, I
think you made the comment with regards to laws and rules and
guidance, and being very concerned that the SEC uses guidance,
kind of like what the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(CFPB) does, to try and scare, bully, and intimidate people
into doing things when the guidance is not held as the force of
law.
Mr. Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Huizenga. With that, the gentleman from Massachusetts,
Mr. Lynch, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ranking
Member Waters, for holding this hearing. Attorney General
Ellison, it is wonderful to see you, my friend.
Mr. Ellison. Likewise.
Mr. Lynch. It has been a while. As you know, Keith, prior
to coming to Congress, I was an ironworker for about 20 years.
I actually worked at the Framingham General Motors facility in
Framingham, Massachusetts. I also worked at the General
Dynamics shipyard down at Quincy, and around the same time, in
the 1980s, General Motors, which was focused on shareholder
value singularly, decided to close the General Motors plant in
Framingham, and close one in Michigan as well, and open up two
plants in Mexico because they were focused on shareholder
value. I know that in both of those communities where the
plants closed down in the United States, it was devastating. It
was devastating. There were, I think, 2,300 workers--it was 3
shifts in Framingham. It devastated that area for a long time,
and only recently have they recovered, after all this time, and
the same thing in Michigan.
General Motors did that to maximize shareholder value by
exploiting--they went from a union workforce in the United
States to a non-union workforce in Mexico in the maquiladoras.
They also had, at that time, almost no environmental laws in
Mexico that would prevent them from basically exploiting the
land there. In that case, the ESG considerations on the
environmental impact on Mexico, and the social impact of the
communities here in the United States were completely ignored
while General Motors relocated those plants and those jobs to
Mexico. If ESG had been in play at that time, if the impact on
the local communities had been considered in that decision,
could all this offshoring, companies moving their jobs to China
to maximize shareholder value--in your role as the chief law
enforcement officer in the State of Minnesota, can you see how
ESG could benefit and inform some of those decisions?
Mr. Ellison. Thank you, Congressman. It is great to see
you, too, and to see everyone. I think it is important to point
out that ESG, as we apply it in the Minnesota State Board of
Investment (SBI), is not a mandate. It is not like, you must
only do ESG and you can't do anything else. It is what we ask
our portfolio manager to consider, and I think it would only be
of benefit to consider the impact on workers and communities.
Moving a plant to a foreign country will impact supply chains.
If something happens there, you have less control over it. You
may have less quality assurance, not for certain, but it is
certainly something to consider.
You may have child labor. Maybe it is cheaper and it can
drive up your bottom line to use a 13-year-old to clean a kill
floor in a meatpacking plant, but maybe that is so outside of
our value system that it is something that we won't do even if
it will make somebody a few more bucks, right? So, I think that
these are things to be considered. They should be factored in.
And the way we apply our ESG policy is that we have a robust,
diverse conversation and we want these values considered so at
least somebody can raise the issues that you raised. At least
somebody can say, hey, what about this? That is what we do with
our ESG policy.
Mr. Lynch. That is great. I know that President Biden has
two reasons that he supported and signed the CHIPS Act. Number
one, all this chip manufacturing had migrated from our country
mostly to Taiwan, but other countries as well, so there was a
national security issue. But he also relocated those plants in
the Midwest where there was high unemployment, which continues
today. So, I can see where the President's adherence to ESG
principles has benefited the workers in the Midwest. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your indulgence.
Mr. Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman yields back, and I now recognize myself for 5
minutes. I want to say thank you to the witnesses for being
here. Mr. Ellison, thanks for being back again. I have a lot to
cover, so I am going to jump right in.
Mr. Copland, the SEC's legal mandate includes directives to
protect investors, facilitate capital formation, and promote
efficient markets. How does the dominance of social and policy
issues in corporate annual meetings conflict with these
objectives?
Mr. Copland. I think it is generally in tension with them,
and the SEC is----
Mr. Huizenga. Sorry. Did you say, ``intentional?''
Mr. Copland. ``In tension'' with them. Excuse me.
Mr. Huizenga. In tension, got it, yes.
Mr. Copland. So, I think there is a conflict there. And
this Congress has expressly put on the SEC those words,
``competition,'' ``efficient markets,'' and ``capital
formation,'' that don't apply in terms of rulemaking in all of
the other agencies.
Mr. Huizenga. Beyond the direct costs, what are the costs
incurred by companies in responding to all of the shareholder
proposals focused on social or policy issues? There was a study
that said 67 percent, or I believe it was 61 percent of all
proposals were ESG-focused last year, which was a twofold
increase.
Mr. Copland. Yes. This is the important question because
the direct costs for the large companies are relatively small
in terms of how to respond, but the indirect costs are huge.
The most valuable thing for your board of directors and for
your chief executive C-suite officers is their time. And they
have to focus a lot of time on these shareholder proposals that
get put on their ballot every year at all these annual
meetings.
Mr. Huizenga. And very few large companies become public,
right? They tend to be smaller companies. Would you view this
as a detriment to companies going public?
Mr. Copland. Yes, absolutely. When I first testified in
front of the subcommittee of this body in 2006, we were talking
about the capital markets. And the number of publicly-listed
companies is less than half today what it was in the mid-1990s
at the peak, and this is one of the reasons.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes. What are the costs to shareholders and
consumers who primarily are focused on financial performance
and long-term value creation?
Mr. Copland. It hurts their returns. We did a study on
this. Tracie Woidtke at the University of Tennessee, an
economist, looked at the cost of shareholder proposal activism
from public pension funds and we saw a negative correlation--we
did this 8 years ago--between that sort of activity and share
valuation at the company. So at the end of the day, if you are
investing for your retirement in your pension, you are hurt by
this activity.
Mr. Huizenga. It hurts investors. Okay. Thank you. At the
beginning of this Congress, Chairman McHenry and myself, and
Senator Tim Scott sent a letter to Chair Gensler at the SEC
requesting documents and information on the climate disclosure
rule. To date, we have largely received publicly-available
information and precious little actual information that has
answered any of those questions. In other words, the Commission
has stonewalled Congress.
Mr. Allen, can you speak to potential consequences if the
SEC were to require companies to disclose non-material climate
information? How might this affect investor decision-making and
the overall efficiency in capital formation of the market? And
again, the emphasis is on non-material.
Mr. Allen. Yes. No, we think it will have a significant
impact, a negative impact on investors. Investors already are
overloaded with a lot of information, even if it is material,
and it is difficult for them to parse through and identify what
information is most useful for them. And if there is this flood
of non-material information, particularly information related
to emissions that is not material for picking a company, that
is just going to further burden investors and make it more
difficult for them to make effective buy/sell decisions. The
Supreme Court had it right when it looked at the reasonable
investor and the importance of materiality, and there is no
reason for the SEC to depart from that standard.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Zycher, I want to address a couple of things to you.
The climate rule attempts to assess the costs of the new
disclosure requirements to individual businesses, but does not
address the potential for increased energy costs more broadly
to society. We have asked for this information, how it could
potentially raise energy costs, but it has been very limited
and no actual underlying analysis, which is what we are asking
for. It does say on page 401 of the proposed rule that it could
cause energy costs to go up. Are you aware of any analysis
conducted by the SEC on the proposed rule's impact on energy
prices, and do you agree it would be prudent to better
understand those costs before proceeding?
Mr. Zycher. No, I have not seen any analysis from the SEC
staff or any other organization working with them on the effect
of the proposal on energy prices.
Mr. Huizenga. Just because they won't give the parameters
for anybody else to do the analysis?
Mr. Zycher. Yes. I just have not seen anything like that.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay.
Mr. Zycher. The problem is that there are two different
components. One is----
Mr. Huizenga. Unfortunately, my time has expired, but I
will follow up and I would love to get your written answer.
Mr. Zycher. Fine.
Mr. Huizenga. With that, the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Cleaver, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Attorney General
Ellison, welcome back. After 18 months----
Mr. Ellison. Thank you.
Mr. Cleaver. ----I made it up on the top level with the
Chair. I am so proud of myself. We lingered down on that level
for years together, but it is good to see you here, and I
appreciate your work in your State.
I am always worried about having a dichotomous discussion
on climate change because what it tends to do--if, ``further,''
can be used here--is it further divides and damages our ability
to solve problems. And we do have a problem, and we should be
concentrating, from my perspective, on how we deal with this
issue.
In 2019, Phoenix had 103 days above 100 degrees. It is a
fact, and we are arguing here primarily because this is
argument heaven. And we have spent a lot of money to come to
Washington to argue, and run TV commercials to get to
Washington to argue. It would be much more productive if we
were in here talking about how we deal with this issue, because
it is not a question of whether it is going to happen, it is
already happening, and we are going to have to deal with it and
we are going to all have to deal with it, including companies.
The only question is how bad it is going to be and which areas
are going to suffer the most.
For many companies and corporations, extreme weather events
or even slight changes in regional weather patterns can affect
their operating performance. This is especially true for
insurance companies and also for companies that are focused on
specific geographic regions. Some companies already include
general disclosures about climate risk, but those disclosures
are typically vague and don't provide investors with a good
sense of the scale of the risk the companies will face in
climate change, and what potential financial benefits there are
to a company in disclosing financial and business risks.
And what I am hoping, Attorney General Ellison, is that you
can at least push us in a direction of how companies can comply
with the ESG policies and still make progress and make profits.
It is not one or the other; we can make both.
Mr. Ellison. Certainly, you are right, Congressman. In
Minnesota, we don't view consideration of ESG factors as in
tension with risk-adjusted rate-of-return priority. We see it
as something that we have to do to be careful, and it is not
just environmental; there are also social and governance
factors which need to be brought into consideration. The
research we have turned up shows that my more-diverse board of
directors actually is consistent with a more-profitable firm
because we break out of this grouping model that sometimes
undermines the ability to assess risk. In our experience in
Minnesota, we have had a very successful State Board of
Investment, and we prize our ESG risk consideration and think
it is important to how we do business.
Again, we don't lock ourselves in. Not every single
decision is to favor some ESG fund. We are flexible. But I
think you are absolutely right that to not look at these
factors would be to put blindfolds on. And to take a look at
these factors would be to put either a microscope or certainly
a magnifying glass on a serious problem which impacts the
pensioners for whom we are responsible.
Mr. Cleaver. I wish I had time to have somebody answer the
question about whether or not crisis creates innovation. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Huizenga. You are welcome. The gentleman's time has
expired. With that, I recognize the gentlelady from Missouri,
Mrs. Wagner, who is also the Chair of our Capital Markets
Subcommittee.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank all of
our witnesses for being here. Attorney General Ellison, it is
good to see you again. I appreciate the work that we have done
together on----
Mr. Ellison. Likewise.
Mrs. Wagner. ----fighting the scourge of human trafficking
and especially online sex trafficking.
Mr. Ellison. Absolutely.
Mrs. Wagner. I appreciate your continued efforts on that.
Mr. Copland, under SEC Chair Gensler's leadership, the
number of environmental and social shareholder proposals has
increased dramatically. The shareholder proposal process, which
has played a key role in meaningful corporate governance for
decades, is being eroded by a minority influence over America's
public companies at the expense of everyday average investors.
If the reforms proposed today are not enacted, what will be the
long-term consequences for retail investors?
Mr. Copland. They are going to get a weaker return, right?
There are two big problems here as I see it. One, you are going
to hurt the returns for the average investor. It makes it more
difficult for companies to run their business when you convert
them into political platforms. The SEC has long understood
this. I argue in my written testimony that the 14a shareholder
proposal process is legally dubious to begin with based on what
Congress has authorized the Commission to do, and based on the
presumptive State law, which is not a race to the bottom, as
Representative Sherman said. It is a race to the top as, as
Chief Judge Winter argued in his seminal 1977 article. I
clerked for him, and it is the most important corporate article
of the last 50 years, but I argue that there is a problem with
it anyway.
But at least if you are taking the social things off the
table and we are talking about whether we elect all our
directors annually or how we elect our directors, you are
talking about real governance issues that involve the
corporation and not these environmental and social concerns. So
yes, that is good, but the other cost is the cost to democracy
itself, right? And that is why I wanted to emphasize that you
have two small, privately-owned proxy advisory firms and asset
managers that are principally passive index investing vehicles,
not making affirmative buy/sell decisions, telling corporate
America how to do their jobs. And that is an end run around the
representative process that everyone in Congress will be really
concerned about, in both parties.
Mrs. Wagner. And to your initial point, too, sir, there are
millions of Americans who invest their hard-earned dollars with
the simple goal of achieving the highest return on their
investment.
Mr. Cunningham, based on your decades of experience, sir,
in what ways can the shareholder proposal process be restored
to better protect the economic interests of what I care about
most, retail investors?
Mr. Cunningham. Thank you for the opportunity to make some
suggestions. I think many of the bills that you are considering
would do so. I think we need to eliminate or filter out the
special interest groups from hijacking the shareholder proposal
process. And as Mr. Copland just said, it has been a very
useful mechanism through which to improve fundamental
governance practices in the country for 30 or 40 years, and
that is the real legitimate and genuine purpose, to respect
State law prerogatives in that space. So, any rulemaking that
you can do or that the SEC could do to return it to focus on
the corporation's interests, the shareholder's interests, and
to filter out the special interest infiltration would be very
useful.
Mrs. Wagner. And their fiduciary responsibilities.
Mr. Allen, how have proxy advisor errors, analytical flaws,
and omissions been documented and reported by stakeholders,
including the Society and its members?
Mr. Allen. It is certainly a major concern for our members.
We did a member survey in 2019, and it found that 42 percent of
our members reported or noticed errors in their proxy research
about their companies within the past----
Mrs. Wagner. Forty two percent?
Mr. Allen. Forty two percent was an astounding figure. We
provided examples of those errors to the SEC in our comment
letters in 2020 and 2021. Errors are bound to occur given the
number of companies that proxy advisors are opining on. That is
why we support a robust draft review process so companies have
a reasonable opportunity to review draft reports before their
investors start voting on that.
Mrs. Wagner. When presented with these errors, how have the
proxy advisors responded?
Mr. Allen. In some cases, they do make corrections. In
other cases, they will say, well, the error is not material, or
they will say it is a difference of opinion rather than a
factual error. And even when they do make corrections, some
investors don't go back and change their vote decisions.
Mrs. Wagner. Forty two percent of proxy advisor errors,
flaws, omissions. It is reprehensible. I thank you all for your
testimony. My time has expired, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Casten, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to get to a
bunch of questions, but I want to just start, because I think
we are in agreement, and I don't mean to be cute with time, but
I would ask you just to raise your hand right now, each of you,
if you agree with the statement that corporate executives are
employees of, and therefore, directly accountable to, their
shareholders. Do you all agree with that statement? I see some
gray areas with some folks.
Mr. Cunningham. Yes. They are employees of the company, and
the shareholders own stock in the companies.
Mr. Casten. Yes. And if I had put all my cash into a
company, I would want to have a lot of say over what the people
who are managing that were doing. Let's come back to your gray
area, if we get there. I asked the question that way because I
have just quoted Milton Friedman's theory of shareholder
primacy, which is sort of the central proposition, so we agree
with Milton Friedman. There is a rich conversation we could
have about stakeholder capitalism, but we seem to be Milton
Friedmanites today. That is fine. You wouldn't know it on this
side of the room, because we had a whole bunch of debates about
these uppity shareholders that are causing problems and are
creating troubles for companies that don't want to be
responsible to shareholders, but I digress.
Mr. Copland, over the last 5 years, bond funds have
significantly underperformed equity funds. Should investors get
out of bond markets? Just yes or no, should investors get out
of bond markets, given their underperformance over the last 5
years?
Mr. Copland. No.
Mr. Casten. Over the last year, the Dow Jones Oil & Gas
Index has underperformed the S&P 500 by almost 20 percent.
Should investors get out of oil and gas?
Mr. Copland. No.
Mr. Casten. Okay. I asked you those questions because in
April of this year, you wrote an op-ed in the New York Post
entitled, ``Having beat oil to OnlyFans, ESG activists now
focus on `big food,''' in which you said that the ESG bill is
going to come due because of long-term economic impacts. If we
agree on shareholder primacy, why should we take away investor
choice with respect to that asset class, but not with respect
to oil and gas, bond markets, or, frankly, any other asset
class in which investors are free to invest?
Mr. Copland. I don't think we should take away the ability
to invest in an ESG fund. We ought to be able to invest in ESG
funds. What I am worried about are passive index funds that
aren't making buy/sell decisions, voting their shares in
these----
Mr. Casten. Hang on a second. You asserted in that article
that ESG funds were delivering below-market returns. You didn't
provide citations----
Mr. Copland. I think in the long run, an ESG fund that
screens its stocks is necessarily going to underperform its
market benchmarks in the long run.
Mr. Casten. On that basis, so are mid-cap markets. Every
investment fund screens stocks for a certain class. People are
free to get in those as they wish. There have been a bunch of
State laws that have taken away the rights for investors to
invest in ESG, which my colleagues here are trying to take away
choice. Cut away all the other nonsense, and they are trying to
take away choice. Do you know what it has cost in those States
that have taken away choice? How much has it cost the Indiana
Public Retirement System when their State passed a bill banning
their pension funds from investing in ESG funds? Do you know
how much it cost them?
Mr. Copland. I would have to look very carefully at the
study, which I have not read. I am sure you are going to say it
has cost----
Mr. Casten. It is $6.7 billion. How about the Kansas Public
Employees Retirement System?
Mr. Copland. I am not aware of the Kansas----
Mr. Casten. It's $3.6 billion. The Texas County & District
retirement system--$6 billion. These are huge amounts of money
that are being lost to the working men and women in this
country. And this is going to be complicated for some of my
colleagues here who have a hard time with capitalism. If you
take away choice, you reduce supply, and the price moves,
right? These are the costs that we are asking our society to
impose.
Now, let's talk about some facts. In the last decade, coal
use in the United States is down by 40 percent. We used to make
50 percent of our power from coal. We now make more power from
renewables. The fastest-growing vehicle segment is electric
vehicles. Oil use is flat. Consumers given the choice about
what to buy are choosing cheaper energy. Investors given the
choice are following the money. Capitalism works.
It is also really scary if you can't compete, but it is the
only way that we stay competitive as a country, no matter how
much the losers cry to their benefactors in Washington and say,
``Can you please take away choice? Capitalism scares me. I
don't want to compete fairly. I can't compete fairly.'' And
yet, we are now sitting here having a debate, if you can even
humor it with that, about whether we as a country are going to
continue to support capitalism, and free markets, and
competitive choice among investors.
The party of Ronald Reagan, the party of Milton Friedman,
is afraid to defend capitalism. You all ought to be ashamed of
yourselves. But if it is partisan to defend free markets and
competitive and investor rights, let's double down on the
partisanship because it is the only way we move forward as a
country. I yield back.
Mr. Huizenga. The gentleman's time is about to expire. With
that, the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Barr. If ESG is capitalism, why do we need the
government to interfere in the free market? That is what ESG
is. That is what the SEC is doing. One of the bills noticed for
this hearing is the Ensuring Sound Guidance (ESG) Act, my bill
that amends the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, which provides
that pecuniary factors may not be subordinated to or limited by
non-pecuniary factors in determining whether an investment
advisor is acting in the best interest of a customer. That
doesn't take away choice. It merely says that if you want to
invest in an ESG fund, it should be disclosed that this fund is
not designed to maximize returns, but it doesn't take away the
choice.
Now, as you have heard earlier, ESG defenders in this
hearing and elsewhere have responded with hysterics, even
invoking Trotsky to conflate non-owner stakeholders, woke
institutional investors, and proxy advisory firms for bona fide
shareholders. There is a difference between, as Mr. Cunningham
has pointed out in his prepared testimony, an institutional
investor and the actual beneficial owner of the capital. And by
and large, beneficial owners of capital in America, the retail
investors who are the actual shareholders don't care about ESG.
They don't. The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA)
and the University of Chicago did a survey of retail investors
in America, the owners of the companies, not the institutional
investors, the actual beneficial owners of the capital, and
less than a quarter of them even know what ESG stands for--
materiality, they don't care; they want returns.
Let's get to the crux of this. Mr. Zycher, and Mr.
Cunningham, you heard my friend from Minnesota, my former
colleague, say ESG best practices and high market returns can
go hand in hand. My friend from Illinois, who is a defender of
ESG, says this all the time. What is it? Is ESG investing
actually compatible with maximizing pecuniary returns, Mr.
Cunningham?
Mr. Cunningham. The temperature has certainly risen in the
room. ESG investing is a loaded term, and if you are just
solely guided by certain aspects of it, that is not the route
to long-term economic prosperity. It is probably two different
lanes.
Mr. Barr. Mr. Copland, is ESG investing consistent with
maximizing returns? When social and political issues are
prioritized over financial performance, is that compatible with
maximizing returns?
Mr. Copland. It is incompatible with maximizing shareholder
returns in the long run.
Mr. Barr. Mr. Zycher?
Mr. Zycher. It is incompatible in the long run because
imposing artificial constraints on investment choices cannot be
consistent with the maximization of long-run returns. I will
say, however, Congressman, that is not quite the right
question. The right question, which we have kind of dodged in
this hearing thus far, is not whether people have the right to
invest in ESG initiatives, however those are defined. The issue
is whether regulatory agencies should be creating conditions in
which they are forced to do so. And that is the crux of the
problem, is that the SEC has promulgated regulations which have
led to such an environment in which firms are forced to use
proxy advisors. They are forced to adopt the recommendations of
the proxy advisors. The proxy advisors have no responsibilities
in a fiduciary sense to the shareholders and bear none of the
attendant costs. That is the problem.
Mr. Barr. Yes, I agree with you. I totally agree with you,
and that is why this is not the free market; it is government
intervention to distort the free flow of capital.
Mr. Copland, let me finish with you on what the prudential
bank regulators are doing. The Fed is pursuing a Pilot Climate
Scenario Analysis program. The OCC and the FDIC have
promulgated draft Principles for Climate-Related Financial Risk
Management. The NCUA has begun separately assessing climate
risks. Is this effort about assessing climate-related financial
risk, or is it about creating financial risk for energy
companies by redirecting capital away from those energy
companies?
Mr. Copland. It is absolutely about the latter. And the
access to free credit, or not to free credit, but the free
access to credit so that everyone on an equal plane can compete
for credit is really important. And we heard across the aisle
some were concerned----
Mr. Barr. Yes. And in my remaining time, I will just say I
don't understand why anyone would say this is about assessing
climate risk. Increasing energy prices does not stabilize the
economy. Depriving energy companies access to capital does not
promote financial stability.
Mr. Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired. With that,
the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Garcia, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I want to point
out that our historic Diversity and Inclusion Subcommittee, of
which I was Vice Chair last Congress, has been eliminated this
Congress. And here we go again with the Republican leadership
denying climate change, and denying that racism and sexism
still exist in our society by trying to eliminate the critical
and transparent ESG disclosures. To be clear to all the people
watching at home, ESG disclosures include information like
quantitative and qualitative disclosures related to climate-
related risks, and human capital disclosures like diversity and
inclusion. Bottom line, it is about transparency.
All the Republican-led bills discussed today are just more
attempts to deny the truth and ultimately eliminate diversity
and inclusion initiatives just because Republicans think that
they are, ``woke,'' whatever that means. By eliminating
corporate diversity and inclusion efforts, Republicans are
directly harming communities like mine in my district, which is
77-percent Latino and over 90-percent people of color.
Republicans are denying communities like mine the
opportunity to be fully represented. Corporate America and, in
particular, corporate American leadership, boardroom
executives, and sometimes even the general workforce do not
always reflect the true diversity of the American people and
the people they serve. This is part of the reason ESG
disclosures are so very important.
Again, ESG disclosures are about transparency. This
benefits workers, consumers, and investors. The public has a
right to know this information. In fact, research shows that
companies that are more diverse are more successful. Companies
that fail to prioritize diversity and inclusion are putting
themselves and shareholders at a financial disadvantage. As I
mentioned earlier, the disclosures we are discussing today
include information on human capital, or what I like to call,
worker treatment or workforce investment.
In an attempt to combat some of these bad Republican bills,
I am introducing a bill today called the Workforce Investment
Disclosure Act. This bill was led by Congresswoman Axne last
year, and I am proud to be the lead this year. This bill
requires publicly-traded companies to disclose, annually,
information regarding workforce management policies, practices,
and performance. This includes disclosures on demographic
information, data on temporary and contract workers, employee
turnover rate, employment skills and capabilities, workforce
health, safety and well-being, findings of discrimination, and
finally, employee compensation benefits and incentives.
This bill, quite frankly, should be a no-brainer. Again, it
is about transparency, and even executives agree on the
importance of human capital and workforce investment. In fact,
71 percent of public company executives identify human capital
as one of the most important sources of economic value within
their companies.
I also want to remind my Republican colleagues that many of
these ESG disclosures have a direct impact on workers, too. We
have spent a lot of time talking about investors today, and I
want to bring it back much like Mr. Casten did. This is really
about the workers. As Attorney General Ellison noted in his
testimony, public employees in his State trust him with a
portion of their salaries for a return for a secure retirement.
This is about our workers. It is about their choice. It is
about transparency.
Again, my district is largely working-class, and I urge my
colleagues to remember that when workers are happy, paid well,
and treated with respect, companies benefit and profit, and it
helps ensure stability. If companies are doing what they are
supposed to be doing--prioritizing diversity, and treating
workers well--then there is no need to be afraid of disclosure.
Mr. Attorney General, I wanted to follow up with a
statement that you made about Texas. Tell me more about the
$532 million a year in interest rates that Texas lost when they
passed the anti-free market legislation? Would some of these
policies that are being discussed today on these bills cause
that same kind of impact on the taxpayers?
Mr. Ellison. Thank you, Congresswoman. Let me tell you, the
information that my research yielded is that that $532 million
loss in 1 year is a result of a requirement that any banks that
did not want to invest in guns or oil industry products would
be punished. That meant there had to be a fairly abrupt
reallocation of resources, which led to losses to the tune of
about $532 million in a year.
Ms. Garcia. Yes. I think they were going after businesses
that come to Texas.
Mr. Hill. [presiding]. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you. I may follow up, Mr. Chairman, with
a written question. Thank you.
Mr. Hill. Of course.
The gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Rose, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Mr. Hill, and thanks to Chairman
McHenry for holding this hearing, and thank you to our
witnesses for being with us today.
Mr. Allen, earlier this year, ISS, the largely unregulated,
German-owned proxy advisory firm, announced a new, ``board-
aligned voting policy.'' An ordinary reading of the name,
``board-aligned,'' would suggest that under this policy, ISS
would recommend votes in line with how a company's board would
vote, but that is not exactly true under the policy.
Mr. Allen, could you explain how the name of ISS's new
policy is misleading?
Mr. Allen. Thanks for the question. And no, certainly, when
we first heard about this new policy--it came out right after a
group of Republican Attorneys General wrote letters to ISS and
Glass Lewis expressing their concerns about the lack of
alignment with the fiduciary duty of investors. I heard
somebody from another organization refer to it as a, ``red
State voting policy.'' But upon closer review, and we compared
it to the ISS benchmark policy, we found that with the
exception of a handful of environmental and social proposals,
the policy was essentially identical to the ISS benchmark
policy, including ISS policies on board diversity, on executive
compensation, and on takeover defenses. So, somebody opting for
this policy, that is an ISS client, would be misled if they
were opting to have their shares voted in accordance with
management recommendations or board recommendations.
We wrote a letter to ISS expressing our concern. We also
shared it with the SEC and members of this committee, and in
our view, this is something about which the SEC should be
concerned. The SEC is doing a rulemaking on fund names. These
custom or specialty policies are like ISS's main product. So,
we think it should have an accurate name and not something
misleading, like, ``board-aligned.''
Mr. Rose. Thank you. Mr. Allen, is ISS transparent about
the criteria that it uses to determine whether a company's
environmental and social disclosures are adequate?
Mr. Allen. The ISS, to its credit, does do an annual policy
survey, but other aspects of their policy-setting are less than
transparent. Some of their policies on executive compensation,
executive plans, don't fully disclose their methodology because
they want companies to buy their subscription services. So, on
some matters, they are, and on some matters, they aren't. It is
a mixed bag, but certainly we think that there should be more
transparency. ISS should provide more time for companies and
others to comment on their proposed policies every year.
Usually, it is a short period of time, and there could
certainly be improvements in that area.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. Mr. Copland, I would like to discuss
the overlap between the SEC's rulemaking on climate-related
disclosures and the SEC's recent Staff Legal Bulletin 14L, and
time is short, so I am going to try to move fast.
Mr. Copland, is it true that the SEC's rulemaking on
climate-related disclosures requires large publicly-traded
companies to disclose Scope 3 emissions if they have made
climate-related targets or commitments?
Mr. Copland. Yes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. Mr. Copland, under the SEC's recent
Staff Legal Bulletin 14L, significant social policy issues,
like climate-related proposals, no longer need to have a nexus
between an individual company and the policy to be included in
a proxy statement. Do you believe this will make it easier for
climate-related commitment proposals to make it onto a
company's proxy statement?
Mr. Copland. Yes, and it already has.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I tie these changes together because
climate activists, like As You Sow, are trying to make it more
likely that companies make climate-related commitments, and
thus, must disclose Scope 3 emissions under the climate
disclosure framework. I will note that As You Sow, alone, has
filed 25 climate commitment-related proposals this year.
Mr. Allen, one of the bills attached to this hearing would
eliminate the significant social policy issue exception to the
ordinary business exclusion in Rule 14a-8(i)(7). Can you
discuss why SEC staff should not be making subjective judgments
about whether a particular shareholder proposal is a
significant social policy issue?
Mr. Allen. We think that is an entirely subjective
analysis, and it is beyond the SEC's mandate to make such
determinations.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I see time is short, so I yield back
the balance of my time.
Mr. Meuser. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Horsford, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Horsford. I want to thank the chairman and the ranking
member for the hearing today. While I disagree with the posture
of the hearing, these are issues that are actually imperative
to our financial sector and really are a business imperative.
They are an imperative because it is customer-driven, and it is
around new products that my colleagues are so quick to deride.
They only exist because there is a market for them, and I just
find it completely interesting that somehow the market can't
lead in this particular area.
Why would we deny wide swaths of investors the information
they care about when they are making investment decisions,
especially when this is information already exists, in many
instances? We are spending our time obsessing over manufactured
culture wars instead of doing the work of the American people
who sent us here. Our focus should be on the actual issues that
our country faces, such as expanding access to capital for
small businesses, bolstering financial literacy efforts to
build a more-inclusive financial sector, or addressing the
ever-skyrocketing cost of housing, because I know that issues
like housing are the problems that my constituents grapple with
around the dinner table, not over dictating how investors
decide how to manage their money.
Actually, I am glad that we have an opportunity to discuss
just how detrimental it could be if we blind ourselves to the
very real risks associated with a company's mismanagement of
social, environmental, or corporate governance factors. I am
really baffled that I have to say this, but I believe that our
nation's investors and other financial services professionals
know best how to manage their risk. They are in the business of
managing risk in all of its forms, and any risk that these
professionals deem to be material should be included within the
decision-making process. Without considering a company's
exposure to climate change or the ongoing implementation of a
meaningful diversity and inclusion strategy, shareholders and
investors will bear the cost for any potential catastrophes.
These are costs that managers must be able to price into
their investment strategies, but the only way that is possible
is through our work here to promote principles-based
disclosures. These investors at least deserve to have access to
complete information before making their own decisions on where
they want to invest their money.
Attorney General Ellison, it is great to see you.
Mr. Ellison. Likewise. Thank you.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you for taking the time to be here. I
hope that you can help me understand where this supposed ESG
push is coming from. At the Federal level, or in your home
State, have you seen these feared mandates or that the
government's focus is truly on costly non-material issues at
the expense of the U.S. public markets? Is that something that
you are seeing?
Mr. Ellison. No. It is coming from pension beneficiaries.
It is coming from members of our community. It is coming from a
diverse group of Minnesotans who want the Minnesota SBI to
think about governance, to think about social factors in
certain considerations, and also to think about the
environmental impacts. As I noted before, it is a real example
that one of the companies that the SBI was invested in actually
owned a plant where 14-year-olds were being used to clean a
kill room floor in a meatpacking plant. Now, it might be
cheaper and add to the bottom line to use 14-year-olds to clean
your kill room floor in your meat packing plant, but it is not
legal and it certainly is exploitive.
Investors want to know that kind of information. They think
that it is important, and people will come to our SBI meetings
and demand that we do something about it, so it is not like we
are looking for these things. We just think it would be
important for a company to say, okay, we are looking at child
labor, we are looking at human trafficking, we are looking at
governance. Thank you.
Mr. Horsford. And the last issue that I won't have time to
speak about is diversity, equity, and inclusion. And I will
just close my comment on this issue by saying that diversity is
a strength for these companies. It is good business for
investors to know these strengths, and even more importantly, a
company's weaknesses prior to investing. With that, I yield
back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Steil, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
you for calling today's hearing.
I think it is really important that we dig in to how our
Federal agencies are weaponizing Americans' retirement accounts
to achieve political objectives that can't be achieved through
the ballot box. I am concerned about Americans' retirements
being used for purposes other than analyzing risk and return.
And, in particular, we see a duopoly of proxy advisors whom, I
think, have a disproportionate voice in the voting of shares as
more and more Americans are turning to index funds, passive
investments, in particular, through asset managers across our
country.
Mr. Cunningham, as we have seen a spike in shareholder
proposals, fund managers seem to be relying more and more on
this duopoly of proxy advisors, in particular, ISS and Glass
Lewis, which dominate the industry. And the impact that is
having--my legislation, and I think a really important piece
that I have been working on, is that there should be more
transparency as relates to the process with which these proxy
advisors are reaching their conclusions. Do you think there is
a reason that these proxy advisors shouldn't have to disclose
their internal methodologies and the staff qualifications that
they have as they are making these recommendations?
Sorry, I was looking at you, Mr. Allen, and I am asking Mr.
Cunningham. We will start with Mr. Cunningham, and I will come
back to you, Mr. Allen.
Mr. Cunningham. Thank you very much. I think the rise of
the proxy agents, proxy advisors was a response to the
explosion of index fund investment. The index fund business
model prevents those firms from studying every company and
evaluating every subject. The proxy advisors grew up to provide
that service, and initially it was an attractive thing to do,
but they are unsupervised, unregulated, and they owe no
fiduciary duties to American investors. They have no obligation
to disclose conflicts of interest they see. They have no
obligation to explain why their recommendations are in the best
interest of investors. They are not required to fact check
their recommendations with companies.
Mr. Steil. I take it from your comments that you think they
should have to do all of these things, right?
Mr. Cunningham. Yes, and the Congress has studied this
industry for 13 years.
Mr. Steil. Is there a reason that Chairman Gensler struck
down the rule made under former Chairman Clayton that was
reviewed and analyzed, to put these proxy advisors into a form
where they would have to disclose? Is there a reason that
Chairman Gensler should have done that other than to try to
continue to allow these proxy advisors to hide what they are
doing from the American people?
Mr. Cunningham. I supported the 2020 rule revision, which
was hard-fought and a compromise with the proxy advisors----
Mr. Steil. I think it should have gone further, but should
Chairman Gensler have struck it the way that he did?
Mr. Cunningham. It was a compromise, worked out over a long
period of time, and it was a surprise that Chairman Gensler----
Mr. Steil. You take it as a surprise. I will take it as a
bad action. Mr. Allen, do you think that Chairman Gensler
should have struck the rule on proxy advisors to bring them
into the light rather than allow them to continue to not have
to disclose their methodologies and practices?
Mr. Cunningham. No. I supported the 2020 rule----
Mr. Steil. Let me come to Mr. Allen on that.
Mr. Allen. No, we completely disagree with the SEC's action
to reverse the 2020 rules. We think there were no new
circumstances, no new facts, other than just that opponents of
the rules weren't happy with them.
Mr. Steil. I agree with you, and as we look at this, what
happens when proxy advisors give bad advice? We can take the
Travelers example, where a proxy advisor recommended what would
have been an illegal action and voted in favor of that, and
then, we see a robo-voting move forward. And we see over 40
percent of these asset managers agreeing with an illegal action
that would have forced Travelers to re-price their insurance
based on race, which is illegal, in States across our country.
What are the ramifications for that?
Mr. Allen. It has serious ramifications for Travelers and
other companies in those situations----
Mr. Steil. But what are the ramifications? I agree that it
does for Travelers and for companies across our nation that are
fighting against being told to perform illegal actions. What
are the ramifications to ISS and Glass Lewis for giving this
disastrous advice? Are there any?
Mr. Allen. There really aren't because part of the problem
with the duopoly is that their clients don't really have many
other options.
Mr. Steil. ISS and Glass Lewis are unaccountable for their
bad behavior. Is that right, Mr. Copland?
Mr. Copland. Yes.
Mr. Steil. And, Mr. Zycher, should this duopoly remain
unaccountable to the American people?
Mr. Zycher. I don't believe so, but I do believe that,
again, the major problem is the SEC regulatory environment that
forces the private sector to use them. Were that not in
existence, I think the transparency problem also would
disappear.
Mr. Steil. Yes. I would love to see this duopoly broken up
and more players in this space, but I remain incredibly
concerned that the duopoly we have in the proxy advisor space
is pushing forward this agenda. It is problematic for
Americans' retirements because it is allowing America's
retirement funds to be weaponized for political purposes rather
than to be used to actually analyze risk and return. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from California, Mr. Vargas, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
the opportunity and I also want to thank the ranking member and
these five distinguished gentlemen for being here today. Thank
you very much.
Sometimes, timing is everything, and this week, the
newspaper headlines have been screaming about climate
disasters--The New York Times: floods, fires, withering heat.
Climate change brings new disasters every day. Flooding closes
roads and churns through much of Vermont. The New York Times:
the heaviest rain ever in Japan's south sets off floods. Heat
wave may be the longest ever and temperatures will likely
increase. Northeast storms dumps over 2 months' worth of rain
on Vermont. Helicopter and boat rescues underway across a
devasted Vermont. Do any of you gentlemen think that human
actions with respect to the use of fossil fuels have
contributed to these climate disasters? And you can start in
any order you would like. Yes, sir, but just don't go long
because I don't have a lot of time.
Mr. Zycher. If you look at the peer-reviewed literature,
what you will learn is that since the end of the Little Ice
Age, global temperatures have risen about 1.1 degrees, of which
roughly half is due to increasing atmospheric concentrations of
greenhouse gas emissions. So the narrow answer to your question
is, yes, mankind's activities have influenced the climate, and
we can detect those effects. The next question is, are those
effects large and is there evidence of a crisis? In the sense
of the several examples that you have cited, the answer is, no.
Mr. Vargas. Okay.
Mr. Zycher. There's no evidence of a crisis.
Mr. Vargas. No evidence of a crisis.
Mr. Zycher. It is not the same as saying that----
Mr. Vargas. Right, I get it.
Mr. Zycher. ----there is no evidence that anthropogenic
emissions have had an effect--they have.
Mr. Vargas. Right. It is not a crisis, and you wouldn't say
that the burning of fossil fuels has been a large part of the
crisis that we do see.
Mr. Zycher. I don't think we see a crisis and, therefore, I
don't think fossil fuels are a problem----
Mr. Vargas. Fair enough. Anyone else want to give it a
shot? Yes, sir?
Mr. Copland. Yes, I think that human activity has had an
impact on the climate, and I think there is at least a
theoretical link between some of that activity and certain
climate patterns that we may or may not see. I also think,
however, that the human cost in terms of loss of human life
over the last century from climate-related events has gone
dramatically down, and that is because of the broad economic
growth that we have seen in our country. Therefore, I think it
is very important that we consider that economic growth in our
capital markets and financial regulatory structures a part of
that so that we can remain a wealthier country and more
resilient to climate impacts.
Mr. Vargas. Okay. Anybody else? Mr. Ellison?
Mr. Ellison. I would say certainly human activity has
contributed to a chaotic climatic environment. There is no
doubt in my mind, and I would disagree that it is not causing a
crisis. I think it is, and I think it is causing a crisis as it
relates to agriculture, species, and weather events, and I
think it is a serious problem we have to address.
Mr. Vargas. And, of course, most of the scientists are
saying it is a crisis, and it is because we are burning fossil
fuels. How can that not be material? That is why investors want
to know, what is your company doing? Is it investing in a way
that is responsible, and, more importantly, is your company
going to be around for a while or not, because you are in a
situation where you are not paying attention to these risks,
and these risks are real. And that is why so many people want
to know about this.
And timing is everything. I can't think of a worse time to
be trying to pass bills against environmental issues than right
now when the headlines are screaming about these climate
disasters. Timing is everything. It really is fascinating to me
that these bills are coming up right when the scientists are
saying this is a disaster and human beings are causing it
because of the burning of fossil fuels. And with that, I thank
you, and I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Williams, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank
all of you for being here. When I go home to Texas, I am a car
dealer. I have employed hundreds of people over 52 years, so
when I am talking to business owners back in my district, I
know what they are going to say. And they say they are
concerned about the SEC's push to implement costly
environmental, social, and political regulatory requirements
which require them to disclose climate-related information that
is not relevant or material for their companies.
Now, businesses are already struggling to operate within
tight margins, with high interest rates, and are seeing their
profits erode, so an increase in compliance costs could be even
more of a tipping point to their future. The SEC's proposed
climate requirements will cost companies millions for them to
ensure they comply, and I am worried this proposal will
discourage companies from even getting into business or
entering or staying in the public market, which will hinder
competition, stifle economic growth, and affect jobs.
The biggest issue is that the SEC does not even have the
legal authority--and we have talked about that today--to
enforce climate-focused regulations, and this proposal exceeds
the SEC's intended mission and their statutory authority. And
it is the job of Congress to set an environmental policy, not
unelected bureaucrats. The fact is the Biden Administration--
here we go again, Bidenomics--does not have the votes to pass a
climate agenda through Congress, so they are trying to push
climate-related policy through financial regulators. And this
committee is tasked with overseeing the SEC, and we must rein
in the abuse of the rulemaking process before they cause any
further damage to Main Street America.
Mr. Copland, if the SEC continues to operate outside of
their statutory purview, how will their proposed climate
disclosure rules negatively impact financial institutions and
small businesses, and what will the implications be on the U.S.
public market?
Mr. Copland. Assuming that they get a rule enacted and it
is not overturned in court, and I predict it probably would be,
but assuming they have an operative rule that does what they
are calling for initially, things like Scope 3 emissions, the
financial institutions are going to have general counsels,
right? And the financial institutions' general counsels are
going to say, how are we going to comply with this rule?
And when you start figuring out how we are going to comply
with this rule, well, okay, we are going to ask the car dealer,
or we are going to ask the family farmer that Representative
Scott was talking about, and we are going to say, you have to
tell us all of your climate impacts. And you don't have teams
of economists, you don't have teams of analysts to do this, so
you are going to lose access to credit. You are going to lose
access to business. And so, it is going to be potentially
devastating to a lot of small businesses and family farmers if
this were to be enacted and actually enforced.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Yes, these people can't afford
lawyers. They can't afford it, these folks, so it is
devastating. Shareholder engagement is one of the most
important parts of corporate governance. Now, however,
shareholder proposals have begun to try and hijack boardrooms,
and we talked about it this morning, and turn them into
platforms for political agendas. And it comes as no surprise
that the SEC, which governs this process, has been instigating
these groups to submit proposals that do not align with a
company's interests or core duties. It is the duty of an
institution to protect the financial interests of all
investors, not just a particular group that is trying to be the
loudest in the room. And this process must be revised to ensure
that companies can protect the interests of real shareholders.
Mr. Copland, could you elaborate on the effects that
partisan and political shareholder proposals have on an
institution's ability to create value for all shareholders, not
just one select group that is trying to advance a radical
agenda?
Mr. Copland. The reality is, why do we even have dispersed
stock ownership in corporations? What economists will call
agency costs are actually higher for this type of equity
ownership in many regards, but what they do do is align around
shareholder primacy. People brought up Milton Friedman--align
interest around a single variable, share value, and it makes it
easier to do business. When you start making each boardroom a
political football field, then it becomes hard to be an
efficient business and do your job. The folks in this body know
that this body isn't known for its efficiency, so making a
political football field out of every business is not a good
way to run all of our businesses.
Mr. Williams of Texas. I have limited time, so I will
shorten my question. Mr. Cunningham, could you expand on the
effects of financial regulators forcing ESG policies on the
private sector? What effect will that have on retail investors
and their ability to grow their own wealth?
Mr. Cunningham. Yes. The genius of corporate law is that
shareholders get to buy stock, and then they have no duties.
They don't have a fiduciary obligation. They don't have to
vote. They don't have to do anything but elect a board of
directors, which is the fiduciary body and the overseers of the
corporation, and that is the body that should make these
decisions. The shareholders should not be telling the managers
what to do or telling the board what to do. When a small subset
of shareholders do that, they will hurt the other shareholders.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Everybody is an expert. My time is
up, and I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The
gentlewoman from Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I am really
incredibly taken aback. I always look at the witnesses who come
before us and try to figure out what lens they are bringing, or
their lived experience, or the people that they serve. And when
I found out, and again, these numbers are pretty old, but in
2018, ExxonMobil gave the American Enterprise Institute
$160,000, bringing the total to $4.65 million. No, keep shaking
your heads. I want to know why we are here, because in Detroit,
we had the hottest days. Do you know anything about Cities like
Detroit, New York, or Chicago, where working-class people are
literally suffering because we do nothing about climate?
Nothing. We don't give them the resources we put aside. Why?
Because certain industries want to deny that we even have
climate risks and how that impacts people's retirement, and how
it impacts our economy. It is going to happen. Guess what? You
are going to come right back here and want us to bail you out
again, literally.
Look at the National Flood Insurance Program, that I talk
to our chairman about all the time. First of all, it is a form
of socialism, but okay, that doesn't exist, because those are
the big mansions on the ocean and those folks get bailed out,
but my folks, literally their basements, everything get
flooded. They are literally suffering every single day.
This whole, ``ESG,'' whatever, debate, is a fabricated
political issue. We already know. Luckily, there are folks
within your industry who have actually spoken up and said this
is BS, that particularly the fossil fuel industry, in some
cases, is trying to protect their short-term profits at the
expense of workers, retirees, and communities. Shake your
heads, but $4.65 million since 2018. This is since 1998. It is
a lot of freaking money, and that is only just the recent
amount of money, and I don't even know what everybody else is
taking.
But Attorney General Ellison, one of the things that I am
concerned about, and again, pensioners and families saving for
retirement are concerned about, is the performance of companies
over the decades. They really are. They sincerely are. They
actually don't trust them. I have a lot of retirees who don't
trust them. They are pretty good, so for them, transparency is
a wonder. This is exactly what they need to be talking about.
This is exactly what they need. They want to be able to access
that information. They need to protect their investments.
Attorney General Ellison, can you touch on the ways that
ESG disclosures promote long-term value creation instead of
risky or short-term profit-seeking initiatives and movements
that they are supporting?
Mr. Ellison. Congresswoman, I think they drive a
conversation that is essential. I think they drive a dialogue.
They allow questions to be asked and answered. I agree,
immaterial, truly immaterial information, that is one thing,
but how climate is impacting people in an urban environment,
like Detroit, where I grew up, is everything. People die when
it gets too hot, for too long, but also, the issue of
governance is critical. People want to know that we are getting
all points of view in this conversation so that we can assess
the risk all the way on a 360 level, and certainly, in the area
of social does matter to folks. It certainly is an important
thing. It is not a mandate, but it is a critical set of
considerations, which I think improve shareholder value. The
risk adjustment is more accurate, I think.
Ms. Tlaib. It is the anti-ESG crusaders here, or simply,
for me, carrying the water of corporations, that don't really
want to disclose long-term risks that their businesses face,
and it is true. I don't know how much data we need, how many
more studies. I know my folks are really tired of the studies,
because it reveals everything we are supposed to know, but we
do nothing about it. We are saying, not now, not now, not
really. And I don't think that there is any care of whether or
not the heat or climate challenges are really impacting human
life or certain sectors of the business.
And I know, Attorney General Ellison, you are going to give
me some examples of material risks related to workplace safety,
racial equity, and workers' freedom of association that ESG
disclosures might reveal. We can continue talking about that,
but for me, you lose credibility, like the Manhattan Institute
for 2 decades taking money from Exxon. You lose credibility
when you are taking, literally, money from the people who don't
think the challenges are actually here, that we actually have a
climate crisis. You lose credibility.
You have to come here, and you have to understand this is
real and it is happening. And saying it is not happening or how
somehow it is impacting the private sector and so on, guess
what? You are all going to end up right here asking us to bail
you out, so do something about it now. Don't wait, and try to
gaslight the American people that ESG is not important.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Norman, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norman. I want to thank each of you for taking the time
to be here. As has been noted, for the SEC to basically dictate
the 500-page climate disclosure rule is idiotic. The SEC
doesn't have the power or the authority, nor is it granted by
Congress. To hear some of the statements that have been made,
for example, the thing about capitalism taking away choices--
Andy Barr brought the exact point up, why is government needed
then? Why is government needed to dictate that? Why is
government needed to dictate electric cars--I turned on the
news this morning, and saw that electric cars are sitting in
the lots. The public doesn't want them, particularly when the
batteries to run them--cobalt, lithium--come from China, as
well as aluminum. That is stupid. It is very interesting when
you talk about ESG requirements disclosure, make sure the
shareholder knows everything about it--that hasn't been done.
I am a real estate developer. If I put together a proposal
for you for real estate, you would want to know every line item
and where the money goes. Where is that in the disclosures as
it relates to ESG? It is not there. I haven't seen it. I am
talking about the money that Ms. Tlaib is talking about, the
billions of dollars. Where is it actually spent? Where do the
dollars go? They go to groups that have nothing to do with the
floods she is talking about and the hurricanes. A man is not
going to control that. It is idiotic to think that.
I had a group of meteorologists in the other day who are
experts and I asked them, how can we control the floods and the
hurricanes? They laughed me out of the building, and it was at
that time that they said, you are not. I said, well, how about
Al Gore, who brought up that the oceans were boiling, and they
started laughing. He worked himself up into a frenzy. We have
yet to have a hearing where you had two sides, the Al Gores of
the world and the experts, to do a counterbalance. I have yet
to see a disclosure where the monies that the corporate boards
are, I guess, adhering to have a line item, this is the firm
that is getting this money that is going to control the
environment. I have yet to see that. I have to do that every
day in my world.
Mr. Copland, ``efficiency,'' is not exactly a word that is
ever used in Congress, because Congress is not efficient. There
are two things that I think Congress has a role in, one being
diversity, not of race and ethnicity, but diversity of ideas
and different opinions. That is what the boards have to have.
They have fallen in this line of just complying because it is
the politically-correct thing to do that this Administration is
forcing on the American people.
And the other thing I would suggest is, if we are going to
require full disclosure for the taxpayers who invest, for the
small businesses who buy those index funds, let's have a line
item of where that money is going, who is getting it, and
explain to me how it is going to affect what they are all
talking about.
And, Mr. Zycher, you are exactly right. This isn't a
crisis. It is a crisis by a certain few who are loud and bored
activists, but when we have as many things going on in this
country--an invasion at the border, we have crime, we have so
many things that are threatening our society--to divert the
issue on that is lunacy.
I am running out of time, but do any of you want to comment
on any of that? Mr. Cunningham?
Mr. Cunningham. I do think that the system of proxy voting
has a lot of deficiencies, and the shareholder proposal rule
has been expanded far too greatly to entertain all of these
major topics of debate, and the corporate boardroom, the
corporate meeting room really isn't the right forum, so I
commend your efforts to try to return to business through the
shareholder proposal process. And the indexing industry is a
wonderful industry, but it has a problem. It owns the stock,
which is great, but maybe it shouldn't vote the stock. Maybe
that is the solution. We wouldn't need the proxy advisors
either.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, sir. We are out of time. I
appreciate your testimony.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Connecticut, Mr. Himes, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Himes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, before I begin my questions, I would like to
submit the following statements into the record: the Interfaith
Center on Corporate Responsibility; Out Leadership and
affiliated businesses; Ceres; the U.S. Impact Investing
Alliance; US SIF; Americans for Financial Reform; the
Shareholder Rights Group; and Green America.
Chairman McHenry. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Himes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, what are
we doing here? We have had bank failures--with Silicon Valley
Bank, the government had to step in. I am hearing so much about
the proper role of government. The government had to step in,
just as it did when I was a freshman in this institution, to
rescue the banking sector. We have had the bank failures. We
are working in great bipartisan fashion on cryptocurrency, on
regulation there, stablecoins, FTX. We don't want that to
happen again.
The SEC is very active. I understand your side doesn't like
that. My side may like it more, but we have so much to talk
about, and here we are devoting a week to telling private
corporations that they are mad for exercising the rights that
they have in a free market. It is mind-blowing to me.
Now, look, I am a Democrat, or actually, I am an analytical
human being. So when I see the fact that the 7 hottest days in
recent history were in the last week, that feels like a crisis
to me. Now, my colleague, Mr. Norman, doesn't feel that way. I
am wondering about our witnesses here. I will get more
particular here, but if the witnesses could do a show of hands
quickly, how many of you don't accept the scientific consensus
that anthropogenic carbon burning is causing an alteration for
the worst in our climate? Anybody not accept that? If you don't
accept that, raise your hand.
[Hand raised.]
Mr. Himes. Okay. We have one witness who denies the
scientific consensus on climate change. The rest of our
witnesses, the other four are not raising their hands. I can't
breathe in the State of Connecticut because of fires in Quebec,
and Florida is going to be underwater in a generation. This is
a crisis, and you know what we do in a crisis? We mobilize as a
government. I took some economics courses, so I can tell you
that there is a free market--Mr. American Enterprise Institute,
I will come back to you--reason to intervene here, which is
that we are not pricing in the externalities of the burning of
carbon, and the free market will not solve this crisis that
four out of five of you acknowledge is real and serious.
I am also on the House Intelligence Committee, and we have
a real diversity problem within that committee. These are
magnificent organizations. The CIA does great work. It is still
too much what it was a generation ago--pale, male, and Yale--
and they are working really hard to change that, and if they
don't change that, they are not going to be the powerful
organization that they need to be. What are we doing here? The
State of Texas is losing money because they forbade bond
underwriters that are, ``woke''--whatever that means--from
participating in municipal auctions for bonds in the State of
Texas. The State of Texas is losing millions of dollars because
of this anti-woke crusade.
The last point I want to make is that I respect those on
the right who say that we should have free markets. We should,
but isn't the whole point of the free market that corporations
get to make their own decisions? And yes, it is a combination
of the board and the shareholders, but they get to make their
own decisions, and if they make bad decisions, consumers will
punish them.
So if you believe in economics--and, Mr. Zycher, I have a
lot of respect for the American Enterprise Institute and I go
to your conferences from time to time, and I think you are a
principled voice for more right-wing philosophy. Where am I
wrong about saying that Congress has no role, the State of
Texas has no role in formally or informally telling players in
free markets that they shouldn't be woke? Is that a free market
thing for the government at the State of Texas level or at the
Federal level to be saying, we are angry about your wokeness?
Is that consistent with free market principles?
Mr. Zycher. That is not the premise. The premise is whether
or not a regulatory agency should be promulgating rules that
force firms and funds to make decisions or to delegate
decision-making in ways that are not consistent with the
fiduciary interests of their shareholders and fund
participants. The issue is not whether Congress or the State of
Texas should tell people how to spend their money. Of course,
that is true.
Mr. Himes. That is the larger issue. One party here is
running an entire Presidential campaign premised on the
notion--talk to Disney--that the government should bludgeon
corporations into their philosophical framework. I am having a
little trouble with this conversation, sir, because you were
the one person who raised your hand saying you didn't believe
in anthropogenic climate change.
Mr. Zycher. No, that is not what I said, Congressman. That
is not what I said. That is not what I stated, not what I
disagreed with.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I don't think that this hearing is about climate change.
There is a lot being done dealing with climate change in our
country, as I think we all know. And the idea of mobilizing
government under crisis--our government consists of three
branches of government, so it can't be mobilized just in the
branch that you happen to control at the time. I think this
hearing is more about laws and the following of laws and the
enforcement of such laws. And if the laws are to be changed, it
needs to be done by legislation, by lawmakers who represent the
people; that's how our republic works.
According to the Investment Advisers Act, dating way back
almost 100 years, the primary responsibility of a fiduciary is
to run the plan solely in the interests of the beneficiaries,
for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits. ERISA law must
act in good faith with the best interests of the shareholders
in mind and must disclose any potential conflicts of interest.
We know of some very large investment companies that have
actually written letters saying, you are asking the SEC to
renege on our fiduciary responsibilities. That is what the case
is here. What is next, investing in foods that are better for
people? That wouldn't be a bad idea, but to force individuals
to do so--and that is what we are talking about here. We are
talking about investment choice versus being forced quite
unlawfully, I believe, by the SEC.
I will go further to state that we also shouldn't be forced
into European standards. I have a bill that requires a study on
the Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence Directive (CS3D),
which is an imposition on United States companies to follow EU
standards that some of you may be familiar with, which is a
really bad idea, because if such a thing would have passed 60
years ago, our economy arguably would be about 35 to 40 percent
smaller than it is today because of our innovation, because
that is what leads the way in this country, not the force of
the heavy-handed government, because government, I think we all
agree on both sides of the aisle, usually gets it wrong.
Mr. Copland, I want to ask you this, just referring back to
my bill. I recently asked Treasury Secretary Yellen about the
directors of CS3D. She agreed that Treasury had significant
concerns. Do you have similar concerns with such EU directives
being placed on American businesses?
Mr. Copland. Absolutely. Do you want me to elaborate?
Chairman McHenry. Please, for a couple of moments.
Mr. Copland. We do not want our international system to be
this, ``we attack you, you attack us,'' sort of system. This is
what we got out of in the 1930s when it came to the trade
system when you had retaliatory tariffs going back and forth
which really shut down world trade and exacerbated the
Depression. We don't want that with regulatory oversight
either. What they are suggesting is that by 2028, you could
have American parent companies with European subsidiaries have
to do all these sorts of disclosures based on their regime,
even though our regulators may differ from that, and this can
go both ways. And I think Members of Congress and the
Administration may want to raise that----
Chairman McHenry. Getting our sovereignty over for the
state of our economy, absolutely, I agree with you. Thank you.
The SEC climate disclosure rule, Scope 3--I hear all about
it from manufacturers, from farmers to supermarkets. With such
a mandate as this, Mr. Zycher, do you think this provision is
very costly to business as well? Does the SEC have authority
here?
Mr. Zycher. I don't believe the SEC has the authority to
promulgate any part of this rule. The SEC, under Gary Gensler,
is obviously trying to become part of the climate crusade and
expand its authority and its budget, and I don't believe the
rule is consistent with the major questions doctrine recently
decided by the Supreme Court. And in a policy sense, it is a
terrible rule in terms of its economic effects.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Allen, if this precedent were set by the SEC, it they
enacted such a rule for all political agendas pushed by any SEC
Commissioner, how would American businesses handle that?
Mr. Allen. I think that is an appropriate----
Mr. Zycher. To whom are you directing this?
Chairman McHenry. Actions taken? I'm sorry. It was for Mr.
Allen. My time has expired, unfortunately. We can follow up in
writing afterwards.
Mr. Allen. I would be happy to follow up.
Chairman McHenry. Great.
The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Fitzgerald, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was part of a
conversation with a CFO this winter, and the topic of ESG came
up. And you could tell there was almost a resilience building
already by some of the major financial institutions to simply
make a move that was proactive, and in this case, it was on a
website, to just basically put up a statement about ESG and how
they were concerned about the environment. And the conversation
then involved him saying it is just something we are all going
to have to do to get the SEC off our back, so why not comply
right now? He didn't take it seriously, and you could see that
it was part of this corporate pressure that has continued to
emerge.
I think, without being redundant of some of the questions
that were asked earlier, Mr. Copland, can you discuss, first of
all, the harms to State and local funding that could come from
ESG mandates, like the potential one from the Municipal
Securities Rulemaking Boared (MSRB)? Ultimately, that is where
I see kind of the crossroad is when you start forcing
compliance with this voluntary kind of half-look at the entire
issue that is going on right now.
Mr. Copland. Yes. Here, you have a body that is sort of a
subsidiary of the SEC, sort of quasi-independent, wanting to
push these sorts of requirements on, and this is very heavy-
handed. You are basically telling municipalities all around the
country that they have to buy into this ESG thing, or they are
going to lose access to capital, and you are effectively
strong-arming from the top what municipalities can do. And it
also is probably just going to raise the cost of capital for
those municipalities in general, and, therefore, that is going
to affect both local property taxes and local services, et
cetera. So, it is something we have to be really, really
careful about, to not be heavy-handed. That is not really what
that body is for.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Yes. And I think, just to kind of further
that discussion, the other part of this is, eventually
shareholders are going to kind of see through it, right?
Mr. Zycher, you talked a little bit about this, obviously,
the overreaching kind of discussion about how much can a
boardroom and a group of shareholders kind of continue to
swallow on this front until they say enough is enough because
they are seeing the impact on their investment and their
shares.
Mr. Zycher. There are two problems. One, ESG has never been
defined very carefully. It has a multitude of goals, which
inevitably conflict, and the question is, what are the
tradeoffs among them? To the extent that the business sector
either chooses to or is forced to incorporate ESG or
sustainability--if you want to call it that--criteria into its
business and management decisions, the conflicts become
greater. The ability and the goal of maximizing returns becomes
ever more diluted. Capital costs rise, capital productivity
falls, and with it, labor productivity and wages. The
implications for the economy are not salutary, which is a
reality that the empirical literature demonstrates, I think,
pretty convincingly.
Mr. Fitzgerald. And there is probably a short fuse on
compliance with some of these items that will ultimately be set
in motion, and then what you will see is a series of penalties
when somebody doesn't comply, and that is my biggest concern.
We are trying to prevent, once again, the heavy hand of
government kind of stepping in and inserting themselves into
something that is the basis for this entire committee, which is
to govern financial institutions and related services.
Mr. Zycher. The government has stepped in through SEC
regulations. The question is, how do we undo that damage? That
is a job for Congress.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Donalds, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
witnesses. Attorney General, it's good to see you again.
This is a great hearing actually, and I know that some of
our colleagues on the other side don't really want to focus on
this sector, or what is happening here in our capital markets.
And I honestly believe the reason why they either, A, don't
want to focus on it, or, B, say it is a waste of time, is
because it helps them achieve a lot of the political and social
ends that they want to see without actually having to come here
and vote. This works a lot better when you have small pockets
of activist shareholders bringing board proposals ad nauseam
and they kind of overwhelm the C-suite, if you will, to
accomplish these things through the corporate sector that you
could not get through the legislative process, so I see why
they didn't want to focus on it.
I know a comment was made about belief in anthropologic
global warming. It used to be called climate change or whatever
you want to say it is. No, I actually don't agree with that
statement. I don't think that the science is settled. And I
think it is interesting that in 2023, people talk about settled
science, and they are also talking about physics, and the laws
of gravity, and other things that are now tried and true over
many, many decades. But no, the science is not settled on that,
but at the end of the day, what we are discussing is the real
implications, the real-world fiscal implications of ESG policy
on our capital markets.
If you look back to returns for 2022, BlackRock's own ESG
screened S&P 500 exchange-traded fund (ETF) was down 20 percent
in 2022. It lost 20 percent of its money. And by the way, if
you look at the fees for that fund, the fees are much higher
than a baseline ETF, just taking the S&P 500 as a basket of
securities and delivering it to somebody with an IRA, or if it
ever got batched into any matrix of a 401(k) that might be out
there, even one that might be available to pensioners in the
State of Minnesota. That broad-based S&P energy sector ETF was
up 50 percent last year--50 percent.
Now, the reason why it is easy for me to talk about this is
because I actually was a fiduciary. I was an investment
advisor. I did the job. I would never invest my clients in ESG
funds because they are more expensive, and the returns are not
there. The returns have not been there. And I think the issue
that we are going to maybe potentially begin to run into is
that, because you have this chilling effect on the movement of
capital into the ESG firms, then by the sheer force of capital
chasing them versus chasing other companies, that either, A, do
not comply or, B, do not conform to the ESG matrix by their
dearth of capital. By default, their returns year-over-year as
a company is going to actually wither over time. That kind of
chilling effect is not what the free market was ever created to
do. That chilling effect is something completely different,
which is an anathema to the free market.
Mr. Allen, I know proxy advising has been talked about a
lot, and frankly, the voting procedures going on with these
shareholder proposals. What would you think a good remedy for
Congress would be to take a look at this and try to remedy this
situation?
Mr. Allen. There are several things that Congress could do.
Certainly, I think addressing Rule 14a-8, and removing some of
these social issue proposals from corporate proxy ballots, and
not requiring companies to have to put these out to a vote of
their shareholders, certainly that would help quickly on
matters that relate to ordinary business or that are
economically significant for a company.
As I mentioned in my written testimony, I think there
should be SEC oversight of proxy advisors. I think the SEC's
proposal in 2019 struck the right balance and then called for a
draft review process. Public companies can review the accuracy
and the completeness of the reports before their investors are
voting on them because part of the problem is that there are a
number of smaller asset managers who don't put the resources
into proxy voting and essentially vote blindly or in lockstep
with the proxy advisors. Unfortunately, it dilutes the voice of
the other investors who are being more thoughtful, including
the voice of retail investors who own shares directly in
companies.
Mr. Donalds. No, I totally agree. And I think when it comes
to the question of materiality, at the end of the day, what is
material is what matters to the financial operations of the
company, because the investment is into the company itself, not
into the environment writ large, and not into the social system
of the United States, or of the world, for that matter; it is
the going concern of the company. And with that, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman yields back. The gentlewoman from California, Mrs.
Kim, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Kim. I want to thank the witnesses for being here. And
I am the last person to ask questions, so hopefully, you will
take a breath. But I represent a district in Southern
California which is prone to wildfires because of bad land
management practices from Sacramento, and we have droughts and
the impact of climate change. And I share the concerns about
climate change and welcome the opportunities to work together
without raising the cost for American firms and retirees, and
punishing small businesses with onerous climate disclosure
requirements. Nevertheless, the issue at hand here is that the
existing SEC rules, like 14a-8, and SEC Chair Gensler's
decision to roll back the 2020 proxy advisory reforms, has
politicized boardrooms and directed firms to devote more time
and resources on costly non-material proposals.
Mr. Copland, according to NASDAQ, in Fiscal Year 2022,
nearly 4 times more capital was raised in private offerings
than in public markets. In your written testimony, you
mentioned that we have seen the number of companies listed on
the U.S. public exchanges decline more than 50 percent since
the mid-1980s. To what do you attribute that decline? Can you
give us some examples?
Mr. Copland. Yes. I think it is a mix of factors. One is,
this body has acted in ways that increased the cost of being
public through the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in 2003. Another is that
we had this more-onerous sort of oversight for being a public
company, which is a bit different today for the reasons that
Larry Cunningham talked about in his opening statement. The
landscape has shifted.
And nowadays, you are going to be called to task by these
proxy advisory firms that didn't even exist back in the mid-
1980s, or they were just beginning in the back in the mid-
1980s. And they certainly didn't exist for the kind of power
they had, let alone these big asset management fund families
like BlackRock, State Street, or Vanguard. They existed, but
they didn't have nearly the market share and clout they have
now.
You are going to have to answer to all these sorts of
events, so it is a cost of doing business or being public. And
what we are doing with a lot more private owners within public
owners is we are creating a two-tiered system of ownership so
that some people, the Americans who aren't wealthy, who aren't
accredited investors, have access to all the same sort of
market returns as others.
Mrs. Kim. Over 5 decades, we have transitioned our
retirement system from defined benefit to defined contribution
plans like 401(k), and in 2019, private sector-defined
contribution. They had 85.5 million active participants. In
your view, how could the slowdown in initial public offering
(IPO) activity and costly non-material shareholder proposals
impact the returns on retirement savings for Americans?
Mr. Copland. It unambiguously hurts it, particularly
because a lot of these defined contribution plans aren't going
to have access to private capital sources depending on whom
your employer is. The move towards defined contributions is a
great move. You don't want to be relying on your employer for
your retirement because if your employer goes belly up, you are
in trouble, right? So this is a good thing in general, but,
yes, not having as many companies in the public markets is a
problem.
Mrs. Kim. I want to throw out one question to you, Mr.
Cunningham. I want shareholders to be engaged in corporate
governance. It is part of our democratic process. However, SEC
Rule 14a-8 sets a very low bar for shareholders to submit
proposals for inclusion in a company's proxy statement. Do you
believe that we run the risk that rogue actors, like the
Chinese Communist Party (CCP), could game the shareholder
proposal process to put our firms at a competitive disadvantage
in global markets? If so, how can we prevent this from
happening?
Mr. Cunningham. Yes. I think there is a great risk when the
SEC relaxes all of its filters and permits any proposal to be
submitted, especially the social proposals where the judgment
of the SEC staff alone will determine whether a proposal needs
to be submitted or not and is without any nexus to the
corporation or its shareholders. The risks are endless of the
sort you referred to about competitive disadvantages and just
misallocation of corporate resources, so I think restoring that
constraint should be a high priority.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you so much. With that, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back. I would like
to thank our witnesses for their testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:00 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

July 12, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
