- BEYOND SCOPE: HOW THE SEC'S CLIMATE RULE THREATENS AMERICAN MARKETS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BEYOND SCOPE: HOW THE SEC'S
CLIMATE RULE THREATENS AMERICAN MARKETS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 10, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-86

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-437 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
April 10, 2024...............................................     1
Appendix:
April 10, 2024...............................................    67

WITNESSES
Wednesday, April 10, 2024

Fisch, Jill E., Saul A. Fox Distinguished Professor of Business
Law, University of Pennsylvania Carey Law School...............    11
Roisman, Elad L., Partner, Cravath, Swaine & Moore LLP; and
former Commissioner and Acting Chairman, U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC)......................................     6
Stebbins, Robert, Partner, Willkie Farr & Gallagher LLP; and
former General Counsel, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC)..........................................................     7
White, Joshua T., Assistant Professor, Finance, and Brownlee O.
Currey Jr. Dean's Faculty Fellow, Owen Graduate School of
Management, Vanderbilt University..............................     8
Wright, Chris, Founder, Chairman, and Chief Executive Officer,
Liberty Energy Inc.............................................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Fisch, Jill E................................................    68
Roisman, Elad L..............................................    74
Stebbins, Robert.............................................    84
White, Joshua T..............................................    92
Wright, Chris................................................   106

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Horsford, Hon. Steven:
Las Vegas Review-Journal article entitled, ``Las Vegas home
prices going up 5 times faster than wages, report says,''
dated January 18, 2024.....................................   118
Nevada Independent article, ``It's time to take back our
housing from Wall Street,'' dated March 30, 2024...........   119
Ogles, Hon. Andy:
Advancing American Freedom, ``Stop the Biden SEC's Climate
Disclosure Rule,'' dated March 25, 2024....................   121
Fisch, Jill E.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   126
Roisman, Elad L.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   128
Stebbins, Robert:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   129
White, Joshua T.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   131
Wright, Chris:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   132

BEYOND SCOPE: HOW THE
SEC'S CLIMATE RULE
THREATENS AMERICAN MARKETS

----------

Wednesday, April 10, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick McHenry
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives McHenry, Lucas, Sessions,
Posey, Huizenga, Wagner, Barr, Williams of Texas, Hill, Emmer,
Loudermilk, Rose, Steil, Timmons, Norman, Meuser, Fitzgerald,
Garbarino, Kim, Donalds, Flood, Lawler, Nunn, De La Cruz,
Houchin, Ogles; Waters, Sherman, Scott, Lynch, Green, Cleaver,
Foster, Beatty, Vargas, Gottheimer, Gonzalez, Casten, Pressley,
Horsford, Tlaib, Garcia, and Pettersen.
Chairman McHenry. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Beyond Scope: How the SEC's
Climate Rule Threatens American Markets.''
Before proceeding to the opening statements, I would like
to engage with the ranking member in a colloquy. As Members
know, we have been working to implement electronic voting in
this committee for a number of years, in fact, in multiple
Congresses. We have held three open houses prior to the April
recess to educate Members and staff. We will hold another one
after this hearing, and again tomorrow. Other committees have
electronic voting, so members of this committee may have
experienced it there.
We will vote next week using electronic voting during our
scheduled markup, and I want to take this opportunity to set up
my expectations for how this will work for all Members. For the
first markup only, we will conduct a quorum call to ensure all
Members are able to use their electronic devices. From there, I
will announce each request for recorded vote, as is the current
practice, and open the vote for Members to cast their votes
electronically.
The goal here is for the electronics to be a timesaving
device. I will work closely with the ranking member to ensure
that all Democratic Members have cast their vote and all
Members of the committee have the opportunity to cast their
vote. As is the current practice, I will ask if all Members
have had an opportunity to vote or wish to change their vote
before closing the vote. From there, I will announce that the
vote is closed.
At that point, as is the current practice, I will ask the
clerk to report. We will pause to accommodate technical issues.
If a technical issue cannot be resolved for a Member, I will
direct the clerk to call on that Member to record their vote
orally. If more than five Members have issues with their voting
devices, we will revert to calling the roll orally.
And I would ask the ranking member if the ranking member is
comfortable with that process?
Ms. Waters. Oh, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate the practice sessions that you have afforded to all
of the Members. And what you have explained with regard to
execution of electronic voting seems very reasonable to me.
Now, perhaps, I need a clarification on one thing. During a
roll call vote, sometimes Members vote in error, and the
calling of the roll provides me and my staff with additional
time to verify if all Members have voted as they intended. If
requested, will you accommodate requests from me for additional
time before closing the vote to verify if all Members have
voted as they intended?
Chairman McHenry. Of course. I will always work with the
ranking member and her members to ensure votes are cast as a
member intends.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your consideration
on this effort, and I am looking forward to it. And I yield
back.
Chairman McHenry. Excellent. I want to thank the ranking
member, and I want to thank the Democratic Financial Services
Committee staff for working with the Republican staff on this
matter. I know we started this initiative when she was Chair,
pre-COVID, with the leadership of the House Administration
Committee and Chairman Steil. I want to thank the House
Administration Committee for making this more available to
committees across the campus. I know other committees do this
and do this well. And it is the intention of this committee to
be able to move more expeditiously through votes while still
accommodating Members' ability to vote, and I'm really grateful
that we can close this process out and at least get rolling
here.
With that, I will now recognize myself for 4 minutes for an
opening statement.
We are here to discuss the Securities and Exchange
Commission's recently-finalized climate disclosure rule, which
will be disastrous for American markets, job creators, workers,
and investors. It is costly, complex, and against the public
good. The final rule is not a so-called compromise. It is yet
another attempt by the Biden Administration to force its
climate regulatory policy agenda on the public through
financial regulation.
I want to be clear. Climate change is real. Human activity
contributes to it. It is a significant challenge that America
and the world is grappling with and will continue to grapple
with for decades to come. But this hearing is not about climate
change; it is about the proper role of our securities
regulator. So, when you hear Democrats accuse Republicans of
being anti-science, they are proving our point that this rule
is about the left's climate policy agenda, not simply
standardizing corporate disclosures. The SEC is not a climate
regulator, nor should it be. Congress has never authorized it
to act as one.
The final rule clearly exceeds the Commission's statutory
mandate. This is par for the course with the current Securities
and Exchange Commission. Whether it is inadequate public
engagement, failing to comply with the Administrative Procedure
Act (APA), attacking innovation, or issuing rules that exceed
its authority, Chair Gensler's SEC clearly thinks it is above
the law.
And it is not just Republicans sounding the alarm. In the
past 12 months, a Federal judge imposed sanctions on the
Securities and Exchange Commission for its, ``gross abuse of
power,'' in the DEBT Box case; the judge in the Ripple case
criticized the Commission's lack of, ``faithful allegiance to
the law,''; and the judge in the Grayscale case found that the
SEC acted in an, ``arbitrary and capricious manner.'' It is
clear that Chair Gensler's SEC is tarnishing the reputation of
this very important institution.
The final climate disclosure rule is yet another glaring
example of the agency's overreach. First, the rule will
significantly harm our markets and job creators. It will force
public companies to decipher an 886-page rule, increasing costs
for a public company by 21 percent, according to the SEC's own
estimates. Many, including SEC Commissioner Peirce, have noted
that this estimate is likely on the low end. Such a massive
increase in compliance costs will impede firms from going or
staying public. Oddly enough, the largest companies, often
attacked by the progressive left, are the only ones which might
be able to afford these enormous new costs.
Second, the rule will crush everyday investors. Fewer
public companies means fewer investment options for families to
save and build wealth. Everyday investors will also be
overwhelmed, not informed, by the amount of granular, complex,
non-economic information required by the rule. Contrary to
Democrats' claims, it is non-economic actors and progressive
stakeholders who are demanding these climate regulations, not
everyday investors.
Finally, the climate rule will hurt American workers, who
are already struggling to make ends meet under Biden economics.
Increased costs will force companies to hire fewer employees,
invest in fewer job-creating opportunities, and pass higher
costs on to consumers.
It is clear that the SEC's climate disclosure rule would be
catastrophic for our markets and for American competitiveness.
The Commission's stay on the rule is not enough. Instead, I
urge Chair Gensler to abandon this regulatory power grab and
return his focus to the statutory role of the SEC: protecting
investors; maintaining fair, orderly, and efficient markets;
and facilitating capital formation. And if he doesn't, this
Republican House will be forced to act. I yield back.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
committee, the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, for 4
minutes for an opening statement.
Ms. Waters. Good morning. According to the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), last year was the
hottest year on record. Mr. Chairman, climate change is real.
It was with the realities of climate change in mind that the
SEC finalized its long-awaited climate disclosure rule last
month. This rulemaking is common sense. The climate crisis
affects the financial health of public and private companies
and investors. We have a right to know how the companies they
own are responding to this crisis.
Unfortunately, MAGA Republicans don't see it this way. Not
only do they deny that climate change is real, but they also
don't want anyone else to acknowledge its reality, either. My
Republican colleagues want to block America's investors from
knowing key information about stocks and outright ban them from
making sustainable investments. Neither Congress nor our
regulators can ignore the impact of the climate crisis on the
financial system.
In California, climate change-induced wildfires are leading
to insurance company withdrawals, premium spikes,
cancellations, and other restrictions on coverage for people
all across the State. Nevertheless, MAGA Republicans downplay
the climate crisis by inviting climate deniers as hearing
witnesses and marking up legislation that prohibits regulators
from mitigating such risk in our financial system.
Despite the extreme MAGA effort to ban sustainable
investing or ESG, Committee Democrats have been pushing the SEC
to use its clear and longstanding tools to finalize and
implement a strong climate rule to ensure investors receive the
information they need. I am disappointed that the SEC, under
immense pressure from MAGA and their corporate donors, didn't
muster the political courage to adopt a bolder rule.
Nevertheless, the SEC's rule, once implemented, will establish
a clear framework to standardize climate disclosures, and in
this sense, it is historic and overdue.
Mr. Chairman, sustainable investing doesn't just benefit
investors. It is also good for business and serves as a key
element of capitalism, where investors get the opportunity to
consider the true potential risks, rewards, and impacts of the
investments they are making. Unfortunately, the SEC rule is
being challenged by several well-funded special interests
trying to eliminate it entirely. These groups have succeeded in
forcing the SEC to pause its rule while they wait for the court
to consider the lawsuit.
Stopping government action on climate change is consistent
with the aims of Project 2025, Mr. Trump's subversive and
radical agenda to kill progress, prosperity, and freedoms in
our country. The plan includes not just dismantling Federal and
State climate-related policies, but also gutting the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), thereby making clean air
and drinking water a luxury in our time. Committee Democrats
will stand up to these attacks and make sure that people just
trying to save for retirement or provide for their families
have the information they need to make smart investment and
economic decisions, and that Project 2025 never becomes a
reality. With that, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, who is
also the Chair of our Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, for 1 minute.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Only in Washington
can you add 350 pages of text and call it a clarification and a
simplification. In a rush to appease the left, SEC Chair Gary
Gensler finalized a nearly 900-page climate disclosure rule
last month, which celebrated a, ``narrow approach.'' Look,
let's not be fooled. The rule is still unworkable, no matter
how much spin my Democrat colleagues put on it.
In the 2 years since the climate disclosure rule was
proposed, we have seen a deluge of new rules and an
unprecedented assault on our capital markets. The Commission
finalized the climate rule despite no clear authorization from
Congress to do so. Although Chair Gensler has repeatedly
reminded the public he is not a climate regulator--we agree--
under his leadership, the SEC has strayed far from its clear
statutory mission. Investors should know that the SEC's
overreach will significantly hurt our economy while serving as
a boon for special interests and far-left activists. Unless he
radically alters this approach to regulating our capital
markets, his legacy will be that of an overzealous bureaucrat
who has been repeatedly slapped down by the courts.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Huizenga. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from California, Mr. Sherman, who is also the ranking member of
our Subcommittee on Capital Markets, for 1 minute.
Mr. Sherman. Today's hearing is an attack on capitalism.
Under capitalism, those with capital are given the information
that they want, to make capital allocation decisions as they
decide, and the government's role is to make sure that
information is reliable and comparable, and that a material
percentage of American investors find that climate is material
to their investment decisions. Under anti-capitalism, central
planners let the government decide what factors should go into
capital allocation decisions.
And apparently, the Majority believes that the government
has already decided that such decisions must be made solely on
the basis of earnings per share, and is now working to deprive
those with different criteria from getting the information that
they need, and instead force them to fall in line with the
government's capital allocation decisions. Investors want the
information, and under real capitalism, we get it for them, and
we make sure that it is reliable and comparable. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back.
Today, we welcome the testimony of our five witnesses: Mr.
Elad Roisman, a partner with Cravath, Swaine & Moore, and a
former Commissioner and Acting Chair of the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission; Mr. Robert Stebbins, a partner with
Willkie Farr & Gallagher, and the former General Counsel of the
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission; Mr. Joshua White, an
assistant professor of finance at the Owen Graduate School of
Management at Vanderbilt University; Mr. Chris Wright, the
chief executive officer of Liberty Energy; and Professor Jill
Fisch, the Saul A. Fox Distinguished Professor of Business Law
at the University of Pennsylvania Law School.
Welcome. We thank each of you for being here. Each of you
will be recognized for 5 minutes to give an oral presentation
of your testimony, and without objection, your written
statements will be made a part of the record.
We have a lighting system, and just like in society, red
and green mean certain things. Yellow specifically means, hurry
up, because we are about done.
So with that, Mr. Roisman, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ELAD L. ROISMAN, PARTNER, CRAVATH, SWAINE & MOORE
LLP; AND FORMER COMMISSIONER AND ACTING CHAIRMAN, U.S.
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)

Mr. Roisman. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman McHenry,
Ranking Member Waters, and members of the committee. Thank you
for inviting me to testify today, and thank you to your staff
for helping coordinate this hearing as well. My name is Elad
Roisman. I am a partner at the law firm of Cravath, Swaine &
Moore, but today, I am presenting my own views and not those of
my firm or any client of the firm. My testimony and the views I
will express today are informed by my nearly 20 years of
experience in both the public and private sectors, working on
securities, regulatory, and compliance matters affecting public
companies and other securities market participants.
In my practice at Cravath, amongst other matters, I advise
public companies on disclosure, governance, and compliance.
Prior to joining Cravath, I had the distinct honor and
privilege of serving as a Commissioner and as the Acting
Chairman of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. I was
appointed to the SEC after serving as Chief Counsel for the
Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. And
before that, I served as Counsel to then-SEC Commissioner
Daniel M. Gallagher, as the Chief Counsel at NYSE Euronext, and
as a corporate lawyer in private practice in New York.
My statement today focuses on certain implementation
challenges with respect to the SEC's newly-adopted rules
requiring companies to disclose certain climate-related
information and registration statements and annual reports. I
believe that the final rules represent some of the most
significant expansions of public company disclosure
requirements in decades.
Compliance with the new requirements will be a major
undertaking for many public companies and will be costly. Some
requirements will be particularly challenging given the
compliance schedule mandated by the final rules. And while the
SEC cites the goal of comparability and consistency as one of
the primary reasons for this rulemaking, I fear that this may
not be achieved given the different assumptions, estimates, and
definitions that will underlie company disclosures.
Furthermore, because some companies will make determinations of
whether to disclose information based on evolving foreign and
State laws, comparability and consistency will be especially
hard to achieve.
I believe companies will need to spend significant time and
money in order to analyze, prepare for, and ultimately comply
with the many new requirements of the final rules, costs that
will ultimately be borne by investors. The final rules
introduce a prescriptive, climate-related disclosure regime
that is likely to result in extensive and granular disclosure
on topics that many companies previously determined were not
material to investors under SEC existing guidance and
disclosure requirements.
I hope that my testimony is helpful to members of the
committee in highlighting some of the concerns and issues that
public companies will be grappling with in complying with the
final rules and some of the practical difficulties in the
application. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Roisman can be found on page
74 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you for your testimony. We will now
recognize Mr. Stebbins for 5 minutes.

ROBERT STEBBINS, PARTNER, WILLKIE FARR & GALLAGHER LLP; AND
FORMER GENERAL COUNSEL, U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
(SEC)

Mr. Stebbins. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. The views expressed in this testimony are my own
and do not necessarily represent the views of my current
employer, Willkie Farr & Gallagher, or any client of the firm.
The climate rules were adopted by the SEC in March 2024
pursuant to an adopting release of almost 900 pages. This
followed a proposal in March 2022 that generated in excess of
24,000 comments. A recent memo published by a leading law firm
called the rules, ``perhaps the most controversial rulemaking
in SEC history.'' In my written testimony, I summarize certain
recent Federal court challenges to the SEC rulemaking and then
provide an analysis of legal challenges to the climate rules.
A number of the rules recently adopted by the SEC have been
challenged in the Federal courts, and the SEC has suffered a
number of setbacks in these cases. These cases involve the
proxy rules, the share repurchase rules, the private fund
advisor rules, the dealer rules, the short sale rules, and the
securities lending rules. Many of these challenges were heard
in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit.
In addition, in 2022, the Fifth Circuit also ruled against
the SEC in a case relating to the use of the SEC's
administrative courts. This case was appealed to the Supreme
Court, was argued in November, and a decision is pending.
As to the current rules and the challenges, litigation
challenging the climate rules ensued promptly after the rules
were adopted, as expected. Petitions were filed in the Second,
Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and D.C. Circuits. A lottery system
subsequently selected the Eighth Circuit to hear the
consolidated cases, and then, on April 4th, the SEC issued an
order staying climate rules pending the outcome of litigation
in the Eighth Circuit.
As to an overview of the legal challenges to the rules,
Liberty Energy filed a motion for an administrative stay in the
Fifth Circuit, arguing that climate rules violate three
things--the major questions doctrine, the Administrative
Procedure Act (APA), and the First Amendment--and the SEC filed
a response to this motion. So, I think those two filings give a
pretty good roadmap as to the litigation to come.
As set forth in my written testimony, for the reasons
described in the testimony, I believe there is a strong basis
for the Eighth Circuit and the Supreme Court to conclude that
the climate rules violate the major questions doctrine as set
forth in West Virginia v. EPA. As to the APA, for the reasons
set forth in my testimony, I believe that a reasonable basis
exists for the Eighth Circuit and the Supreme Court to find an
APA violation.
And as to the First Amendment challenges, First Amendment
challenges are extremely difficult to win against the SEC in
connection with its disclosure program. So, I think that is
extremely less likely to see a successful challenge as to the
First Amendment grounds. However, if the Supreme Court did set
aside the climate rules based on First Amendment grounds, this
decision would be potentially devastating to the SEC and would
put substantial legal stress on many of its other ongoing
reporting requirements, as the SEC depends on, ``compelled
speech.''
My comments are in no way meant as a criticism of the staff
of the SEC. I was General Counsel of the SEC for 4 years, and
it was an honor to work with the SEC staff on a daily basis. I
have the utmost respect for them. This is a rulemaking they
were instructed to prepare, and people from my former office
will be defending the rule in the Federal appellate courts, but
this is a rulemaking that will be challenging for them to
defend.
Thank you very much. I look forward to answering any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stebbins can be found on
page 84 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you for your testimony. We will now
recognize Mr. White.

STATEMENT OF JOSHUA T. WHITE, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR, FINANCE AND
BROWNLEE O. CURREY JR. DEAN'S FACULTY FELLOW, OWEN GRADUATE
SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT, VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY

Mr. White. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and
members of the House Financial Services Committee, thank you
for inviting me today to discuss the SEC's climate-related
disclosure rule. I look forward to discussing this important
issue, with the disclaimer that my views may not reflect those
of my employer, Vanderbilt University.
The adopted rules will require comprehensive climate-
related disclosures, including those on governance, business
strategy, targets and goals, greenhouse gas emissions, risk
management, and financial statement metrics. Thus, it is
crucial to consider the economic implications, which the SEC
readily admits will substantially raise the direct costs of
being a public company. The spillover effects of this rule
could also have wide economic consequences, potentially leading
companies to exit public markets or choose to stay private,
reducing capital formation and job creation and limiting
investment options for everyday investors.
In my written testimony, I draw on my experience as a
former SEC financial economist and my scholarly work on
conducting cost-benefit analyses around rulemaking endeavors. I
outline several critical issues concerning the SEC's economic
analysis of the climate disclosure rule. I would like to draw
your attention to three.
First, I am concerned that the rule mandates costly and
granular disclosures that are not economically material, such
as Scope 1 and Scope 2 greenhouse gas emissions. This concern
is exacerbated by the SEC's economic analysis, which ignores
recommendations and data provided by the public. Multiple
commenters asked the SEC to conduct an event study on
greenhouse gas emission disclosures. An event study is the
classic test of whether information is economically meaningful
to investors.
Fortunately, University of Pennsylvania professor, Dan
Taylor, conducted such a test study and found that the average
greenhouse gas emission disclosure does not elicit a stock
price response that is different from zero. Thus, we can expect
that Scope 1 and Scope 2 disclosures will provide climate
information that does not change stock price valuations for
most investors. Rather than acknowledging these findings and
the economic analysis, the SEC instead pointed to an academic
publication with data that actually predates its 2010 climate-
related guidance.
Second, the SEC fails to make a convincing economic
argument for prescriptive disclosures, as the existing
principles-based system already mandates that registrants
disclose material climate information. Studies show that
following the SEC's 2010 guidance, registrants strengthened
their climate risk disclosures, especially when they operated
in industries where climate factors are more likely to impact
their operations. The SEC's cost-benefit analysis discusses how
climate risks are on average reflected in stock prices, likely
due to this principles based disclosure that already exists.
Thus, I expect that mandating additional information will
provide limited benefits but will come at a substantial cost.
This leads to my third point, which is that the SEC
projects the climate disclosure rule will raise the cumulative
disclosure burden for public companies by 20 percent. While
this is no doubt an economically large amount, I am concerned
that the SEC's final cost estimates are too low and do not
capture the unintended consequences of the rule. Such a result
would not be unexpected given that the SEC found compliance
costs for provisions of Sarbanes-Oxley exceeded the estimates
in the final rule by more than 350 percent.
I believe the SEC should have re-proposed, not adopted, the
final rule due to the substantial changes that were made, which
would have allowed market participants to offer more precise
compliance cost estimates following these changes.
In closing, I am highly concerned that the climate-related
disclosure rule will increase costs, with limited economic
benefits for most shareholders. It can reduce the number of
public companies, harm capital formation, and ultimately impede
economic growth. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Professor White can be found on
page 92 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Mr. Wright, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS WRIGHT, FOUNDER, CHAIRMAN, AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, LIBERTY ENERGY INC.

Mr. Wright. Thank you, Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Waters, and members of the committee. I am Chris Wright, the
founder, chairman, and CEO of Liberty Energy. I am also the
author of a new report on energy and climate change entitled,
``Bettering Human Lives 2024,'' and the founding chairman of
the Bettering Human Lives Foundation, which is focused on
expanding access to clean cooking fuels in Africa.
Liberty Energy employs over 5,000 people and fracks roughly
20 percent of the onshore wells drilled in the United States
and Canada. We are proud to say that about 10 percent of total
primary energy production in the United States comes from wells
fracked by Liberty. Liberty has been a leader in next-
generation technologies that reduce our impacts. Two examples
are Liberty's quiet frack fleets and our leadership in
replacing diesel-powered frack fleets with natural gas fleets.
While investors are keenly interested in our innovations
that lower emissions of both air pollutants and greenhouse
gases, I am not aware of any specific investor requests for
reporting along the lines of the SEC climate rule. The SEC
serves as an important regulator for our financial markets.
Liberty has dealt with the SEC for many years. Both before our
initial public offering (IPO), and for the 6 years that we have
been a public company, we have had only positive and
constructive interactions with the SEC. But now, the SEC is
proposing to venture well outside of their lane without any
congressional mandate to do so. We strongly oppose this
destructive mission creep.
Climate change is a complicated global issue that I have
studied, written about, and spoken about for nearly 20 years,
but it is certainly not in the SEC's purview. That is why about
a month ago, Liberty instituted a challenge to the SEC's
climate rule in Federal court and asked for the rule to be
stayed pending this challenge. The SEC vigorously opposed the
stay, but it was granted anyway by the Fifth Circuit. Last
week, the SEC decided to stay the climate rule itself. We
appreciate this gesture but remain committed to seeing this
misguided rule dropped permanently.
How might climate change impact Liberty's operations?
Global average temperature has risen by roughly 2 degrees
Fahrenheit over the last 150 years. Extrapolating the current
rate of satellite-observed warming would imply roughly 2 more
degrees Fahrenheit of warming by the end of this century. We
operate at minus 30 degrees in North Dakota and at over 110
degrees in South Texas, a range of 140 degrees. A few degrees
warmer simply will not impact our operations.
What about extreme weather? We work in areas where
tornadoes visit, and hurricanes and floods, too. The United
Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
reports no significant trend in these weather extremes. U.S.
flood damage as a percent of global gross domestic product
(GDP) has been on a downward trend since 1940, and global
weather disaster losses as a percent of GDP have declined about
20 percent since 1990. Hence, there is no obvious growing
threat to our business from extreme weather. Nevertheless, the
SEC's climate rule mandates that public companies now must
spend considerable resources to track and report impacts from
the supposed changes of extreme weather events. Why?
In our, ``Bettering Human Lives,'' report, we tallied the
growth in global energy production by source since 2010.
Natural gas is the fastest-growing source of energy in
absolute, not relative terms, supplying nearly 40 percent of
growth in global energy consumption. Oil is the second fastest-
growing energy source. Hence, global demand for our industry's
products is at a record high and rising. Liberty also has
ownership stakes and partnerships with both a nuclear small
modular reactor company and a leading next generation
geothermal energy company. We have positive outlooks for both
companies and their technologies.
Where do we see climate risks for our business? In
regulations, like those proposed by the SEC. These regulations
will be costly to comply with and will invite litigation from a
party seeking to hamper our industry. The net result will be to
make it costlier and riskier to produce oil and gas in the
United States, which surely will reduce U.S. production at the
margin. The SEC climate rule will do nothing to reduce demand
for oil and gas, while reducing U.S. production.
Two results can be expected: higher costs for U.S.
consumers and businesses; and increased oil imports.
Outsourcing oil production to foreign countries like Iran,
Russia, and Venezuela will certainly increase global greenhouse
gas emissions and reduce energy security and economic well-
being. Why impose a complex regulatory rule with no apparent
climate benefit and easily-foreseeable downsides? What am I
missing? Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wright can be found on page
106 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Professor Fisch, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JILL E. FISCH, SAUL A. FOX DISTINGUISHED PROFESSOR
OF BUSINESS LAW, UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA CAREY LAW SCHOOL

Ms. Fisch. It is an honor to participate in today's
hearing. My name is Jill Fisch, and I am a professor at the
University of Pennsylvania Law School. As an academic, I have
been teaching and writing about securities regulation for 35
years. Before that, I worked for a big law firm, and prior to
that, at the Department of Justice.
The U.S. capital markets are unparalleled throughout the
world for their size and quality. They are important not just
for businesses to raise capital, but for individuals. Today,
more Americans own stock than ever before. Many depend on the
strength of the capital markets to secure their savings for a
home, the education of their children, and their retirement.
The key to this success is Congress' wisdom in creating a
disclosure-based system and tasking the SEC with determining
the required disclosures. In adopting the Federal securities
laws, Congress explicitly recognized the importance of market
integrity to the broader public interest, stating that orderly
and efficient capital markets contribute to the strength of the
U.S. economy and protect interests beyond those of investors.
Over its 90-year history, the SEC has made regular
adjustments to address issues ranging from executive
compensation, Y2K risks, cybersecurity, environmental risk,
human capital, political risk, and the impact of COVID-19. In
addition to quantitative disclosures, the rules focus on
providing management's perspective on a company and its
material risks. As part of this longstanding framework, the
rule focuses on material climate-related risks and the impact
of those risks on operations.
My written testimony offers specific examples of how this
information helps investors. Investors also use this
information to evaluate management quality. It is a red flag if
management is not monitoring risks that are likely to
financially impact financial conditions. Voluntary disclosures
are not the answer. They are often inconsistent, incomplete,
inaccurate, and unreliable. In response, the rule increases
standardization and comparability of key climate-related
disclosures, reduces search costs, and it increases reliability
by bringing these disclosures within the securities reporting
process.
Criticisms that the SEC's rule exceeds its authority by
requiring disclosure of nonmaterial information are not well-
founded. First, the rule limits required disclosures to
information that is material to investors.
Second, the SEC's authority has never been limited to
requiring disclosures that are individually financially
material, and there are many historical examples to the
contrary. Simply put, the SEC acted squarely within its
wheelhouse. This rule is the product of careful study,
including analysis of thousands of public comments and the
application of the SEC's technical expertise to the complex
issue of capital market disclosure.
Within that context, the rule is incredibly modest. It is a
disclosure rule only. It mandates no change in business
operations. It focuses on a small subset of the sustainability
considerations that market participants identified as most
important. It requires very limited and, in some cases, no
disclosure of greenhouse gas emissions, although investor
demand for them is overwhelmingly high. For example, the rule
does not require any disclosure of Scope 3 emissions even when
those emissions are material. The rule prioritizes disclosures
where the potential for greenwashing is high, such as targets
and transition plans. A review of the comment file provides
ample basis for the SEC to have gone much further.
The SEC has also adopted a variety of measures that reduce
compliance costs, materiality qualifiers, limiting the required
disclosure of greenhouse gas emissions, extended timelines for
implementation, and safe harbors for liability. My written
testimony has more on the tradeoffs the Commission made, and I
am happy to address them in Q&A.
Significantly, the SEC did not adopt this rule in a vacuum.
The disclosure standards adopted by the EU, California, and the
International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB) will
require many large U.S. issuers to meet more-demanding
standards than those in this rule. This suggests the SEC could
have been more ambitious in its disclosure mandate or sought to
reduce the impact of multiple and potentially-conflicting
disclosure requirements. In the absence of any SEC reporting
requirement or if the SEC rule is curtailed, it is likely that
those alternative systems will set a different and higher
baseline for climate-related disclosures.
Thank you, Chairman McHenry, and Ranking Member Waters, for
inviting me to participate in today's hearing, and I welcome
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Professor Fisch can be found on
page 68 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you all for your testimony. I very
much appreciate it, and the committee appreciates it. I will
now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Wright, you are in a unique position, I think, to
answer these questions. You comply with environmental law
wherever you are doing projects. Is that correct?
Mr. Wright. Absolutely.
Chairman McHenry. And at the corporate level, you comply
with the environmental laws of the United States?
Mr. Wright. One hundred percent.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. You also follow the securities
laws. Is that correct?
Mr. Wright. Yes, we do.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. So, you know the distinction
between your obligations in the securities marketplace to your
investors, to your owners, to your shareholders, and to your
board of directors. You also know the obligations under law to
the environmental impacts of any actions you take wherever you
are doing projects. So, what is the distinction here? When we
have a securities regulator acting as an environmental
regulator, what level of complexity does that add to projects
to bring down the cost of energy, make it more available to the
American people, to the world? How does that impact your
investors? Walk us through the distinction between the
environmental rules versus the securities rules.
Mr. Wright. Yes. Of course, they are quite different and
different people are involved with them. Obviously, it is our
accounting and legal departments that do our SEC compliance or
whatever. I am quite proud of the role our team plays in that.
Environmental rules are very local as well. We operate a lot in
Colorado, with the tightest regulations on, of course, not just
greenhouse gas emissions, but on pollutants and noise and dust
and all sorts of environmental regulations. We have a technical
team that deals with Colorado about how to optimize, even
helping them to understand what are the generators of
pollutants, and how can we do this together better.
But for the SEC to get into the very complex area of
greenhouse gas emissions, to me, the thing right up front is
they are going to get it wrong. It is very hard. It is easy to
track dollars and cents precisely. They come into an account,
and they leave an account. Greenhouse gas emissions are quite
complex. It is not just what engine is burning what fuel. It is
what is the temperature, what is the fuel mix, how good is the
combustion, how is the engine tuned. You can't specifically and
directly measure greenhouse gas emissions. It is all about
guesstimates, and if we were told to take guesstimates----
Chairman McHenry. With your securities filings, are
guesstimates okay with your accountants and lawyers?
Mr. Wright. They are not.
Chairman McHenry. And post-Sarbanes-Oxley, there are
consequences when you are guesstimating in a corporate
environment?
Mr. Wright. I sign my name every quarter that----
Chairman McHenry. Okay. So, you are going to sign your name
on a set of disclosures, that you have just said as an expert
in this field, in this energy production field, in this
specific field that is going to be very impacted by the set of
rules, that the best estimate you have in a business that has
dollars and cents attached to investments, the best estimates
we get in greenhouse gas emissions are guesstimates.
Mr. Wright. They are guesstimates.
Chairman McHenry. And you are going to have to certify
under the same penalties that apply to your corporate
disclosures, whether or not you are rigging accounting, the
same standards on guesstimates. Okay.
Mr. Wright. That is my biggest concern. It will invite
litigation, an effort that won't go towards reducing greenhouse
gas emissions or improving our business or our operations or
any of those things.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. You will be----
Mr. Wright. It will be, how do we minimize our litigation
risk?
Chairman McHenry. The Securities and Exchange Commission
has justified the climate rule by saying that investors,
``want,'' and ``need,'' the type of information required by
this rule. You talk to your investors regularly, at least
quarterly, right?
Mr. Wright. Absolutely.
Chairman McHenry. You spend a lot of time with activists in
this space. Are they asking for this type of disclosure? Do
they want this type of disclosure?
Mr. Wright. I have never heard a request for anything
remotely like what is in the SEC rules. But yes, we do engage
in dialogues with our customers about greenhouse gas emissions,
what we are doing, the trends in those technologies that can
improve them, absolutely.
Chairman McHenry. And materiality, right? You are in a
business that is dealing with carbon, and disclosures around
carbon and carbon emissions are material to your business you
already disclosed. Is that correct?
Mr. Wright. We do.
Chairman McHenry. Yes.
Mr. Wright. We do.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. Mr. Roisman, let's talk about
materiality, which is a basic underpinning of securities law.
If you just would give me a little color there, as my time is
about to run out.
Mr. Roisman. With materiality, most people think of the
Supreme Court cases, Basic v. Levinson, and TSC Industries v.
Northway. And it has always been this concept that there is a
substantial likelihood that the information is material if a
reasonable investor would consider it important in making an
investing or a voting decision, or such a reasonable investor
would find the omission of that disclosure to substantially or
significantly alter the total mix of information. It is a
longhand way of saying, is this information important for
investors from the eyes of a company about what will be
impactful to that company?
Chairman McHenry. And this climate rule is different than
this question of materiality that has been longstanding?
Mr. Roisman. The level of prescriptive disclosure makes
this unlike any rule of which I am aware.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. We will now recognize the ranking
member of our Capital Markets Subcommittee, Mr. Sherman, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. It is long past time that companies
report how resilient they are, and hopefully move to become
more resilient, and it is long past time that companies report
what effect they have on our climate, and hopefully, society
will insist that they try to reduce that effect. Mr. White
points out that all the burdens of these regulations are
falling on publicly-traded companies, and I agree with him. And
I hope this committee will consider legislation so that
multibillion-dollar private companies will also make these same
disclosures, because they have the same effect on our climate,
and because the stakeholders in a company are not just the
shareholders who might be private, but the public as well.
There have been comments on the cost of these disclosures.
I will point out that many of these companies have to do
reporting anyway because of the European Union or because of a
number of States, including my own progressive State of
California, so this may not add much to their costs at all. I
am hoping that as we move forward, the States, the SEC, and the
European Union will do even more to harmonize their
regulations.
Mr. White points out that stock prices don't change often
as a result of revealing this information. First, one would
expect the stock price to change only when the information that
is revealed is different from market expectations. If a company
comes in with earnings per share exactly what the market
expects, the price of the stock doesn't change. Also, we may
see no change in the price because some choose to sell because
they are green investors, and others choose to buy because they
are anti-green investors who think that, well, the green
investors have sold. I have a chance to pick up a bargain.
So even if the price doesn't change, the makeup of the
shareholders change, and green and anti-green shareholders have
a right to the information they need. Mr. Wright says that
climate change is not a problem for the operations of his
natural gas company. I will simply point out that a report on
the 215 largest public companies indicates that they will incur
over a trillion dollars of losses over the next 5 years as a
result of climate change. Whether his particular company is
affected, I will leave to him.
I think the SEC has done a good job on climate. We now have
to move toward other necessary disclosures. I have been an
advocate here of looking at workforce disclosures and
disclosures about one's exposure to China, because an invasion
of Taiwan is certainly a possibility, and the economic effects
of that would be enormous and shareholders ought to know, so I
want to focus on workforce. Over 100 years ago, the price of
the stock was very close to the balance sheet. Today, 90
percent of the value has nothing to do with what is on the
balance sheet. The most valuable asset isn't on the balance
sheet; it is the company's workforce.
Professor Fisch, should we require companies to report
information about their workforce? Among this would be turnover
rates, employee training expenses, diversity, equity, and
inclusion efforts, and how diverse their upper management is;
is that a good project for the SEC?
Ms. Fisch. Mr. Sherman, absolutely. When I said that this
was sort of a small step in terms of sustainability disclosure,
investors have been asking the SEC for dozens of years not just
for modest climate-related disclosures, but disclosures with
respect to the range of new and challenging issues that go to a
company's resilience, and human capital management is right up
there at the center of those issues. Human capital management
raises new challenges for companies, both because an increasing
percentage of their assets are their workforce and because
there are evolving issues: worker safety, worker turnover,
sexual harassment. All of those things are critical in
understanding a company's business plan, its strategic vision,
and the quality of its management.
Mr. Sherman. In addition, the other asset that isn't on the
balance sheet is research and development (R&D), and I have
urged on many occasions and often with the Financial Accounting
Standards Board (FASB) that R&D expenses be capitalized. And
finally, we now have bipartisan legislation to require
companies to describe their China risk because that will give
them some incentive to try to derisk. And to the extent they
were derisked, that creates a greater likelihood that China
will not invade Taiwan, because we will be able to stand up to
them if they do. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. We will now recognize the Vice Chair of
the committee, Mr. Hill, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you, and
the Chair of our Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Ann Wagner,
and Representative Bill Huizenga of Michigan, for your good
work on guiding the response to the SEC agenda on
environmental, social, and governance (ESG), particularly on,
``E,'' during this Congress.
Mr. Stebbins, it is good to see you. It's good to have you
back at the committee. When you were General Counsel of the
SEC, I think you were involved in some 80 different rulemakings
during your time as General Counsel. Were you accused by the
Federal courts of being arbitrary and capricious when you were
the General Counsel?
Mr. Stebbins. I don't remember if we were or not, and the
SEC certainly gets sued on every major rulemaking. It just
happens. The Gensler administration has had a number of major
rulemakings, but I don't recall, sir, everywhere, but I think
our record was pretty good on rulemaking.
Mr. Hill. And did you ever have a Federal court suggest
that you had to pay the plaintiff's legal expenses due to a
poor ruling by the SEC?
Mr. Stebbins. I don't recall that.
Mr. Hill. I think we have seen that in this Administration,
under Chairman Gensler, and we have seen bipartisan response
here on this committee that Chairman Gensler has moved some 60
rulemakings, and in your testimony, you outline just a
tremendous number of challenges with them. I thought it would
be useful to ask you some questions about the Administrative
Procedure Act (APA), and how do we get a better process here in
the Financial Services Committee of overseeing the SEC on that?
The final climate rule dramatically differs from the proposal.
They got 97,000 comments or something like that. By removing
mandatory Scope 3 emissions and adding new requirements, is
this something that, if you would have been General Counsel,
you would have recommended?
Mr. Stebbins. I think I would have recommended that they
send it back out for comment. Logical outgrowth is the theory
they would be relying on. I just think it was substantially
changed with the removal of most of the Scope 3 requirements as
well as the 1-percent financial statement test, I think, to the
better. But I think in many ways, it is a large release. It is
a 900-page adopting release, and the comments were obviously
extensive, but a lot of people were focusing on those two
topics, maybe to the exclusion of other topics. And when those
two topics were out of there, I think the focus was going to
perhaps go more to the other topics. I would have re-proposed
it. I don't know if that is going to be fatal to the SEC in
their court case, but I would have recommended it, yes.
Mr. Hill. And I misspoke. It is not 97,000 comments; it is
only 24,000 comments, so I want to let the record be
straightened out there. In your testimony on share repurchase
rules, the Fifth Circuit again said the SEC acted arbitrarily
and capriciously and said they failed to conduct a proper cost-
benefit analysis. The SEC is required to do a cost-benefit
analysis for rules they propose, isn't that right, Mr.
Stebbins?
Mr. Stebbins. That is correct. It was a Fifth Circuit
decision vacating the share repurchase rules and vacating them
on two grounds: number one, failure to conduct a proper
economic analysis/cost-benefit analysis; and number two,
failure to show a genuine problem existed. They went back to
the staff and asked them to show the problem, and they weren't
able to do it, or at least they said they weren't going to be
able to do it, so the Court vacated the rule. So, those will be
the challenges they will face again, the same arguments in this
litigation.
Mr. Hill. To me, it seems like the problem is that we don't
have a high-quality standard at the Commission for conducting a
cost-benefit analysis. In your testimony, you talked about it,
Chairman McHenry mentioned it, and 79 percent of respondents
asserted that the SEC underestimates the cost of compliance
with all of its proposed rules. And in this particular rule,
the range was from $197,000 to $739,000 for annual compliance
costs, in Mr. Wright's point of view. What do we need to do as
Congress to make sure and hold the SEC to a high standard, that
there is a methodology that is defensible, whether you are at
Penn or at Vanderbilt, anchor down, to have a decent cost-
benefit analysis?
Mr. Stebbins. I think Professor White is probably in a
better position than I am to talk about the cost aspects. I
thought the cost numbers were likely going to end up too low
based on that. Law firms are now billion-dollar entities. The
going rate in New York City is over $2,000 an hour, so I am
guessing they are going to end up too low on these estimates,
given the complexity of the rule, but it remains to be seen.
Mr. Hill. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. We will now recognize the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Scott, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much. Professor Fisch, you are a
great professor at the great University of Pennsylvania, and I
am a graduate of the Wharton School at the University of
Pennsylvania. And I want to give you a very gracious welcome to
our committee, and please give my regards to the Wharton
School. That great professor, George W. Taylor, was a good
friend to me, and please tell my friends at the Wharton School,
hello, and please keep doing your good work.
Professor Fisch, the SEC's climate risk disclosure rule
encompasses a strong set of standards that meet investors'
demands for mandatory corporate transparency as well as
companies' need for clarity. Is that right?
Ms. Fisch. Yes, sir, and thank you for your kind words
about the Wharton School. That is exactly right, and what I
think distinguishes this rule from so many others is just the
overwhelming investor demand for this information and
investors' insistence that despite everything that the SEC has
done to encourage climate-related disclosure, investors are not
getting the information they need.
Mr. Scott. Let me ask you this also, Professor Fisch. Do
you believe that many of the registrants who would be impacted
can and should be prepared to make these disclosures before the
final rule requires them to do so?
Ms. Fisch. That is a great question. And that is one of the
reasons that it is so tricky to do a cost-benefit analysis in
this system, because you have so many things going on. Just in
the 2 years between the original rule proposal and the SEC's
adoption of the final rule, the technology in this area has
improved by leaps and bounds. Many more companies are
disclosing this information voluntarily, and as I elaborate on
in my written remarks, there are other regulators who are going
to demand this information regardless of what the SEC does.
Mr. Scott. Would you agree that this is an aggressive
enough timeline now?
Ms. Fisch. I think it is a very generous timeline. I think
that you also have to keep in mind the fact that regardless of
whether there is a mandate, many companies are disclosing some
or all of this information voluntarily, and every year
increasing their voluntary disclosure in response to investor
demands. At the same time, because there isn't a uniform
baseline, that information is located in multiple places. It is
hard to compare. It is not standardized.
Mr. Scott. Does the timeline that the SEC adopted generally
align with many U.S. companies' compliance dates for the EU's
corporate sustainability reporting directives and the
California laws?
Ms. Fisch. Both of those standards are still evolving, but
I would say at least in some cases, the SEC's timelines are
more generous than those other regulators.
Mr. Scott. And I want you to know, Professor Fisch, that I
am also appreciative that the SEC chose not to take any actions
that could lead intentionally or unintentionally to burdensome
reporting requirements for production agriculture. You see, I
am also the ranking member of the House Agriculture Committee.
My question is, would it be burdensome reporting requirements
for production agriculture when their goods are part of the
supply chain for a publicly-related company?
Ms. Fisch. You are absolutely right. The SEC, I think, was
very careful in the scope of what it mandated, but again,
companies that aren't subjected to the mandate still have to
report to the extent that they are dealing with customers,
suppliers, and third parties who are demanding that
information. And in many cases, large companies with climate-
responsible policies are asking for that information from their
counterparties.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, and please keep up the good
work.
Chairman McHenry. We will now recognize the gentleman from
Oklahoma, Mr. Lucas, who is also the Chair of the House Science
Committee.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and while it will be a
great day when that happens, I would note to my colleague, the
ranking member, that we are not quite there yet, David, and we
also have a slightly different definition of how agriculture is
impacted by these SEC issues.
Mr. Scott. Well, once a chairman, you are always a
chairman, and you are the same chairman.
Mr. Lucas. You are obviously a great ranking member. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
That said, since the Biden Administration could not
successfully implement its climate agenda through Congress when
they controlled both Houses, of course, and the White House, it
has turned to the agencies to implement climate policy
unilaterally. At the SEC, the climate rule aims to implement
climate policy under the guise of security regulation.
Mr. Wright, you discussed in your testimony, and with
Chairman McHenry, how your company has been impacted by this
SEC rule. Could you expand on that, on how this rule goes
beyond the purpose of securities regulation?
Mr. Wright. Yes, absolutely. Again, securities regulation
is essential, and the SEC has done a great job. My beef is not
with the SEC, but, yes, this is going into a complex topic of
climate change, for which we don't get specific numbers like we
do for financial accounting. My other, maybe philosophical
problem with it is, what is the net impact going to be? We are
going to get sued more. It is going to be harder to do business
in this industry.
We backed a very small company, Nomad, which had a
technology to produce sand instead of at a mine, and you get a
truck at 60 miles, a mine right near the well so that we could
reduce driving truck traffic, not drive the sand. Of course,
our industry is striving to do things better. But now, that
little private company, a couple of scrappy entrepreneurs--
since we are their dominant investor, we have some control over
them--is going to have to figure out how they are going to
count their greenhouse gas emissions instead of running their
small business so that we can report them up the chain.
I view it as cumbersome, clunky, and not really a climate
policy. How are we going to drive innovation and improve
greenhouse gas emissions by making best guesstimates on
subjective numbers as opposed to talking about technologies and
big pictures and real progress?
Mr. Lucas. Clearly, no industry is insulated from this, and
the energy sector is seriously harmed, and manufacturers of all
sizes will be impacted, and I think, very clearly, the climate
rule hit farmers and ranchers, too. Some supporters of the
final rule have praised the complete removal of the disclosure
requirements for Scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions.
Unfortunately, I think this is a mischaracterization of the
rule. While the rule scales back the explicit disclosure
requirements for Scope 3 emissions, many public companies must
still collect emissions data from their supply chains to comply
with this rule.
Mr. Roisman, could you discuss how public companies in many
instances will still need to collect this greenhouse gas
information, this data?
Mr. Roisman. I will say this. I think many companies are
relieved that they will not have to do explicit line-item Scope
3 disclosure. However, there are interpretive questions today
about what companies may have to do. And one such example is if
a company decides that they have a material climate-related
target or goal, something that could be net zero or a reduction
in Scope 3 emissions, they are required to provide investors
with enough information to understand the progress they have
made. And if you are required to talk about progress, you are
going to have to talk about Scope 3, and how you have done
every year.
So, I think there is a concern that even though there is no
line-item disclosure, you are still going to qualitatively at
least have to talk about how you are meeting those goals and
the progress you made, and this is an issue that is unclear in
the rule. People are scouring footnotes, and looking at
statements. And if the SEC wants to clarify that you won't have
to do any Scope 3 emissions disclosure, I am hopeful that they
are going to do that soon.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Stebbins, could you offer your expertise on
this?
Mr. Stebbins. I am a securities lawyer. I would tell
people, if they are setting goals or have set goals, they are
going to need to do Scope 3 work in order to do the analysis to
give people an update based on what I read in the release. And
also, I would say that, as it says, you only have to put Scope
1 and 2, and if material, the only way to judge materiality is
to do the work. Even if you are not reporting it, you are still
going to have to do the work determining 1 and 2. But I think 3
is in there, the way I read the rule, and there is also
something in there about reaching out to your suppliers and
determining the effects and your customers and suppliers based
on climate risks to your business. So to say that the food
chain up and down your value chain of customers and suppliers
isn't going to be affected by this, I think is an
overstatement.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Lucas. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Lynch, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Professor Fisch, the
traditional role of the SEC and a central tenet of our
securities laws aims to protect investors. And because of the
asymmetry of information that exists where companies have all
the information and an innocent investor may have very little,
there is a need for disclosures, and that is sort of a
framework that encapsulates the relationship between the SEC
and these companies wishing to sell securities and investors.
Is that a fair statement?
Ms. Fisch. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. So as part of that investment decision, an
investor needs to know the risks, correct?
Ms. Fisch. Absolutely.
Mr. Lynch. And from what we see in the world around us,
climate change is a tangible risk. It is ongoing. It may affect
some companies greater than others, but the bottom line here is
that an investor is entitled to that information, and that has
long been the practice. That is not a departure from the SEC's
mission; that is a founding principle within the SEC. Is that
correct?
Ms. Fisch. Yes, that has been true since the 1930s. The
SEC's disclosure mandate is to ensure that investors get all
the information they need, and that includes information about
material risks and how management is identifying and responding
to those risks.
Mr. Lynch. And a consequence of the lack of disclosure,
especially in today's world, I think is described well by the
folks over at Better Markets. They wrote, ``The failure to
disclose risks, regardless of the source, prevents investors
from properly evaluating companies, causes those companies and
markets to be mispriced, and distorts capital formation and
allocation, which eventually harms the economy, jobs, and
growth.'' Do you agree with that statement?
Ms. Fisch. Yes, I do.
Mr. Lynch. So, the rule itself just requires disclosure. It
doesn't require any action. Is that a fair statement?
Ms. Fisch. Yes, that is a fair statement.
Mr. Lynch. And what advantages do you see, not only in the
climate context, but generally, for the strength of our
markets? The SEC was established in response to the collapse of
our markets in the 1920s, and it restabilized the markets
themselves and induced consumer confidence to the point where
we are the envy of the world in our markets. We have deep and
strong markets, where investors feel like they are protected.
By limiting disclosures to investors, would this harm the
integrity of our markets?
Ms. Fisch. I don't believe the rule limits disclosures to
investors.
Mr. Lynch. No, no, no, no, no. It is just the opposite.
Ms. Fisch. Right.
Mr. Lynch. It is the opposite.
Ms. Fisch. I believe what the rule does is respond to a
very real and very longstanding investor demand, and I think
that is entirely consistent with protecting the integrity of
our markets, the reputation of our markets. And I would say
that reputation doesn't just attract U.S. companies to list,
but it attracts companies and investors from all over the
world.
Mr. Lynch. Right. One of the things I noticed the other day
is that the cost of a kilowatt hour in Europe is about triple
what it is in the United States, even though we have robust
regulatory frameworks in place. And I am curious if you know of
instances where the greater disclosure not only helps the
investor, but it helps the integrity of the industry itself?
Ms. Fisch. I think that is exactly right, and one of the
advantages of broad-based disclosure is so that the market and
investors can do comparisons, right? They are not just getting
some selective sample of companies, but they are looking across
an industry and able to identify, well, what is reasonable, and
what is reasonable in the oil and gas industry might be quite
different from what is reasonable in technology.
Mr. Lynch. That is great. Mr. Chairman, my time has
expired. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. In the words
of a really common-sense writer by the name of Robert Ringer, I
think this will be classified as another case of the government
being the omnipresent defender of nonexistent problems with the
people. Right now, at the height of inflationary concerns of my
constituents who are paying more for everything, I am sure none
of them are looking forward to paying more for their stocks
because of the non-value-added costs that this proposed rule is
going to add to it by an agency that let Robert Ringer
literally run free after being warned numerous, numerous times.
This guy is probably doing nothing for 10 years. Now, they are
going to be the climate police, and I guess the next step is
that they will criminalize any stock purchase that they don't
think is proper in their view.
Mr. Roisman, can a typical noninstitutional investor really
make use of the required climate change disclosures to make
better investment decisions? We are talking the average guy in
the street.
Mr. Roisman. I am afraid I haven't been at an asset
management shop that has shown me how greenhouse gas emissions
works into their portfolio theory.
Mr. Posey. Mr. Wright, does this rule increase or decrease
the chances that the United States will have a sound
diversified energy strategy, and why?
Mr. Wright. I think it decreases the chances. I think the
net result is likely less production here. More production
imported from overseas, to me, would be the expected net
outcome of the rule.
Mr. Posey. Okay. Clearly, in concert with the rest of this
Administration's agenda to make America last. We have heard
from the MAGA integrators already.
Mr. Stebbins, does this rule meet the Supreme Court's major
questions doctrine in terms of its foundation on congressional
authority?
Mr. Stebbins. I think it is going to be a difficult lift
for the Commission in that regard. I think there is a strong
likelihood that the Eighth Circuit and the Supreme Court will
strike the rule down based on the major questions doctrine. The
major questions doctrine talks about when you are outside your
area of expertise, which is in Justice Kagan's well-written
dissent. She talks about being outside your typical area of
expertise. In my experience at the SEC, that is certainly the
case here.
And doing something of large economic and political
significance is going to be a difficult area for the SEC as
well, and then, you need to look to a specific congressional
authorization if those other two criteria are met. The SEC does
not have a specific authorization here. They have just the
general investor protection mandate. So, those will be the
questions that the courts will be looking at, I think, in the
criteria.
Mr. Posey. To add to a better than a thousand-to-one odd
that a consumer is hauled into court for violation of a Federal
law made by some unaccountable, unrecallable, bureaucrat, not
by people that they elected to make their laws like they think.
Mr. Roisman, do you really believe this rule will have any
effect on the world climate as their proponents hope it will?
Mr. Roisman. I think that Mr. Wright is a better judge of
that, sir. I am not a climate scientist.
Mr. Posey. Mr. Stebbins, to disclose things like climate-
related goals, climate transition plans, climate scenario
analysis, and internal carbon pricing really become a mandate
to have such things because companies will be afraid not to
have them.
Mr. Stebbins. I think the way this is going to be judged is
there is already, as I think most of you know, a requirement to
disclose all material, economic, or all material risk, which
includes environmental risks that are already out there. So if
you are requiring other information to be disclosed that might
be viewed as nonmaterial, then you are looking at a cost-
benefit analysis, right? And then, you are trying to determine
what is the cost of this disclosure and what is the benefit of
the disclosure, and that is going to be the area where all of
these requirements will be judged. If there were two or three,
I think it is an easier case than when there are 30. So, that
is how I would put it.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield back.
Mrs. Wagner. [presiding]. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I thank the ranking
member, I thank the witnesses for appearing, and I especially
thank you, Ms. Fisch, for being here today. You have brought
some degree of balance to the panel. I especially appreciate
the fact that the Democratic staff invited you to come to give
some degree of balance to the panel. And without going into any
specificities, are you familiar with the entities that these
four White men work for?
Ms. Fisch. Yes, I am.
Mr. Green. Are there smart women working for these
entities?
Ms. Fisch. I believe there are, yes.
Mr. Green. Are there women working for these entities who
could testify about the issues before us today?
Ms. Fisch. I couldn't answer that question, sir.
Mr. Green. I see, but you believe they are smart.
Ms. Fisch. I do.
Mr. Green. Okay. Thank you very much. Let's go on with the
traditional questioning. I have a question for you, but within
the question, I have a question. So I will read the question,
and then I will go to the question within the question, and I
thank the staff for assisting. The question is, can you explain
how these rules will help to protect retail investors who might
otherwise struggle to obtain or interpret climate-related risk
information about their investments? That is the question. But
the question within the question is, define, if you would,
please, what a retail investor is, for the public?
Ms. Fisch. Thank you. Retail investors are regular people
like us as opposed to institutional investors, mutual funds,
pension funds, and so forth, and most retail investors invest
through intermediaries. Many of us have stock in mutual funds,
in our retirement plans, right? The way this rule helps is the
people who run those retirement plans have come to the SEC for
years, and they have said, we need this information, and we
need this information for several reasons. One, it helps us
understand the financial value, the economic value, the
sustainability of these companies in which we are investing our
customers' retirement savings, right? And we have a fiduciary
duty to collect and evaluate all material information. We need
it. We are not getting it.
But there is a little bit more. Retail investors have a
variety of investment preferences. Some of them want to invest
in carbon zero funds. Some of them want to invest in the
Catholic values fund. So institutional investors have an
obligation, as part of this robust capital market, to satisfy
those different investor preferences, but you can't construct a
fund that meets those preferences without having access to the
underlying information.
Mr. Green. And is it true that the larger investors, some
of them have persons available to them to do research to help
them to acquire the intelligence that you have referenced? Is
this a fair statement?
Ms. Fisch. It is a fair statement. But one of the, I think,
repeated statements in the SEC's comment record is that even
the largest investors are spending hundreds of thousands, in
some cases, millions of dollars, trying to obtain this
information. They are paying third-party providers, they are
asking companies to fill out extensive questionnaires because
they are not getting this information in securities disclosure.
Mr. Green. And the retail investors, people like you and me
and other persons who are investing in retirement accounts,
don't have the wealth to acquire this level of intelligence, do
they?
Ms. Fisch. That is absolutely right. Mandatory disclosure,
as you say, creates a level playing field for all investors.
Mr. Green. And as we are going about doing this--making
sure that we level the playing field is the way I see it, so
that the retail investors, the people who just don't have the
millions, can make proper investments. As we go about doing
this, is there a way to do it other than to require some
disclosure and try to make it uniform?
Ms. Fisch. Congress decided in the 1933 Act and the 1934
Act that mandatory disclosure was the best, the most-efficient
system for getting that information to all investors.
Mr. Green. I want you to know I stand with these retail
investors. I stand with the average person who is trying to
make an investment, and I want the playing field leveled for
that average person. Right now, they are at a disadvantage.
This rule can help us to give them the same opportunities to
invest as other investors.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I yield back.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, who is
also the Chair of our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee, and also heads up our Climate Change Commission,
Mr. Huizenga, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Like Chairman
McHenry highlighted, the SEC's climate rule has deviated from
the materiality standard, which will leave investors to be,
``second-guessed,'' by the SEC. Materiality qualifiers also
ensure that companies must disclose climate-related items that
the SEC staff has considered important, not investors.
Mr. Roisman, can you explain how special interest groups
can take advantage of disclosures borne out by rules such as
this? Earlier, we heard from one of my colleagues' statements
that well-funded special interests are suing the SEC. I am
sure, Mr. Stebbins, you never saw a well-funded special
interest sue the SEC while you were General Counsel, but, Mr.
Roisman, how can these well-funded, special, left-leaning
interest groups sue the SEC to take advantage?
Mr. Roisman. For better or worse, anyone can really sue the
SEC, as we have seen. What I do think----
Mr. Huizenga. We will get to Mr. Wright shortly.
Mr. Roisman. I think one of the concerns people are raising
about this rule, and it is echoed in the statements of SEC
Commissioner Uyeda, is that by creating sort of a special set
of rules relating to climate, you are making it stand apart.
And historically, what the rule has been is companies need to
provide information that is material to investors, and it is up
to companies to do that because they are, frankly, in the best
place to do it.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. I wish some of my colleagues on the
other side would think as highly about a female and a minority
voice on the SEC opposing this as well. It seems to me that you
have been lumped in a group as well.
Mr. Wright, are you a well-funded special interest?
Mr. Wright. I am not.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. I didn't think so. It sounds like you
are a business person. As you know, many companies have been
unwilling to stick their neck out like that. Why have you
decided to do so?
Mr. Wright. I think the issue is just simply too important.
We get trade groups. Everybody is going to sue on it, but we
are very passionate about this topic. And it impacts not just
our company, but our entire industry, and ultimately, I think
it impacts the United States' energy system, and being by far
the largest producer of energy in the world, that affects the
world energy system. So, I am very passionate about having
thoughtful, open dialogue in evaluating tradeoffs and how to
make those inevitable tradeoffs between the energy system and
climate change. But a bureaucratic reporting rule that will
lead companies to, in reality, get sued, I don't see that
constructiveness in that.
Mr. Huizenga. Materiality sounds like a pretty good
watchword.
Mr. Stebbins, someone was asking you, and you were kind of
getting cut off on the time, I think it was Mr. Posey--
supposedly Scope 3 was, ``pulled out,'' but we are hearing that
there are going to be some real ramifications, and it may not
actually have the same effect.
Mr. Stebbins. The statistics show that a lot of companies
do set goals in this area, and to the extent you have set
goals, I think Scope 3 is going to be implicated based on the
adopting release. And I think also, it talks about transition
plans, which are defined very broadly to mean plans that a
company is using to reduce its environmental risks, and in
connection with those plans, if you have such, and most
companies will, Scope 3 again comes into play. So, I think it
is an overstatement to say it is totally out of the release.
Has that lessened? Yes, it has lessened.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Has the SEC stated its own rules
previously?
Mr. Stebbins. It has happened before. It happened in the
D.C. Circuit when I was there.
Mr. Huizenga. I have to move quickly here. And then, when
there are major issues, court cases, legal challenges, et
cetera, with a rule, and the SEC would voluntarily stay its own
rule, would it add an implementation time cushion on the tail
end of that?
Mr. Roisman, feel free to weigh in on that as well.
Basically, would you grant an additional year before you are
doing any kind of implementation?
Mr. Stebbins. I think practitioners will expect the SEC,
depending on how long the litigation goes, to adjust the
timeframes. I think that is next.
Mr. Huizenga. So that is reasonable, Mr. Roisman?
Mr. Roisman. I think it is more than reasonable. I would
certainly hope.
Mr. Huizenga. It should be expected?
Mr. Roisman. I hope, yes.
Mr. Huizenga. Would it be helpful if the SEC actually
weighed in right now and said, we are going to give it one
year?
Mr. Roisman. Very much so.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. That is something I intend to pursue
with them.
Mr. Stebbins, I only have a few seconds, but you had hit on
the APA as well, and I am sorry, Mr. White, I can't get to my
question for you. I am going to be doing a follow-up on that.
But it seems to me that the economic analysis to adequately
consider the impacts of the rule wasn't done, so we will follow
up with you on that. I yield back.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the ranking member of the committee, the gentlewoman
from California, Ms. Waters, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. Professor Fisch, although I welcome
the SEC's latest step in creating a standardized climate
disclosure framework, I was nonetheless disappointed that the
SEC's final rule fell short of the original proposal. In
particular, the rule exempts Big Banks and insurance companies
from disclosing their greenhouse gas emissions, even though it
is known as Scope 3 emissions and gives license to companies to
avoid disclosing any of their greenhouse gas emissions if they
decide it is not material. The final rule also lessened
requirements that companies disclose the potential impacts of
transition risks. Do you agree these are areas where the SEC
can improve the efficacy of its rules in the future?
Ms. Fisch. Yes, I do, and, in particular, I wanted to focus
on transition risks, targets, and announced goals, because the
issue has come up in several questions. Aren't companies
inadvertently going to have to disclose Scope 3 emissions as
part of that? And I just want to flag that one of the areas
that is most ripe for greenwashing is the announcement of
targets and transition plans without any underlying
information. That is not just greenwashing; that is outright
fraud. And to the extent that a company makes those statements
and, therefore, puts itself on the hook under the existing
rules to say, well, yes, we are actually monitoring the things,
our goals that we have announced that this is the progress that
we are making, these are the steps that we are taking, I think
that is exactly the information investors need to distinguish
true and meaningful disclosures from fraud.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. As you mentioned in your testimony,
the final rule also limits the attestation requirements for
Scopes 1 and 2 emissions, and, in some cases, shields
attestation providers from liability. Can you share your
thoughts on why this information is important to investors?
Ms. Fisch. Auditing, attestation, all of that increases the
reliability of information, and auditing has been part of
financial statement disclosure for a long time. Issuers are
voluntarily, in many cases, providing that same measure of
reliability to their greenhouse gas emissions disclosures and
to their other climate-related disclosures. And what the SEC is
saying is, look, this is something that adds a tremendous
amount to the reliability of this information. This is
something that we should facilitate.
At the same time, auditing services are viewed as costly,
particularly for smaller firms, so what the SEC has implemented
is a graduated level of disclosure with different timelines and
different levels of assurance, depending on the size of the
company. So it is very responsive, I think, to both investor
and issuer needs.
Ms. Waters. I want to thank you very much, and I yield back
the balance of my time.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentlewoman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sessions, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Madam Chairwoman, thank you very much. This
is an interesting discussion today. Mr. Wright, I am going to
probably aim some questions directly at you. I think it is
better to tell you ahead of time rather than repeating the
question.
When this 886-page rule was issued, the SEC estimated that
the rule would increase typical costs of a public company by 21
percent. Today, I looked at the website for the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission, and their website, at the very top,
has across it, ``Supporting small business,'' and below that,
``We inform and protect investors. We facilitate capital
formation. We provide data.''
Well, they are providing data. I really wonder how this
obvious 3-to-2 vote that took place seems like it is anti-
investor and not helpful. Talk with me about your viewpoint
about their mission statement, which I took as a mission
statement, and about this as it relates to the typical cost of
being a public company increased by 21 percent.
Mr. Wright. Yes, I think that matters a lot in this
country, and I think you have seen the trend. There are less
than half as many public companies today as there were a few
decades ago. This is unfortunate because it is through these
public companies that investors, the smallest investors, every
investor in this country can access private companies. There
are other vehicles. Wealthy people can invest in those deals,
but public companies are what is on offer and what is available
for the investors across this country. So making it harder,
more expensive, and riskier to be a public company, yes,
reduces investor choices and options. It means larger amounts
of resources are spent, in this case, gathering guesstimates
that are then assembled, my bigger worry, and then, litigation
over the guesstimates. I don't see that as productive.
I think the SEC plays a critical role. We need oversight,
we need a level playing field, we need to get out fraud, we
need to build confidence in our marketplaces, so I think the
SEC plays a critical role. But when it strays way outside of
its lane, I struggle to find anything positive that could come
from that.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Wright, I agree with you. I spent 16
years in a public company, and moved 8 times with them. It was
a small company called AT&T, and our job as the management was
to encourage not only the formation of capital, but to also
encourage the supporting of small business. We took that as the
way that we would grow our value, not just to the shareholder,
but to the marketplace. Why would someone allow this to be up
there that obviously is questionable? How would they justify
this? I will ask anyone on the panel. Supporting small
business, we voted for what would be, for a typical company, a
21-percent increase in costs. Can anybody on the panel offer
some insight into that?
Ms. Fisch. I would just note for the Congressman that the
rules broadly exempt smaller reporting companies and emerging
growth companies from virtually all of the reporting
requirements, which is consistent with the SEC's longstanding
practice of reducing----
Mr. Sessions. Thanks. The gentlewoman has been around long
enough where she knows that if the big people, the big
companies, if they suffer a 21-percent increase in cost, that
means that it finds its way down to smaller companies. That was
the one thing that you learned in Chamber of Commerce 101. You
get a big company, and there are lots of small businesses that
feed off of it. So, what I heard you say is we are only
diminishing the value of the big companies, no process. We can
definitely say we are for small business. I disagree. Madam
Chairwoman, I yield back.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Cleaver, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I thank all
of you for giving us your time. Mr. Wright, this is no,
``gotcha,'' kind of question that leads to some kind of nasty
comment from me. It is not. But I would like for you to tell me
whether or not you believe that the SEC should still be in
existence. Go ahead?
Mr. Wright. Okay. I think I said in my opening statement
that the SEC plays a critical role, and I am a strong believer
in it. I have had only a constructive and positive working
relationship with it for years.
Mr. Cleaver. Okay. Yes. As you know, the SEC came into
existence in the aftermath of the 1929 collapse, so it has been
in existence for over 70 years, and from time to time, the
risks have changed, but the SEC's role has remained the same.
Do you agree with that?
Mr. Wright. I think the implementation of that role has
evolved as finance has evolved and as counting has evolved, and
all of that. But to protect against fraud and make sure that
people can trust the numbers from public companies, I think
that mission has remained the same.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes. Sometimes, it seems as if the opponents
are actually beating up on the EPA as opposed to the SEC.
Mr. Wright. Well, the EPA is an environmental regulator.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes.
Mr. Wright. Yes, that is the question. We have an
environmental regulator that is also very rigorous in doing its
job. Why do we want a financial regulator to become an
environmental regulator?
Mr. Cleaver. As I said earlier, the SEC's role has remained
the same. Does this rule require companies to reduce emissions
or make any kind of changes to address the risks identified?
Mr. Wright. It certainly makes us change what people in our
company do, because now we are going to have to spend a lot of
time again gathering data that we can't gather, precisely. I
can't emphasize that point enough. And the biggest issue for
us, I believe, is this, ``transition risk,'' which is really
regulatory risk from the government. So, does anyone know what
the government is going to do in the future? I don't know how
to speak thoughtfully or act thoughtfully on that risk.
Mr. Cleaver. I respect the chairman's comments at the
beginning. He said, we believe in science, and I seriously and
honestly respect that because I think we are probably beyond
it. But your comments that the globe is slowly warming and sea
levels are gradually rising and have been doing that for over
150 years, and in the second half of this same period, you say
that since the end of World War II, human burning of fossil
fuels has increased atmospheric CO2 concentration by 50
percent. That's from your YouTube video, let's be honest. And
if I listen to that, it is almost like you don't believe that
climate change is real because you said you did, but then when
I read this, you are essentially saying, no, it doesn't, that
the scientists are wrong.
Mr. Wright. Not at all. I think the video and the report
that I am reporting the public data on temperature, on sea
level lies on extreme weather, I am trying to put the public
data that we understand about climate change in a more-
digestible format so people can understand it. We don't know
the future, but people can understand at least the history of
what is going on with climate change because you have to weigh
the tradeoffs there, the importance of energy.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes. My time is running out. Explain this. You
say, ``Any negative impacts from climate change were clearly
overwhelmed by the benefits of increasing energy consumption.''
Can you add anything to that and clarify it even more?
Mr. Wright. Yes, you bet. The arrival of hydrocarbons as
meaningful energy sources, maybe a little more than 100 years',
150 years' global life expectancy, has more than doubled. The
number of people living in extreme poverty has gone from 90
percent of humanity to less than 9 percent today. It is not
zero yet, but the 20th Century is the greatest century of
progress in human history.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you, Mr.
Wright.
Mr. Wright. Thank you, Congressman.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes herself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Roisman, the climate rule initially included Scope 3
greenhouse gas emissions data, which would have forced
Missouri's farmers to track all emissions being produced by
their crops and livestock, an extremely time-consuming, costly,
and sometimes impossible task. Although it was removed from the
final rule, I still have serious concerns regarding the future
of Scope 3 disclosures. Can you explain what the SEC could have
done if it wanted to fully prevent companies from making Scope
3 emissions disclosures? For example, could the SEC have
considered preempting compliance with other jurisdictions, such
as California, that require Scope 3 disclosures?
Mr. Roisman. Yes, that would have been one way to do it.
Additionally, I think they could have made an explicit
statement in the rules saying we are not requiring any Scope 3
disclosure requirements. And I think one of the concerns people
have is, as you heard from Mr. Stebbins and myself----
Mrs. Wagner. Yes.
Mr. Roisman. ----is that a lot of us will be counseling
companies that they will have to seriously consider whether
they have to provide Scope 3 emissions, and, again, that is up
and down the value chain. So, many people who wouldn't have
thought that they had had to track any of this information are
going to be getting calls from public companies saying, we need
to find this out in order for us to comply.
Mrs. Wagner. Can you explain why the uncertainty
surrounding the future of Scope 3 emissions disclosures is
troubling, outside of your current remarks?
Mr. Roisman. I do think the SEC goes to great lengths in
the release to talk about the difficulty of actually tracking,
assessing, and cataloging all of this information. I think Mr.
Wright did a very good job just talking about the difficulty of
Scopes 1 and 2. And I think the problem is when things are put
into an SEC filing, they come with a lot of liability and
responsibility, including, oftentimes, having to sign your name
on certain disclosure requirements and being subject to plenty
of lawsuits. So, when you have sort of a measurement that is
still not that well known or able to be quantified with
precision, there is a lot of concern for companies on signing
on the dotted line.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you. Mr. Wright, the SEC's decision to
remove mandatory Scope 3 emissions disclosures gave many the
impression that private companies are no longer affected by the
rule. We know that is not true. Mr. Wright, can you tell us
about how private companies, like Nomad, your co-petitioner in
this lawsuit, are affected by the climate rule?
Mr. Wright. Yes. I have been a lifelong technology
innovator, and that is what Liberty Energy does. We invest in
small companies that have exciting technologies that we think
can make the energy system better. Part of it is reducing
emissions or lowering pollution or lowering costs. We are
passionate about all of these things, but Nomad is one
example--I could give others--of private companies we have
invested in that now we have some control rights, so they fall
into our greater accounting. Now, they have to tally their
emissions and we have to sign in a test that those are the best
guesstimates, or whatever term we are going to use for that, I
don't know. But yes, absolutely, big companies partner with
small companies all the time.
Mrs. Wagner. Professor White, Commissioner Peirce stated in
her dissent that, ``The Commission performs impressive math-
crobatics to slash the anticipated cost of the rule by 90
percent.'' Can you explain what costs the SEC left out of its
analysis to artificially lower the anticipated costs?
Mr. White. Yes, thank you. The statistic that Commissioner
Peirce was referring to was the cumulative external burdens
under the Paperwork Reduction Act, and it was specifically on
Forms S-1 for registrations and the annual reports on 10-Ks.
So, the cost estimate was reduced from $6.4 billion to only
$600 million.
Mrs. Wagner. $6.4 billion to what?
Mr. White. To $600 million.
Mrs. Wagner. So, that is the math-crobatics that
Commissioner Peirce is talking about. Unbelievable. Carry on,
please.
Mr. White. Correct. And there was no detail provided around
the Paperwork Reduction Act as to where that came from. Now,
surely, some of this would apply to the removal of Scope 3
emissions, but it is hard to imagine how that cost goes down by
more than 90 percent, and it should certainly be explained. I
tried to reproduce this in my testimony and was also confused.
Mrs. Wagner. Right. I appreciate that. I have some
additional questions that I will submit for the record. I
appreciate all of your testimony. My time has expired.
And I now recognize the gentlewoman from Ohio, Mrs. Beatty,
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you to
the ranking member and to all of our witnesses here, thank you
for all your comments, and your expertise that you have
provided today. And certainly, we have heard a lot today, and
frankly, over the last couple of years since this rule was
first proposed, it seems like we have heard all about how
disastrous and burdensome climate exposure would be, so let me
just interject this. Climate should not be a political issue.
It is a reality. We must face it head on rather than burying
our heads in the sand, pretending that it does not exist or
complaining that it would be too burdensome to address it.
Investors have been asking for more disclosure. Fifty
percent of the voters oppose Congress limiting their access to
corporate business records, and as you mentioned, Professor
Fisch, climate is just one small piece of what investors have
been asking for. We should not be in the business of banning
what American consumers and investors want just because it
doesn't serve our political agenda.
Consumers, everyday Americans are dealing with the effects
of climate change daily. They are seeing insurance company
withdrawals, spikes in premiums, and other limitations on
coverage as a direct result of climate change. Instead of
coming to their aid, we are still bickering about whether or
not a problem exists. America knows a problem exists.
Meanwhile, other countries around the world are filling the
vacuum, and taking the lead while we sit back and, in my
opinion, maybe even wasting our time.
The SEC made significant changes. And I think it is worth
noting that the SEC made significant changes to the final rule
in response to feedback from businesses and other shareholders
who submitted comments. They have bent over backwards, in my
opinion, to address everyone's concerns while still
establishing a comprehensive disclosure framework that meets
investors' demands.
Now, I know you have read all the reviews, and certainly,
to one of our witnesses, as a former Acting Chair, I am sure
you have gone through all of those thousands of thousands of
comments you get. But to my Republican colleagues, it appears
that it is still not enough. Stonewalling and refusing to
compromise, to find workable solutions, I don't believe is any
way to go.
But now, in my few minutes left, let me go to you,
Professor Fisch. Other countries are way ahead of the United
States when it comes to sustainable finance and climate risk.
For example, I have been advised that the European Union has a
comprehensive climate disclosure regime that is already in
effect. What would be the benefits of the SEC harmonizing its
climate risk disclosure rules with other countries' disclosure
standards?
Ms. Fisch. I think there would be tremendous benefits.
Number one, a company wouldn't have to be subjected to the
uncertainty of which regulatory regime they are subject to.
Number two, the company could have standardized one set of
disclosures, one set of auditors, to the extent auditing is
required, one set of advisors to help them frame the
disclosures to comply. That would greatly reduce the costs, and
that would simplify not just the cost for issuers, but it would
also simplify the cost for investors.
We have a global marketplace, not just capital markets, but
businesses, right? So, harmonization would be a tremendous
step. My view is, that is something the SEC should be
considering going forward, the extent to which substituted
compliance might be a possibility, the extent to which
negotiation as opposed to separate rulemaking might provide
some sort of global standard.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. And quickly, I understand that the SEC
made significant changes to the final rule. And by the way,
there was a female who also supported that, to my colleague who
wanted to interject about another female, that the SEC made
significant changes to the final rule in response to the
comments on the original. How did the SEC make the final
requirements less burdensome? And I have about 20 seconds.
Ms. Fisch. As a lot of this discussion has focused on, the
SEC reduced the requirement for carbon emission disclosures,
eliminated the requirement that Scope 3 emissions be disclosed,
even in situations in which they are material. The SEC extended
the implementation period. The SEC reduced the number of
disclosures that have to be made as part of the financial
statements. The SEC reduced the oversight responsibilities of
auditors. That is just a sample.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
As the witnesses well know, the Securities and Exchange
Commission has a three-part statutory mission: protect
investors; maintain fair, orderly, and efficient markets; and
facilitate capital formation.
Mr. Wright, on the issue of protecting investors, will the
additional reporting costs and litigation risk that you have
testified would result from this rule enhance or diminish the
financial performance of your company and other similarly-
situated energy firms?
Mr. Wright. Diminish.
Mr. Barr. And would that then protect or harm your
shareholders?
Mr. Wright. Harm.
Mr. Barr. Strike one. On the second part of the mission, to
maintain fair, orderly, and efficient markets, Mr. Wright, what
impact would the rule have on U.S. energy markets?
Mr. Wright. I think on the margin, you would see less oil
and gas production in the United States, but no change in
demand, so necessarily more imports and almost certainly from
countries with higher greenhouse gas emissions from their
productions.
Mr. Barr. So, it would have an impact on the
competitiveness of U.S. energy markets relative to foreign
energy producers?
Mr. Wright. Correct.
Mr. Barr. So, maintaining efficient markets, strike two.
And third, to facilitate capital formation. Mr. Wright, will
the rule help your company access capital? Would it facilitate
capital formation in the energy sector?
Mr. Wright. No.
Mr. Barr. Strike three. It doesn't look like the SEC is
fulfilling its statutory mission here.
Mr. Roisman, Professor Fisch testified that the rule will
increase the standardization and comparability of key climate-
related disclosures. In fact, Chair Gensler makes the argument
that we need this rule for comparability and consistency. You
testified, however, that you doubt that the SEC has achieved
this goal in the final rule. Why are you right, and why is
Professor Fisch wrong?
Mr. Roisman. I don't want to be counter to Professor Fisch.
My perspective is that if you are going to have a standard
line-item disclosure, everyone is going to do it. The problem
lies in the fact that a lot of these things are based on
different assumptions. Each company is going to have to make
tailor-made assumptions to itself and to its business, and
because of that, it is really not going to be apples to apples.
Mr. Barr. Let's settle this debate a little bit more, with
all respect to Professor Fisch. Public companies, Mr. Roisman,
will be required to disclose in the final rule information
related to the financial statement effects of, ``severe weather
events and other natural conditions.'' Mr. Roisman, in terms of
severe weather events and other natural conditions, that
appears in the final rule 205 times, and 158 times,
respectively. Are either of these terms defined anywhere in the
rule?
Mr. Roisman. Natural conditions are certainly not. Severe
weather events, you get a little bit of indication that might
be tornadoes, earthquakes. I think what I would like to focus
on is your point about the accounting treatment which is a
severe weather event for a company, is very different based on
where it is business is. Whether it is in Kentucky or in Poland
or in Belize, companies are going to need to do different
policies and procedures to track all of this information in
different countries, in different areas. And all of this
information needs to be tracked because there is a very, very
low de minimis amount that if you hit it, you have to disclose,
so this is going to be a very costly and, frankly, onerous
burden.
Mr. Barr. It doesn't sound like this will enhance
comparability whatsoever. Professor Fisch also said that the
rule only applies to large companies or large accelerated
filers. Mr. Roisman, do you want to address this claim and the
rules application to smaller public companies?
Mr. Roisman. What I think maybe Professor Fisch was
alluding to is the Scope 1 and 2 disclosure requirements, but
small companies will be responsible for the regulation S-K
disclosures as well as the S-X, which is the accounting
information that is going to be in the audited financial
statements. So, that is for all companies.
Mr. Barr. Yes, all companies, exactly. All public companies
are impacted by this rule. Professor White, final question to
you. This issue of materiality, I think, is something that we
talk about a lot. And Professor Fisch says that the SEC's rule,
no problems here, because it limits disclosures to information
that has materially impacted an issuer. Professor White, do all
investors benefit when the SEC mandates disclosures that only a
specific group of investors who concentrate on a single risk
factor deem to be material?
Mr. White. No, and there are a lot of special interest
groups that are interested in information, that are not
necessarily representative of all investors, so that what might
be material to one investor might not be material to the
reasonable or the average investor.
Mr. Barr. Thank you. I think that is the key. Materiality
needs to be about materiality of all investors, the reasonable
investor, not just climate alarmists. With that, I yield back.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Vargas, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
the ranking member, and, again, I want to thank all the
witnesses here today. I appreciate your testimonies. I know
that it is tough to leave work and come here and testify, and I
appreciate that very much. I do always ask how many of the
witnesses, and I do this every time--how many of you believe in
climate change, that climate change is real? If you could
please raise your hand. If you don't believe, you don't need to
raise your hand. It is the same question. I want to be fair.
How many people believe that climate change is real? If you
could just please raise your hands. It is a bad question. Okay.
So, the question is bad. I am going to go on to my next
question because you seem to think that is a bad question.
I heard this today, and I hear it all the time, ``the
unaccountable bureaucrats versus elected officials,'' that
somehow the elected officials have this special knowledge.
Well, I have been an elected official for a long time, and I
know a lot of elected officials. I trust the bureaucrats a lot
more than I trust the elected officials because the bureaucrats
oftentimes have special knowledge, especially in the field in
which they are making decisions.
It is interesting. We have an elected official here who
looks up into the heavens and sees the total eclipse and thinks
it is the eschaton, that somehow God is talking to us, and it
is the end of times, that the rapture is about here. Look at
the science. Well, eclipses happen all the time--numerically,
we figure these things out--and so do earthquakes. It is not
the foretold eschaton or the rapture. It is just science in the
earth. And that is why I don't buy this whole notion that
somehow these bureaucrats don't know what they are talking
about. Oftentimes, it is really politicians who don't, but
anyway, that is from experience, unfortunately, my own, too. I
will throw myself into that group.
But all that being said, I do want to ask this. Professor
Fisch, you were given strike one, strike two, and strike three.
You didn't even get up to bat. I think that is a little unfair.
So, I want to give you the chance to answer those questions
before you strike out. Again, in your view, how is the rule
consistent with the SEC's three-part mission to protect
investors; maintain fair, orderly, and efficient markets; and
facilitate capital formation? You get up to bat this time--go
ahead--before you strike out.
Ms. Fisch. Thank you. As my written testimony details, this
is information that investors have been demanding. This is a
small tip of the information that investors have been demanding
with respect to business risks, and sustainability challenges
for companies, and it responds to the longstanding information
asymmetry. Companies have this information, investors don't,
and reducing that information asymmetry is what produces more-
efficient markets so that investors can choose the companies in
which they want to invest. They can evaluate whether a business
plan is resilient for the future and they can evaluate the
quality of management.
And something we haven't really focused on today is,
investors do that not just by buying and selling securities;
they also do that through exercising their governance rights.
And part of the SEC's mandate is to provide meaningful
disclosure so that investors can vote, so that they can vote to
elect directors who are monitoring material risks, so that they
can vote for or against shareholder proposals based on how well
they think the company is doing. And how does that facilitate
capital formation? Obviously, if you have strong quality
markets, that is going to make it easier for companies to raise
capital, and that is going to tailor the costs of capital to a
company's business plan. And we see that in the fact that so
many companies come to the U.S. capital markets to raise
capital.
Mr. Vargas. Professor, I don't give you a homerun, but a
solid triple, standard triple. I think you did a good job
there. Now, I do want to say this. You talked about the
corporations. A lot of these corporations do, in fact, collect
this information, as you said, because they think it is real.
And you might not think it is a good question, but the reality
is that they do compile this information. It is important, and
climate change is happening, no matter what people think.
I am from San Diego, and you don't think of floods in San
Diego, but we just had a gigantic flood in San Diego, a
thousand-year event, and it flooded a good portion of San
Diego, and we had all of these problems, something we normally
don't get. You can't buy insurance in large parts of California
because of climate change. This stuff is real. Investors know
it, companies know it, the information is there, they should
disclose it, and that is what this rule attempts to do. I also
wish they would have gone a little further with Scope 3, but I
understand that at the moment, maybe it is not the right time
to do it, but it has to go there at some point. And, again, I
appreciate all of you being here, and, again, I thank the
Chair. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rose. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The SEC's
misguided climate crusade has clearly overstepped their
statutory authority by requiring excessive costly and detailed
climate-related regulations. Instead of meeting the needs of
all investors, the SEC has shifted towards pandering towards
progressive shareholders and green activists. This is a
dangerous path to go down. It will have negative consequences
for all investors. In the 886-page climate rule, the compliance
cost has skyrocketed for public companies which must comb
through the burdensome rule to ensure they are meeting all the
requirements. The SEC must return to their core mission and
protect the interests of all investors and public companies,
not just those who are fixated on politicizing boardrooms and
our capital markets.
Professor White, could you elaborate on how this climate
rule will increase costs and burdensome compliance requirements
for public companies? And I have a follow-up for you.
Mr. White. Certainly, the direct cost of the disclosure, as
the SEC has estimated, is going to increase costs by upwards of
20 percent, which is one of the biggest increases, at least
that I am familiar with, in recent times. It is also going to
have indirect costs or spillover costs in the sense that is
going to, as Mr. Wright said, raise legal liability, and it
could have a dampening effect on capital formation. So, those
together are an enormous cost.
Mr. Williams of Texas. I have a question for you, then.
This climate rule will increase costs for public companies, we
have said that, but many of these costs will also prove to be
unbearable for small insurers or issuers, and another concern
of mine is how this rule will affect small companies' ability
to compete on a global stage. Specifically, that the increased
reporting requirements and compliance costs will serve as a
barrier to entry into global markets for smaller companies.
The SEC's purpose is to allow American businesses to
compete, not to try and tie them down with excessive compliance
costs and burdensome regulations, which seems to be what we are
going through with this Administration. One more time,
Professor White, what impacts will these costs have on American
competitiveness, especially regarding the ability of smaller
companies to compete globally?
Mr. White. Regulations always have a disproportionate or
outsized effect on small companies, so these regulations I
would expect to be more impactful to small companies. We might
see fewer IPOs, we might see companies staying private longer,
and we might see companies moving to other jurisdictions, which
impacts us in terms of losing people, losing tax revenues. And
your notion of creating an impediment, I like to view these
types of regulations as being like a brick: While one rule
might be a small block, eventually you have built a barrier to
going public, and once that barrier is formed, we lose
competitiveness on a global stage.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you. This climate rule will
open various challenges for companies which are already public
or for companies which are looking to go public. This rule is a
significant barrier to entry and will surely dissuade companies
from undertaking the necessary steps to go public in fear of
the compliance burdens and costs to which they will be subject.
And companies will face other challenges, like increased risk
of litigation and the complexities and the challenges that will
come with it. Because of this rule and the consequences it will
bring, companies will have to shift their resources towards
compliance and will have to sacrifice key services enjoyed by
their shareholders or they will refuse to go public in order to
protect themselves from needless attacks thrown at them by the
SEC.
Mr. Stebbins, can you expand on how this misguided and
harmful rule will deter companies from going public? It's
pretty simple.
Mr. Stebbins. I think rules aren't passed in a vacuum, and
I think you have to look at what has happened in the last few
years in general, and this isn't the only rule that has been
passed, right? It is very hard to be a public company right
now, and I think all of these rules incrementally make it
harder, including this one.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Any time you hire these compliance
officers, it takes away from the core mission bottom line,
right?
Mr. Stebbins. Say that again, sir. I'm sorry?
Mr. Williams of Texas. I said compliance officers versus
salesmen, that tells you the difference right there, right?
Mr. Stebbins. There are certainly a lot of costs built in
and there are a lot of costs built into this release--
attorneys, accountants, consultants, et cetera.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. Thank you for that, and I
yield back.
Mr. Rose. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Casten, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Professor Fisch, I
would like to start with you. My colleagues have talked a lot
about the disclosure requirements for emissions. And just to
confirm, a lot of this rule is about disclosing your exposure
to climate change, not just your contribution to climate
change, right?
Ms. Fisch. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Casten. Okay. And right now, if I understand it, I
think I have seen numbers that the average public company
spends $500,000 per year complying with voluntary disclosure
requirements?
Ms. Fisch. That is one of the reasons that estimating the
cost of compliance is so difficult because, of course, the SEC
doesn't have access to the costs that each company spends on
voluntary disclosure.
Mr. Casten. Yes. So, if I am an investor or maybe if you
are an investor, would you like to know the risks your
portfolio is exposed to and which companies in your portfolio
are contributing to that risk? Isn't that kind of the basis of
being an informed investor?
Ms. Fisch. Absolutely. I would want to know the risks, and
I would like to know what the management is doing to respond.
Mr. Casten. I realize I am preaching to the choir here, but
our chairman started this by saying that the Democrats were
going to say we are science deniers because we don't want to
talk about materiality. This is so deeply right within the
SEC's wheelhouse to understand risk, right? But by the way, the
SEC does not have an obligation to ignore science, right?
Ms. Fisch. That is right, yes.
Mr. Casten. The last time I checked, Elizabeth Holmes
committed financial fraud by misrepresenting medical science.
FTX committed financial fraud by misrepresenting math, which is
a science. There have long been people who have come to
Congress and said, I need to misrepresent science. Here is one.
James Black, in 1977, said that doubling CO2 gases in the
atmosphere would increase global temperatures by 2 or 3
degrees, and that man has a time window of 5 to 10 years before
the need for hard decisions regarding changes in energy
strategies might become critical. James Black was a senior
scientist at ExxonMobil. He said that privately in 1977. He
didn't say that publicly because that would have hurt their
share price. Don't ignore science, folks.
With that, I turn to you, Mr. Wright. In January 2023, you
said, in a YouTube video, ``We have seen no increase in the
frequency or intensity of hurricanes, tornadoes, droughts, or
floods, despite endless fear-mongering media, politicians, and
activists.'' In the same video, you said, ``There is no climate
crisis. We are not in the midst of an energy transition either.
Humans and complex life are simply impossible without carbon
dioxide. The idea of carbon pollution is outrageous.'' Do you
agree that you said all of those things?
Mr. Wright. Absolutely.
Mr. Casten. Okay. It is all bullshit.
Mr. Wright. Which was wrong? Which one of those was wrong?
Mr. Casten. Reclaiming my time, sir. The fact that you said
that--I could go through countless Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) reports that make it very clear to the
contrary. I could go through countless reports from our own
financial regulators that there are risks. We could talk about
the number of places in the world where the wet bulb
temperature now regularly exceeds 35 degrees Celsius, 95F,
which is beyond the ability of humans to live for more than 6
hours at a time in India, and Bangladesh, maybe not in your
air-conditioned office, but this stuff is real.
And I am not going to get into an argument with you,
because ultimately, you don't matter. You are an
interchangeable person who comes here and finds it useful to
misrepresent science in order to create short-term value for
your shareholders. There are thousands of people like you. You
are going to be forgotten years from now. Maybe, your
grandchildren will be embarrassed. I don't know, but what I
know right now is that we have to act on this stuff. We are
sitting here in a moment where we know these changes are
happening.
And I am sympathetic with you in the narrow sense, Mr.
Wright, that in the last 10 years, oil demand in the United
States has not moved, coal demand is down 40 percent, and
natural gas demand has decoupled from GDP growth, and that is
because renewables are surging. It is because EVs are surging.
The markets are demanding things that you are not providing.
Capitalism is hard, right? And when capitalism is hard, the
worst thing in your world is that you might actually have
informed investors. There is a reason why the whole oil and gas
exploration and production (E&P) sector is, on a good day,
lucky to get a 10 times earnings multiple, and the clean energy
sector is running at 20, 30 times multiple. They are getting
cheaper access to capital. You all are building an industry to
export, to sell your product to places where people don't have
access to capital. Maybe, you don't care. Our job here is not
to protect Liberty Energy investors. It is to protect markets.
It is to protect all investors. It is to make sure that
capitalism works. And I hope that someday that is not partisan,
even if it is scientifically true. I yield back.
Mr. Rose. The gentleman yields back. The Chair would just
remind all of our Members to display proper decorum. Mr.
Wright, we thank you for being with us as a witness today.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Loudermilk, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Wright, I will
start with you. It is amazing to me how some people here in
this body are very selective with the science that they want to
accept, right? We were wanting to follow the science with
COVID. There is gender identity. It seems that they want to
selectively follow science. You were cut off, I think rudely. I
wanted to give you an opportunity to respond to Mr. Casten, but
also to Mr. Vargas, who asked the question about whether or not
you believe in climate change, and you responded that that
wasn't a fair question. So, I want to give you a few moments to
respond to both of them.
Mr. Wright. Thank you, Congressman. Look, climate change
and energy are just simply too important to get wrong, to make
bombastic, non-fact-based statements, which is why I say it is
not about belief, it has become religion. That is very
unfortunate. This is a science-based technical topic. We should
study climate change, understand the risks there, understand
the downsides, understand the upsides, and then, look at our
energy system.
And ultimately, it is about what is the best set of
tradeoffs to make there, and what the world has done in the
last 2 decades. It has actually been a pretty poor calculus in
that. We have spent somewhere between $4 trillion and $10
trillion, depending on how you want to count it, dominantly for
wind and solar, which just crossed 2 percent of global energy,
and everywhere they have large penetration, you have more-
expensive electricity and less-stable grids. They are not
threats to oil and gas. I feel zero threat whatsoever.
I went to college to work on fusion energy at MIT. I worked
on solar energy at UC Berkeley. I have worked on geothermal
energy for 30 years. I am not some partisan defending the oil
and gas industry; I am just a believer in the fact that energy
matters. We still have 2 billion people cooking their daily
meals, burning wood, dung, and agricultural waste, with about 3
million deaths a year from that, and we are going to stand in
the way of them getting propane so they can have clean, long,
healthy lives like us? That is just crazy, and everything I
said in that video is true, and is actually in the IPCC
reports.
People talk about them or the summary from policymakers, so
I am very careful about that. This book that I think I sent to
every member, including Representative Casten, has all of this
data. It is all referenced. This isn't made up. This isn't
denying from my industry. This is just being sober and honest
about energy and climate change.
Mr. Loudermilk. I appreciate that, and it is political
science here. The science that is accepted is based on what is
good in popular politics is what you find here in this
building. Mr. Wright, while I have you, quickly, I understand
your company, Liberty Energy, successfully sued the SEC to stay
the rule in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit.
Then, after the stay was lifted, just last week, the SEC
decided to voluntarily stay the rule on its own. Did the SEC's
decision to change course come as a surprise to you?
Mr. Wright. I am not good at predicting those things, but I
guess it was a pleasant surprise.
Mr. Loudermilk. What was your reaction to the news based on
the SEC's tone, when just a few weeks earlier, they were in
court arguing against Liberty Energy's push to stay the rule?
Mr. Wright. Yes. Again, I can't handicap that. I think the
stay is a good thing. This issue should be litigated. We should
decide what the right answer is, and we will all live by the
answer that comes down.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Mr. Roisman, I am concerned that the
SEC is misleading the public about the impetus for their
climate rule. The Commission has repeatedly asserted that the
final rule's climate disclosures are a direct response to
investor demand, but it is unclear who those investors even are
and how useful the information required by the rule would be
when making investment decisions. Is it possible the SEC is
responding to some other pressure, such as pressure from
activist groups to finalize the climate disclosure rule?
Mr. Roisman. I think this was certainly a concern raised by
the two dissenting Commissioners about this being more
political in nature than substantive. Now, I think it should be
noted that there are investors who want this, and there are
investors who don't want this. The test has always been the SEC
is trying to provide information so people can make an informed
investment decision, and that usually is tied to financial
returns. One of the things that the dissenting Commissioners
talked about was that a lot of the proponents of the rule may
have sort of a focus on nonfinancial or pecuniary returns, and
that is perfectly fine, but that is not historically what the
SEC does in terms of mandating disclosure.
Mr. Loudermilk. Quickly, can you explain the difference
between having the companies file these disclosures that they
were forced to do as opposed to furnishing them, and why that
difference matters?
Mr. Roisman. The difference matters in terms of liability
risk, in terms of plaintiff lawsuits and other litigations
there.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rose. The gentleman yields back. The gentlewoman from
Massachusetts, Ms. Pressley, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Listening to my
colleagues across the aisle as they talk about the recent
climate disclosure rule, the American people might be inclined
to believe that the SEC had no basis for taking on this issue
and that there is no climate emergency. I think that is what
some people might refer to as fake news, when, in fact, at the
last hearing on providing transparency for investors by
requiring climate disclosure, I was encouraged to hear SEC
Chair Gensler confirm on the record that investors responded
favorably to the proposed rule as it was previously designed.
So, the SEC understands that we must take action to protect
our financial system. That is why I am disappointed that the
final rule is significantly weaker. It fails to fully deliver
the informational Scope 3 emissions that investors want, and
this has consequences for millions of workers and families,
whether it is personal retirement savings or college savings
for a child. Investments are at greater risk due to this
weakened rule. Ninety-seven percent of investor comments were
in favor of the proposed rule. This supported the inclusion of
Scope 3.
Ms. Fisch, can you explain how folks would benefit from
data on Scope 3 emissions from U.S. companies?
Ms. Fisch. Thank you. Yes, Scope 3 emissions allow a
company to assess what risks am I exposed to based on the
regulation, the demands, the environmental impact on my
customers, on my suppliers, on my employees, on the world in
which I operate. So for example, to the extent that a company's
supply chain is vulnerable, that is a material business risk,
right? It doesn't matter how you feel about climate change.
That is something that a company has to plan for. That is
something that a company has to take into account.
For example, we get our water from a particular supplier,
and that water supply is limited, is threatened. This might be
a good time to diversify. So, investors need to understand
those kinds of questions as well as the extent to which
management is informing itself and making the hard choices. And
the hard choices may or may not be to take a particular
climate-oriented approach, but it is knowing the information
and guiding your company so it is going to be sustainable in
the future.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. Ms. Fisch, there are trillions of
dollars implicated by the SEC Climate Disclosure Rule, but my
Republican colleagues want it to be even weaker. Do you agree
that it should be a strong rule that helps our economy?
Ms. Fisch. I do believe it should be a strong rule. And I
have to say, I am persuaded by some of Mr. Roisman's questions
that to the extent the SEC has limited some of the disclosures,
that does reduce information in the market, and that does
reduce comparability. So a stronger rule would have, I think,
been even better tailored to the SEC's goals of protecting the
markets and investors.
Ms. Pressley. Very good. I am calling on the SEC to
reconsider its position to include climate risk disclosure on
Scope 3 emissions to protect investors and to safeguard our
financial system. This is not the time to backtrack and to
weaken regulations. This is the time to strengthen them. Thank
you. I yield back.
Mr. Rose. The gentlelady yields back. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes, and I will begin by thanking Chairman
McHenry and Ranking Member Waters for holding this hearing, and
a particular thank you to our witnesses today. I know you
volunteer your time to do this, and we appreciate you sharing
your expertise, and we hope that you regard this as a
productive and enjoyable enterprise.
Three weeks ago, our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee visited Tennessee's 6th District, my district, to
speak with regulatory victims of this rule. After that hearing,
I was further determined to speak out against this rule and
expose what I believe is Chair Gensler's detrimental conduct.
Mr. Wright, part of this awful rule, in my estimation, is the
inclusion of Scope 2 disclosure requirements. This requirement
would, of course, mean that publicly-traded companies will have
to disclose how much greenhouse gas is generated through their
electricity usage.
The execution of this will be especially problematic for
publicly-traded companies in Tennessee, and in my district,
Tennessee's 6th. In Tennessee, the Tennessee Valley Authority
(TVA) generates electricity and sells it to utility companies
which then distribute the electricity to these publicly-traded
companies. This rule will mean that TVA must work with the
distributors to ensure that companies are provided with
accurate Scope 2 figures. From your company's perspective, can
you talk about the level of difficulty in producing these Scope
2 disclosure reports and calculating the costs of energy
generation?
Mr. Wright. Yes. I wish I knew a more accurate answer to
that. But we do business in 12 States, in all different rural
areas, from one-off jobs out in Utah where there is no oil and
gas where we are doing work for geothermal, so it is all over
the place. So yes, to think everywhere we source electricity
from or heat or cooling or other energy sources, that will be
very tricky to do, and, of course, we will just be getting
someone else's guesstimates of the numbers for our data to add
to our own guesstimates.
Mr. Rose. Sure. And I would just say that the scope of this
rule, in my view, is clearly intended to provide information
for blame-and-shame exercises beyond the materiality
requirements that have historically guided disclosure. And it
strikes me that if this is material, then everything is
material, and if everything is material, then nothing is
informative for the investing public.
Mr. White, as a professor at Vanderbilt University, my alma
mater, you are likely aware that the State of Tennessee manages
assets for public workers and retirees across the State. The
managers of these funds are focused on maximizing returns, not
social or political agendas. Is there any net financial benefit
that public workers and retirees could expect to see in their
assets or managed funds due to this rule?
Mr. White. Thank you for the question. Certainly, pension
funds and retirement funds have a fiduciary duty to their
investors, and that is to maximize their returns so that they
can use that money in retirement. The extent that the cost of
this rule outweighs the benefit, would be detrimental to them.
The SEC already has its 2010 climate guidance in terms of
requiring material disclosures around climate. So, if that is
material to registrants, they should already be disclosing it,
which means that additional disclosure burdens would have
limited benefits and thus impact returns negatively.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I appreciate that and agree with your
observations. Mr. White, could the funds that they will have to
allocate towards compliance be better spent towards growth,
fueling stronger returns for Tennesseans?
Mr. White. Yes, absolutely. In fact, I have a study with
Professor Craig Lewis, also at Vanderbilt, that looks at the
2012 Jobs Act, and companies used compliance savings which
exempted them from costly provisions like Sarbanes-Oxley. They
used that money instead of compliance by investing in their
science, so every dollar that goes to compliance is a dollar
that you are not investing for growth and returns. And so, yes,
it would impact them negatively.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. Mr. Stebbins, as a lawyer myself, and
an investor myself, I want to be extremely clear, and I know
this point has been made. But are public companies under the
current materiality doctrine already required to report every
piece of material information?
Mr. Stebbins. That has been made very clear, I think, in
the 2010 guidance, and subsequently in many later statements
from the SEC, whomever has been running the SEC at the time,
Chairman Clayton, or Bill Hinman, the Corporation Finance
Division Director. So yes, it is extremely clear.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I appreciate that. I see my time is
about to expire, so I yield back. And I recognize the gentleman
from Nevada, Mr. Horsford, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you to the chairman, to the ranking
member, and to our witnesses for your time and for being before
us today to discuss yet another manufactured culture war that
has nearly nothing to do with the critical issues facing our
country's financial systems.
Unfortunately, we are here relitigating the same arguments
over an unrelatable SEC rulemaking when we should be working on
the issues that actually matter to our constituents. The
Majority seems wholly uninterested in tackling the hard
questions that we face as a nation today. Anyone who has been
to my district knows that the number-one issue we face is the
high cost of housing. To show just how dire this crisis has
become, I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a
January article from the Las Vegas Review-Journal entitled,
``Las Vegas home prices going up 5 times faster than wages,
report says.''
Mr. Meuser. [presiding]. Without objection, it is so
ordered.
Mr. Horsford. This article outlines the particularly
painful point that, according to recent Zillow data, from 2011
to the end of 2022, home price growth in Southern Nevada has
far outpaced wage growth in the same time frame. It is such a
pressing crisis for folks in my State because Nevada led the
country over that time frame with an astounding six-fold
increase in the ratio of home prices to wages, six-fold over an
11-year period.
However, this should surprise no one, given that Nevada is
already short approximately 80,000 units of housing that is
affordable, and the volume of home sales has bottomed out at
its lowest since 2008. These are real challenges that demand
real solutions, and yet, my colleagues across the aisle have
none. The housing legislation that they have posted for our
most recent markup would do nothing to address these
skyrocketing costs, and one bill would actually make it easier
for landlords to evict their tenants. Their lack of interest in
finding answers to these questions is why we are holding
hearing after hearing to debate the merits of climate change
instead of debating the merits of the necessary fixes to the
housing market that my colleagues and I have advanced.
Everyday Nevadans are in the fight of their lives, and
unfortunately, they are up against some of the wealthiest and
most-sophisticated investors in the country. It is time for us
to stand up for the people.
I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a Nevada
Independent article entitled, ``It's time to take back our
housing from Wall Street.''
Mr. Meuser. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Horsford. The reality for our communities is a stark
one. As this article points out, displacement is the norm in
our communities. North Las Vegas residents regularly confront
exorbitant rates, soaring housing costs, tenant exploitation,
and eventually, eviction notices. Last year, I had the
opportunity to see firsthand just how destructive these abuses
can be when I was able to attend an eviction proceeding at the
North Las Vegas Justice Court on behalf of my constituents.
Out-of-State corporate investors are preying on the most
vulnerable among us, and we need broad Federal legislation to
address the issue and hold these firms accountable for their
unfair abuses that they impose upon our communities. But we can
only do that, Mr. Chairman, if we hold meaningful hearings to
debate the merits of potential solutions, potential solutions
like my Housing Oversight and Mitigating Exploitation (Home)
Act, which would empower HUD to curb the very worst of the
predatory behaviors that we see in the housing market today.
Don't take my word for it. Come to my district and hear for
yourselves stories from people like Katrina Paul. Katrina has
been working with her REALTOR to finally achieve the dream of
homeownership. However, she has been thwarted at every turn.
Katrina has made 18 offers on homes during the recent surge in
Las Vegas' housing market, and she has been outbid on every
single one. She has been outbid by cash buyer after cash buyer,
and through no fault of her own, she is forced to continue to
rent an apartment that is too small. Her only dream, like so
many across this country, is the dream of finally owning her
own home.
This story is far too common across Southern Nevada, where
hardworking people are stuck making rent payments each month
when they should be investing in the equity that helps to build
wealth for themselves and their family. So people like Katrina
will continue to be forced to delay that dream and that wealth,
if they are ever able to have it come true at all.
Mr. Chairman, I just ask you, out of respect----
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Horsford. ----for my constituents, to prioritize my
legislation and that of my colleagues dealing with housing
affordability, and let's address the crisis that is before our
constituents now in this Congress.
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman needs to respect the time.
Mr. Horsford. I yield back.
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Timmons,
is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here today to discuss the recently-
finalized climate disclosure rule. Time and time again, the
Biden Administration has leveraged so-called independent
regulators to achieve political goals they can't accomplish
through Congress. And SEC Chair Gary Gensler may just be
President Biden's most-effective tool in this strategy,
promulgating rules that turn our capital markets on their heads
in order to promote inflation-driving Green New Deal policies,
rather than reinforcing their fiduciary duty to create wealth
for investors. It is quite evident that all investors are
united by their shared concern for financial return and are
divided on how important they consider non-economic factors
such as climate change.
By requiring extensive climate-related disclosures, the SEC
has opened the door for activists to lobby for the mandatory
disclosure of other non-economic information. There are a
multitude of concerns with the SEC's recent efforts to
influence the way company boards and management operate. For
example, the recently-finalized cybersecurity rule requires
detailed, potentially non-material risk management and
governance disclosures to dictate the way companies should
handle cyber risk. The climate rule goes even further,
requiring management and boards to make complex judgments about
climate risks, some of which are admittedly not material.
Mr. Roisman, would you explain what problems arise when
regulators impose overly-prescriptive requirements relating to
board governance and risk management?
Mr. Roisman. Thank you for the question. I think this sort
of stems from the idea of, do you continue a principles-based
disclosure regime where companies are in the best position to
tell investors what they think is material, and then, when
regulators, say, provide line-item disclosures about each one.
The problem you alluded to, which I have heard before, is
sometimes called the federalization of corporate governance,
where, by requiring regulations to disclose things about boards
and management, are you trying to push boards and management to
act in a certain way?
And with the cyber rule and the climate rule, in the
proposal, there was this concept that you needed to disclose
the expertise on the board with respect to cyber or to climate.
Both were struck out of the final rule, but some of the
comments that people received, or that the SEC received were,
are you essentially telling us that we need to have a climate
expert or a cyber expert on the board, because there are many
reasons to be on a board. So I think the concern people have
is, if you require some of these disclosures, is this in effect
trying to effectuate change? And the SEC is a disclosure
agency. It is not an agency that is supposed to dictate how
companies act.
Mr. Timmons. Sure. Thank you for that. Mr. Stebbins, in a
paper entitled, ``The Economics of ESG Disclosure Regulation,''
your former colleague, Dr. Kothari, suggests that climate-
related financial risks are not as significant as other risks
such as interest rate risks, inflation risks, recession risks,
and many others, where granular prescriptive disclosures are
not mandated. Does the climate rule risk misleading investors
into believing climate risks are more significant than other
risks?
Mr. Stebbins. I think that is a concern that has been
raised--Commissioner Peirce raised it in her dissent.
Commissioner Roisman, next to me, just mentioned that you are
trying to push certain behaviors as opposed to just regulating
by requiring disclosures of certain things. You are trying to
push boards and companies to act in a certain way rather than
just doing what they know, what they consider to be in the best
interest of the shareholders, and they certainly know better
than the regulatory agency. I think that would be the main
concern with that. And also, I think Commissioner Peirce
mentioned that it is climate. What is next, right? What is the
next social issue?
Mr. Timmons. I am going to follow up on that. Does this not
disadvantage U.S. businesses in the global markets, because
businesses in foreign countries, other than Europe, don't have
these additional requirements, and they are focused on a return
on the investment, not other variables that are not core to
their business function. Is this going to create a challenge
for U.S. businesses to compete in the global economy?
Mr. Stebbins. I think unquestionably it does, yes.
Mr. Timmons. I think that is a major problem, and my
district has been the victim of Federal policy that has sent
tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of jobs overseas. And
we need to focus on competing in the global economy, and this
Administration is on the wrong track. With that, Mr. Chairman,
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman yields back. The gentlewoman from
Texas, Ms. Garcia, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
of the witnesses for being here today.
Well, here we are again. I think this is the 6th hearing we
have had on the SEC, and the 12th on climate change. I am
hearing a lot of more of the same. As we continue to debate
whether climate risk is a financial risk, the climate crisis
continues to get worse and consumers are paying the price
because it goes on and on. Families and hardworking Americans
in my district are dealing with insurance company withdrawals,
insurance cancellations, and premium spikes in Texas. In fact,
Mr. Chairman, I was stunned during our 2-week break, because my
own homeowner's insurance, which was about $9,500, is now
$13,600. That is a huge spike.
So, anybody who tells me that the weather does not impact
climate change needs to come to Houston where we have suffered
from hurricanes, flooding, storms--one last night--freezes. So,
this whole notion that it isn't real, to me, it is just
dumbfounding. In fact, even the recent fires in Texas cost the
Rangers at least $102 million. Millions and millions of acres
were on fire. Investors are clamoring for these climate
disclosures. I have heard it. I know that people in my
district, even though they are not investors, are clamoring for
it. These disclosures not only promote better transparency to
inform consumers and investors, but also help the industry
track their environmental, social, and corporate governance
goals.
Professor Fisch, I keep hearing the sky is falling, because
this is going to happen. Companies are going to leave. They are
not going to invest. They are not going to do all these things.
Is there any real data to support that? Don't you see investors
demanding this climate disclosure as I have?
Ms. Fisch. Absolutely. And part of the reason the SEC's
final release was so long is because the SEC, which is deeply
immersed in the market and in deep conversations with investors
with summarizing the thousands of investor comments saying we
need this information and explaining why this information is
important. And I should just say that the investors'
perspective by and large is that this information is important
to our financial assessment.
Sure, investors can invest for a variety of different
reasons, but the large investors, the institutional investors
are saying this information is financially material. This helps
us investigate, is the company going to lose its insurance
coverage? Is the company going to lose physical assets to a
flood or other event? And again, we don't have to debate, is it
human cost, is it climate change, or is it just some random
flood? The point is these are business risks. This is economic
vulnerability that investors are demanding.
And I should just say that the discussion earlier that the
SEC should prevent companies from disclosing Scope 3 emissions,
number one, if there are any First Amendment problems, the idea
that the SEC would tell companies you can't disclose what the
market wants, what your investors want, to me, that is just
incredible. The other is that disclosure is designed to
facilitate the market responding to and evaluating this
information. This is not some heavy-handed merit-based
regulation. We have these capital markets. Investors say they
need this. Let's give them what they want.
Ms. Garcia. Right. And do you have any data on the number
of investors who did file comment letters and how many of them
supported climate change and how many didn't?
Ms. Fisch. There were thousands of comment letters--how you
quantify it depends a little bit on whether you are looking at
individual comment letters. In this kind of thing, there are a
lot of form letters as well, but basically, 99 percent of the
investors said, we support Scope 1 and 2 emissions disclosure,
and 97 percent said, we support Scope 3 emissions disclosure.
The numbers are just overwhelmingly high.
Ms. Garcia. Okay. Now, something else caught my ear that
one of my colleagues said earlier. As a layperson, I was a
little offended. It almost sounded like they think that these
disclosure requirements are too complicated and too high level
for the average investor to understand, the noninstitutional,
the retail investor. What is your reaction to that? Do you not
think that the average person understands that the climate
change issue is higher risk, so we should know about it? To me,
it seems simple.
Ms. Fisch. I think there are a whole range of retail
investors out there with different levels of understanding.
There are financial reporters, there are securities analysts
that can help investors understand that information. There are
intermediaries like asset managers that can help investors. But
at the end of the day, investors are entitled to this
information. They are entitled to use whatever resources are
available to them to evaluate the information, and they are
entitled to invest according to their preferences.
Ms. Garcia. Not very complicated, isn't it?
Ms. Fisch. No.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Meuser. The gentlelady's time has expired. Mr. Steil is
now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
dive back into materiality because I think we are missing what
might be one of the most important topics here today, and we
are speaking past that. I listened to you, Professor Fisch, and
you said, I think, something along the lines of, investors want
it, so give them what they want. And then you cited a study, I
think, that reviewed 320 institutional investors and you came
up with 97 percent. It is an incredibly small sample of people.
I would say what people really want is material
information, rather than allowing activist investors or the
loudest voices in the room to dictate what is or what is not
disclosed, because as noted through today's conversation, the
disclosure process is incredibly expensive and time-consuming.
There is an appropriate need for that if it is material, but if
it is not material, it is simply an activity to abate those
that want it--your term, right, ``those that want it.'' You
would say, as I listened to you, give them what they want. Do
you concern yourself with whether or not the information,
``that they want,'' is material? Yes or no, does materiality
matter to you in this context?
Ms. Fisch. Materiality absolutely matters to me.
Mr. Steil. Okay, great. So, it matters to you. Should it be
definitive as to whether or not the information is disclosed?
As a core tenet of securities law, do you believe that if the
information is not material, that it is, therefore, not
material and does not need to be disclosed?
Ms. Fisch. I guess I am not----
Mr. Steil. No, no, no. Just yes or no. Do you think if it
is material, that it matters?
Ms. Fisch. I guess I don't think that materiality is as
clear a binary as you are suggesting, and so there is----
Mr. Steil. It is pretty darn clear, right? There is plenty
of securities case law on this point and topic. There are
significant boardroom discussions on this. Every securities law
attorney goes through a thorough process with public companies
to determine whether or not information is material. This is
heavily litigated. It is very clear. There is plenty of case
law on the topic. I would encourage you to read further into
this, but let's go one step further. If it is or is not
material, does it need to be disclosed?
Ms. Fisch. The Supreme Court case law is----
Mr. Steil. But do you think----
Ms. Fisch. ----in securities fraud.
Mr. Steil. Do you think----
Ms. Fisch. And securities fraud is different from the SEC's
power required to do this----
Mr. Steil. No, you could sue on filings for lack of
disclosure, and so what I am asking you is, do you think that
the information needs to be material?
Ms. Fisch. Do I think which information needs to be
material? The information----
Mr. Steil. Do you think the SEC should require people to
provide information that is not material to investors? Is that
your position?
Ms. Fisch. I think the SEC has done that and will continue
to do that.
Mr. Steil. And you think they should in this case?
Ms. Fisch. I think the SEC has a long tradition of
requiring disclosure----
Mr. Steil. I am not asking about their tradition. I am
asking a very clear question, ma'am. I am asking whether or not
you think the information, if it is not material, should still
be disclosed. Yes or no?
Ms. Fisch. I think the SEC has a long history of requiring
disclosures that are----
Mr. Steil. I am not asking about the history, ma'am. So, a
notice to those watching this, we are going to ask one more
time because it is a very clear question: If it is not
material, should it be required to be disclosed? It is a simple
question.
Ms. Fisch. This rule doesn't require any disclosure of non-
material information. You are asking about this rule and not--
--
Mr. Steil. Okay. Let's pause there, because you are really
fighting to not say that you want non-material information to
be disclosed, because now you are saying it is material. If it
is not material, is it correct that you are okay with it not
being disclosed because it is not material?
Ms. Fisch. No, I didn't say that.
Mr. Steil. Right. I am trying to have a conversation.
Ms. Fisch. Right.
Mr. Steil. So, yes or no, non-material information needs to
be disclosed, in your opinion?
Ms. Fisch. I think there are any number of----
Mr. Steil. So, you can't even give me a yes-or-no opinion.
Why? Because materially is the cornerstone of securities law.
If you have a background in securities law, it is really tough
to say on the record that you want non-material information to
be required to be disclosed. And when we hear this time and
again from my colleagues on the left, they want non-material
information to be disclosed all the time. We have seen human
resources (HR) policies put forward. We have seen policies that
relate to climate put forward. Those of us on the right agree
that when those policies are material, they should be
disclosed.
So if you are Exxon, there is probably a materiality
threshold and you should probably put it forward. If you are an
HR consulting company, it is probably not material, and it
probably doesn't need to be disclosed. But there are those on
the left who want to play to their activists, who are
unconcerned about the economic burden being passed on to every
consumer in the United States of America, and who have no
problem with the fact that through red tape, we drive inflation
higher, and we discourage U.S. companies from going public. And
on the record, a simple yes-or-no question, we have seen it
refused to be answered at least 4 times, which is beyond
frustrating. It is why we have to continue to fight against
non-material information being required to satisfy activist
investors. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman yields back. The gentlewoman from
Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think so many people
always forget how many times the American taxpayer has bailed
out folks for just really hiding the truth from the public,
especially in areas that we know are risks. And folks want to
agree, but they don't actually want to do anything about the
fact that climate risk is a financial risk.
In my community, I cannot tell you how many times we have
had floods. They say, this is a record flood, and I am like, I
don't know. This is four in a row, but we continue to say,
let's do nothing. But then, when these financial institutions
making these real huge risks, putting really our economy at
risk, we bail them out. We bail them out instead of telling
them to do what is right, which is providing information so
that we can make much more informed decisions. So if your
company has gone all in on an outdated business model, then
workers who have put their savings into a company deserve to
know that.
I just don't understand why we are so hesitant in doing it
other than the fact that they don't want to consider this a
risk because, for them, they will just get bailed out by the
United States, that we, the American taxpayer, will just bail
them out. That is exactly what we continue to do, and you all
know it. You do. We always do when they don't tell us the truth
or they are not disclosing what is necessary for us to make
those informed decisions.
Professor Fisch, can you explain what climate-related
physical and transition risks are and provide some examples?
Ms. Fisch. Climate-related physical and transition risks,
and I have several examples in my written remarks, include
things like the vulnerability of physical assets to what you
just said, to floods, to extreme weather events. Last week, in
Philadelphia, we had an earthquake, so everyone went around and
inspected the buildings to see if they were structurally sound.
That is a physical risk that a company might have to take into
account.
Transition risks include responding to whether you think
there are climate-related risks, whether you think there are
regulatory risks, whether your cost of power or the sources of
power that you are entitled to use are going to go up, whether
natural resources like water supply are going to be vulnerable,
right? Those are all risks that face any company.
Ms. Tlaib. So, we are talking about transparency?
Ms. Fisch. Yes.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. Professor Fisch, does the SEC rule require
companies to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions or install
solar panels, anything like that? They are not asking them do
that, right?
Ms. Fisch. Absolutely not, and in fact----
Ms. Tlaib. They are talking about just disclosing first,
right?
Ms. Fisch. Yes.
Ms. Tlaib. Okay. I just want to make sure because folks are
saying that, and that is not truthful. I would like to turn now
to concerns about compliance costs. That is another one. This
is interesting. We are talking about companies that just have a
ton of money, and, again, we just bailed them out. The Wall
Street Journal has reported that roughly 3,000 U.S. companies
will have to make disclosures to comply with the European
Union's corporate sustainability reporting directive.
Professor Fisch, can you compare the EU's reporting
standards with those in the SEC's final rule? Which reporting
framework is more demanding?
Ms. Fisch. The European standards are way more demanding.
It is reporting not just on climate-related risks, but a
broader stretch of environmental risks. It is reporting on
other sustainability issues as well. The European reporting
system will require disclosure of Scope 1, 2, and 3 emissions.
It will require disclosure not limited by economic materiality
to investors. Europe applies a double----
Ms. Tlaib. I am not trying to simplify it. Wouldn't they
just have to copy what they are already providing to the EU?
Ms. Fisch. Well, a substantial number of U.S. companies are
going to be subject to that regime, yes.
Ms. Tlaib. Okay. Because they are complaining about
compliance costs, and I am like, don't you have to do the
reporting for the EU, which is much more demanding?
Ms. Fisch. Yes, that is true.
Ms. Tlaib. I don't know. Maybe I am oversimplifying this
for folks. California has adopted two laws requiring large
companies to disclose their climate-related financial risks in
greenhouse gas emissions.
Professor Fisch, how do reporting requirements of SB 253
and SB 261 compare with the SEC's climate rule?
Ms. Fisch. Again, those reporting requirements are more
demanding than the SEC standard.
Ms. Tlaib. That is all I want to know.
Ms. Fisch. A lot of companies that would be subject to the
SEC rule will have to comply with the California rule whether
or not the SEC adopted its current rule. And I should note that
California's rule extends to private companies as well, so what
we heard earlier about how these compliance costs are going to
drive companies into the private markets, that is not true for
Europe, and that is not true for California.
Ms. Tlaib. I know that Reuters reported that roughly 5,000
companies will have to comply with SB 253, while approximately
10,000 companies will be subject to SB 261. Another analyst
found that 73 percent of Fortune 1000 companies will be covered
by both laws. Is that correct?
Ms. Fisch. I believe that is right, yes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Meuser. The gentlelady yields back. The gentleman from
South Carolina, Mr. Norman, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norman. Thank you to the panelists for being here
today. Ms. Fisch, let me get back to what Congressman Steil
mentioned about what is material and what is not. In one of
the, I guess, footnotes in this 886-page rule are the words,
``severe weather events and other natural conditions.'' Is that
a material risk?
Ms. Fisch. I think the qualifier of, ``severe,'' is a
pretty clear indicator that the SEC intends to limit this to
material risks.
Mr. Norman. So, it is material?
Ms. Fisch. Yes.
Mr. Norman. Okay. If I, on my statement, put that these are
my insurance costs for hurricane risk, for flooding risk, and
let that line item go, would that satisfy the SEC?
Ms. Fisch. I am not sure I follow the question.
Mr. Norman. So, in trying to comply with this rule, would
the SEC take the statement to answer that particular footnote,
the cost to my company is the insurance that I buy that the
stockholders ultimately pay?
Ms. Fisch. I don't think the SEC's requirement is even that
demanding. I think what the SEC is saying is if you suffer a
hurricane or an earthquake and your building falls down, you
have to disclose that cost, companies engaged in a high degree
of planning, insurance, and so forth, and that is required by
the SEC rule.
Mr. Norman. I get all that, but it wouldn't take more than
one sentence, ``this is my insurance cost, this covers the risk
that you are talking about.'' Do we have to include forest
fires?
Ms. Fisch. I think the point of severe weather or other
natural conditions is so that companies wouldn't have to parse
that line drawing, is a forest fire a weather event or is it
some other severe condition. I don't know if that is true for
earthquakes. I don't know if that is true for tornadoes and so
forth. I guess the SEC is just trying to simplify that decision
for companies.
Mr. Norman. They haven't simplified it. That is why I said,
``nebulous.'' How do you define that? How do you answer what
the SEC wants? I will just answer it in my company. This is my
cost, insurance costs, yes or no, and I think that would make
sense. Are you tenured?
Ms. Fisch. Yes.
Mr. Norman. Okay. Mr. Wright, are you tenured?
Mr. White. I am not.
Mr. Wright. I am not.
Mr. White. Oh, go ahead.
Mr. Wright. Oh.
Mr. Norman. No. Mr. Wright.
Mr. White. I'm sorry.
Mr. Wright. I am not.
Mr. Norman. What is the difference in your line of work and
in Dr. Fisch's?
Mr. Wright. It is just a different world. I am in the
commercial space, she is in the academic space, and----
Mr. Norman. In the academic space, your tenure relies on
performance. For Liberty Energy, you are on a different set of
scales and you look at it differently. In your opinion, if I
ask you to have to answer the severity of weather events and
trying to describe it, what would you put?
Mr. Wright. What would I prefer? It would have been nice if
they would spell out what other physical events are.
Mr. Norman. It is nebulous, and I don't know how you answer
that. We major in the minor up here, and it is political
science up here with my good friends on the left. The diatribe
that you heard about from Mr. Horsford, we actually agree. I am
in the housing business. Prices are way up. Now, his answer is
higher taxes and more regulations. My answer is maybe start
drilling and maybe buying oil and gas from America instead of
foreign countries that don't like us, maybe cut regulations,
maybe cut the cost of the illegal immigration that is coming in
all over this country, and the $4,000 we are giving each one of
them, and a driver's license and a phone. Maybe, that would cut
the cost instead of higher taxes and what is happening to this
country.
I admire your courage when you did not raise your hand
about, do you believe in climate change? That is a totally
backward question, and I will let you further respond to that.
I know you were asked about that.
Mr. Wright. Yes. Just the expression implies faith. Climate
change isn't religion. I have written multiple books showing
the data about climate change. So to me, climate change is a
physical phenomenon we should seek to understand with the real
data, not the sensationalized data, and when we show data, we
show datasets from the start to the end. We don't cherry-pick.
We don't look at it. It is a real thing. It is a global
phenomenon, but a sober understanding of it is just critical.
And emissions are the same thing, too. What is the best way to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions? Ultimately, it is just going
to be technology. The biggest driver of U.S.-reduced greenhouse
gas emissions has been natural gas displacing coal.
Mr. Norman. Are we able to control hurricanes and
earthquakes?
Mr. Wright. No.
Mr. Norman. So, we can't control that, and to say
otherwise, the facts don't bear that out. Thank you so much.
Mr. Wright. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Wright, I like what you just said at the end:
Technology is the answer here. I think we are all
conservationists. Heck, I would characterize myself as an
environmentalist at this point. That is kind of your business,
clean energy, right? You don't come in with all your equipment
and your technology and all your R&D investment. It is good
business for you. It is good business for those with whom you
are doing business. It is good business for my former company.
Now, the light is shut off when you come in, and employees like
it.
It is a social trend maybe to my colleagues here in the
House, and certainly the regulators. The private sector is
minimizing carbon emissions far more without the regulatory
burdens--far more than the regulators or this Congress would
do. I will ask you, since that is your business, how much of
your R&D expense goes into minimizing carbon emissions?
Mr. Wright. I would say quite a bit. We have over 2 million
horsepower of equipment. To get oil and gas from underground,
it takes energy to push it down, so typically, large industrial
machinery is powered by diesel. That is the dominant industrial
fuel around the world, and we are moving that to a new
generation of equipment that burns natural gas.
Mr. Meuser. Yes.
Mr. Wright. And not just natural gas, but at the highest
thermal efficiency possible, to use the----
Mr. Meuser. Has the SEC, the regulators come to you and
said, hey, do you have any ideas on some of the best rules that
we should be implementing here?
Mr. Wright. No.
Mr. Meuser. And do you think the same regulators that want
to attack you and attack our domestic energy industry--let's
just face it, they literally choose Venezuela over my home
State of Pennsylvania for natural gas. Do you think some of
them use electricity, oil, or gasoline on occasion?
Mr. Wright. Quite likely.
Mr. Meuser. Yes, probably. Here and there, I am sure, and
far less than us, of course. The rule is the rule, but we are
okay to have complaints about it or issues about it, or you
always want to make a plan better. But it is targeted to who I
hear back from in the real world, who I talk to in industry
about dealing with complying with this plethora of rules coming
out of the SEC. The real problems are in the energy industry,
which you are used to, because you are just under regular
assault. Being a USA flagship energy industry makes you a
terrible person, and the farmers are the ones being concerned
here. And by the way, where is inflation hitting most? Energy
and groceries.
So, isn't this wonderful that we are dealing with something
here that is going to inflate the inflationary situation that
my constituents deal with, particularly low-income constituents
who can't even afford the groceries and the gasoline? I am
going to stick with you for a moment, Mr. Wright. How damaging,
and is there a better way we could go about some of this
compliance, and minimizing emissions, and truly trying to work
together to gain as much clean energy in a best transition
manner sooner rather than later other than these rules?
Mr. Wright. Yes, absolutely. I think there is a passion in
the country--we have seen some of that today--and around the
world. I say the world needs more energy, better energy, and
the U.S. has certainly been a leader in that. Our industry is a
leader of that. It is mostly rural people who grew up on the
land. We want to shrink our footprint on the land. We want to
make the air cleaner. We want to use less energy to produce
energy and produce cheaper energy.
Mr. Meuser. Okay.
Mr. Wright. The thing I celebrate about the shale
revolution the most is it lowered the cost of oil, natural gas,
and natural gas liquids, and that makes people's lives better.
Marketplaces drive improvement, lower costs, increased----
Mr. Meuser. Okay. Do you think the SEC has overstepped its
authority here with this regulation?
Mr. Wright. I absolutely believe so.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. We will move on to former SEC Chairman
Roisman. What do you think? What would you have done here?
Mr. Roisman. They didn't ask me, but if you are asking me
now, I think that the rules in place make sense. It is a
materiality standard. If you had concerns that it wasn't
enough, you can update the 2010 guidance, and that would have
been a very simple thing and probably a lot less controversial.
Mr. Meuser. And would have been more acceptable to
industries because God forbid this Administration do anything
that industry and our economy actually appreciates as opposed
to adding regulation and burdens. But do you think it will be
more acceptable to industry?
Mr. Roisman. I do.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. My time has expired. The gentleman from
New York, Mr. Garbarino, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
all of the witnesses for being here today. In a challenging
global economy, the strength of our capital markets is vital to
long-term economic growth. However, rising costs and increased
regulatory burdens prevent some businesses from entering our
public markets. The SEC's newly-finalized climate rule would
just pile on to the rising costs associated with a company
going and remaining public. The SEC estimates that the rule
will increase the typical cost of being a public company by 21
percent. This doesn't include the indirect costs associated
with the rules such as loss management time, board distraction,
and changes in company operations.
Professor White, would you explain what impact such a
sudden, significant increase in compliance costs will have on
public companies?
Mr. White. Yes. For the companies that are already public,
if they spend more time meeting compliance rather than focusing
on the growth of their business, that can destroy value for
their investors. For companies that are thinking about going
public, I would expect it will limit those companies from doing
so, which is going to trickle down and hurt investors because
they have fewer opportunities to diversify their portfolio.
They have fewer investments that they can make, which can
damage their returns. It also harms market liquidity. So, it
can actually hurt all investors.
Mr. Garbarino. That actually was my next question, what was
it going to do to private companies thinking about going
public. It would probably keep most of them going public, yes.
So, what impact will these costs both for private and public
companies have on American competitiveness? Would you expect
companies to begin to increase their activities in
jurisdictions where similar costs are not required?
Mr. White. Yes. You think about going public and where to
operate both in the U.S. and globally. Now, we compete against
companies all over the world, so if a jurisdiction offers you
better terms in terms of being public, lower costs, but you
still get access to investor capital and liquid markets, then
you would migrate to those jurisdictions, which could end up
having both tax revenue leave the United States as well as
human capital and really high-skilled technologies.
Mr. Garbarino. So at a time when we are trying to bring
manufacturing, all sorts of jobs back into the country, a lot
of investment has gone into that. This rule created by the SEC,
not Congress, outside of the SEC's jurisdiction, could end up
causing us to lose jobs and capital to other places across the
world?
Mr. White. Yes, that is the incentive.
Mr. Garbarino. Yes. Staying on the subject of increased
costs, Mr. Wright, you mentioned in your testimony how Liberty
is subject to the climate rule and faces compliance costs to
meet the rule's reporting timelines. You go on to mention how
the rule will make energy production more expensive by driving
up compliance costs and making conditions more difficult for
investment. Would you summarize what new costs your company
must incur to successfully comply with the rule, and
specifically, how these costs will be more problematic for
smaller public companies than larger public companies?
Mr. Wright. Yes. And, of course, we don't know the number
today, but we look at it as similar to Sarbanes-Oxley. We
probably spend somewhere between a half million and a million
dollars in third-party costs to comply with Sarbanes-Oxley.
Mr. Garbarino. What was that number?
Mr. Wright. Somewhere between a half-million and a million
dollars.
Mr. Garbarino. A million dollars.
Mr. Wright. And our expectation was this would be similar.
My fear is it would be worse because we are counting something
that is ultimately not precisely countable, so where do we draw
that line of a good enough guesstimate? One of my bigger
problems is just the uncertainty around the ability to even
deliver these numbers, where we drive greenhouse gas emissions
by innovations, by equipment. We talk about this stuff all the
time. Our big-picture progress in greenhouse gas emissions is
pretty well-known to investors, and employees in our company.
This distracts from that effort, and we have to count something
that is not perfectly quantifiable. That is unsettling to me.
Mr. Garbarino. I actually was at the U.N. Conference of the
Parties (COP) this year, and oil and gas companies spent a lot
of time there talking about what they have already done to
lower greenhouse emissions. So, us doing something in that
regulatory environment or putting another regulatory burden on
these companies that would actually take away from that, I
think is just a terrible idea and actually is counteractive to
what the SEC is trying to do here but doesn't have the
authority to do it. We have seen plenty of leadership from U.S.
companies, especially gas and oil companies to do right by
greenhouse gas emissions.
I am running out of time, so I want to thank you for all
for your answers, and I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. [presiding]. I am now going to recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Among the specific requirements in the rule, the required
disclosures for greenhouse gas emissions data stand out as
especially burdensome. These reporting requirements do not
track with what is currently tracked by companies and when that
information can be reliably reported. The exemption for smaller
reporting companies (SRCs) is far too narrow, and this rule
will impact many smaller- and medium-sized manufacturers, which
make up the substantial share of businesses, certainly in my
Fifth District. And as you know, even with a limited safe
harbor in place, the SEC acknowledges that the climate rule
will expose companies to increased litigation risk. I am
concerned that the risk will prevent companies from going or
remaining public.
Mr. Stebbins, would you explain why the climate rule's
limited safe harbor is not enough to protect companies against
increased litigation risks?
Mr. Stebbins. Thank you. The safe harbor only covers
certain select disclosures, and it doesn't cover historical
facts, and those disclosures are primarily going to be
comprised of historical facts. And a leading law firm recently
wrote a memo about the adopting release, and they concluded, or
they advised, that you should not give too much credence to
that safe harbor because of the fact that, because it is
typically going to be used by historical facts that is going to
be your disclosure. So they advised, don't give it too much
credence, and I agree with that advice. I think that is sound.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. Proponents of the final rule
will often argue that climate-related disclosures are necessary
in response to the demands of investors. However, I am
concerned that the SEC has finalized the rule not to the
benefit of investors, but instead to placate activists who
consider climate-related objectives important. Rather than
focusing on the financial interests of the shareholders, this
idea of stakeholder capitalism that some companies have
embraced comes off as more of a public relations stunt to evade
the actual accountability. Shareholder rights are well-defined,
but if a company has an obligation to a nebulous group of
stakeholders, it is ultimately not accountable to anyone.
Mr. Roisman, would you explain why these activists may be
better understood as stakeholders and not as investors?
Mr. Roisman. When people talk about stakeholders, as you
mentioned, it is not just stockholders. It can be your
customers. It can be your employees. It can be the community.
It can be the government. It is not just the people who own
your company. And one of the concerns that some of the
dissenting Commissioners had about this was that these rules
may be crafted more to satisfy stakeholders than the Main
Street investor than, historically, the SEC thought.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. Chairman Gensler often kind of
hides behind this argument that many rulemakings are authorized
by Congress, and has said that as he has testified in front of
Congress, believe it or not. However, a study that analyzed the
SEC's rulemaking agenda under his tenure found that 39 rule
proposals, or approximately 80 percent, were not required by
congressional statute. Many of the proposals overlap and could
have unintended consequences that risk undermining our capital
markets. Probably a good example is the proposals to change
beneficial ownership and securities-based swaps and their
disclosures and how that may impair liquidity. This could lead
to harmful activities, such as front-running or diminished
corporate governance checks and balances, I guess you could
say.
Mr. Stebbins, can you discuss the authority the SEC is
relying on for the climate rule and your thoughts on whether
they even have this authority in the first place?
Mr. Stebbins. They are relying on their general investor
protection authority. There is no specific authority for this
rule. They clearly have the authority to pass laws related to
the environment because they have them already based on the
investor protection authorization you could regulate
environmental risks. We still make that disclosure already. It
is already required. So all material environmental risks are
already required to be disclosed. The question is, does that
authority let you do this law? I don't think it is going to be
held up. I think the Supreme Court or the Eighth Circuit is
likely to find it to be a violation of the major questions
doctrine, but that is for the Court to decide, not for me.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. My time has expired. We are now
going to move on to the gentlewoman from California, Mrs. Kim.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank our
witnesses for being with us today for long hours.
I want to talk about my concern that regulations proposed
by SEC Chair Gensler will increase compliance costs and
disincentivize private companies from going public. According
to a recent CNN article, there were 7,300 publicly-traded
companies in the United States in 1996, and today, there are
4,300. That is a significant decrease. I am troubled by the
SEC's own estimates that this rule we are discussing today will
increase the costs of being a public company by 21 percent.
Mr. Roisman, in your testimony you discussed the
complexities of considering foreign and State regulatory
regimes on top of the SEC's proposal. Unfortunately, my home
State of California is the only State mandating disclosure of
Scope 3 emissions. So, can you elaborate on the difficulties
and the costs that public companies will have to bear to comply
with different rules from multiple jurisdictions?
Mr. Roisman. Sure. I think the SEC makes it clear that,
undoubtably, costs will rise as a result of this. Even if
companies are tracking this information right now, it is very
different to track and collect it to be put into an SEC filing
which is subject to higher litigation or, more likely,
litigation. In terms of Scope 3 or Scope 2 even, there are,
essentially, provisions within the rule that say you need to
take into account if you are subject to material sort of
regulatory risk because you are disclosing information due to a
California law or European law, and you are going to have to
take that into account in making a materiality assessment.
I think some of the concerns people are saying, and I think
Mr. Wright did a very good job of explaining this, is that some
of these numbers are just not easy to come up with. I am not in
the industry, I am just a lawyer, but the level of sort of
compliance and outside expertise that are going to be needed in
order for me to advise clients that what they are doing is
sufficient for being able to put the stuff into their SEC
filings is high. And even people who are doing it right now, I
am not sure they are ready for that.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. Mr. Roisman, and Mr. Stebbins, I want
to give you both an opportunity to respond to a few arguments
that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have made
throughout the hearing. Specifically, we have been hearing that
the SEC's rule is somehow weak or preferred because the
California and European requirements extend to Scope 3
emissions and apply to private companies.
First, can you remind us if California should set Federal
securities policy? And second, could you explain what the
difference is from a litigation risk perspective between
complying with European disclosure requirements versus
including climate-related information in SEC filings? Either
one of you.
Mr. Roisman. I will start. I think the role of the SEC or
Congress is to set both Federal laws and Federal rules. To your
question about, is there a difference between complying with
State and European regulators, there is absolutely a
difference, and especially with Europe. What people often
forget is there is not the litigation risk for companies in
Europe that there is in the United States for putting things in
their filings. So, I do think companies need to stand behind
what they say, but there is a difference between putting
something in a voluntary report than it is into your SEC
filings.
Mrs. Kim. Okay. Do you want to add to that, Mr. Stebbins,
or should we move on?
Mr. Stebbins. I think we should move on.
Mrs. Kim. Okay. Thank you. I want to talk about my
legislation, the REG Act. Considering that the SEC, under
Chairman Gensler, is failing to assess the aggregate cost of
regulations in a proper way, I introduced H.R. 7030, the REG
Act, to require the SEC to consider the cumulative effects of
every rulemaking.
I want to ask this question to Professor White. The SEC's
cost-benefit analysis notably fails to account for the ways in
which rules interconnect. It also fails to assess the aggregate
impacts of each new rule with other rules with which companies
are required to comply. So, would you explain why it is
concerning that the SEC only considers the cost of the climate
rule in isolation?
Mr. White. Yes. Thank you for the question. I think it is
important to realize that none of these regulations or rules
operate in a vacuum. Companies have to make many disclosures to
their stakeholders and stockholders through their Form 10-Ks.
And when you analyze a rule in isolation, you might be able to
assess that through a cost-benefit analysis, which I wrote at
the SEC when I was an economist. And when you put all those
together, if you are looking at 2024, Chair Gensler said there
were many more disclosure rules coming down the line, human
capital----
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Mr. White. Yes.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentlewoman yields back. We will now
recognize the gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Flood, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Here we are yet again
dealing with Chair Gensler's, ``fountain of bad ideas.'' That
is not my term. I heard that from one of our most respected
senior members on this committee. But let's take a look at the
SEC's climate rule's overall purpose. Why did it even come into
being in the first place? Chair Gensler argues that the rule
simply measures a risk that was already in the market. In his
statement following the issuance of the final rule, he said
that this rule was simply an extension of the SEC's commitment
to, ``complete and truthful disclosure,'' regardless of the
type of risk.
However, when you take a step back and you look at the
lead-up to the SEC's climate rule, it is apparent that this
rule is not about accurately capturing one more material risk
for public companies. Proponents of the rule express as much
very openly. They say that the rule will help support, ``the
goal of net zeros greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2050 or
sooner,'' or to, ``drive aggressive reductions,'' in greenhouse
gas emissions.'' You can't have it both ways.
You will notice that those particular goals aren't about
disclosure for investors. They are not about accurately
capturing risk associated with extreme weather events or
responding to investor demand. Instead, they say the quiet part
out loud. This rule is about pursuing climate goals, not well-
tailored disclosures, period. This makes sense when viewed in
the larger political context. President Biden has repeatedly
vowed to use any power he has to combat climate change wherever
possible, and this rulemaking is yet another step in that
direction.
Mr. Wright, do you believe the SEC's climate rule is
fundamentally about promising material disclosure or reducing
emissions?
Mr. Wright. No, I don't believe it is about either. I don't
think it is about material disclosure, again, because we can't
count those numbers. The basic facts of our emissions, their
investors can assess that many other ways, but I think the
impact of it, of course, will be increased greenhouse gas
emissions by moving production from here to there. So, I don't
think it could be truly designed to reduce emissions either.
Mr. Flood. Point well taken. Following up on that,
something in your testimony that I have already found
interesting today is, if you take for granted that the SEC
views climate as simply a risk like any other, then why does
this rule include so many detailed reporting requirements that
other, clearly material risks do not?
Mr. Wright. I don't know. It is hard to explain the nature
of this rule, and if it was just material--look, I have to
disclose anything that is a material risk to my business, that
is what I do. To mention extreme weather, that is a real risk.
That has been a risk forever, and it is not on an upward trend.
So, I don't know the new information there.
And the thing that maybe concerns me the most is there is
materiality in there, but it is sort of a fake for the oil and
gas industry, because if you face transition risk, which means
if the government makes it harder for our customers to produce
oil and gas in the United States, that is a threat to our
industry. That is not a climate risk.
Mr. Flood. That is material then, yes.
Mr. Wright. That is a policy risk, that is material, but I
don't know how to discuss or project a risk. I don't know what
future rules are going to do.
Mr. Flood. SEC Commissioner Peirce mentioned that no other
type of risk requires, ``prescriptive forward-looking
disclosure of the risks impact on a company's business
strategy.'' SEC Commissioner Uyeda pointed out the specific
requirements related to disclosing details around severe
weather losses and beyond what a company would be required to
do for any other type of risk. All that is to say that the
SEC's climate rule does not merely identify an existing risk in
the marketplace. It requires disclosures that elevate climate
and emissions information above other requirements. If I were a
public company, the number-one material risk if we are going to
put everything under the sun would be the fact that this
country is $34 trillion dollars in debt. That is material. That
is where the SEC Chair should start.
Following up, Mr. Wright, what does this newfound focus on
climate from the SEC mean for your company and others in the
energy business?
Mr. Wright. Increased complexity, increased cost, and
increased risk, and, therefore, fewer new companies, less new
capital on the margin, less new activity, and less new
production in the country.
Mr. Flood. Well said. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
the gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Nunn, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for joining us here today.
Under SEC Chairman Gensler's leadership, in Iowa, my home
State, small and mid-sized businesses are being crushed by both
ill-thought-out rules and increased compliance costs. This pro-
Green New Deal and anti-job-making rule for the SEC is just the
latest offense in a long line of decisions by unelected D.C.
bureaucrats forcing businesses to comply with unreasonable, and
unnecessary, in my opinion, bureaucratic red tape.
I would like to be able to see all the witnesses there and
just remind them that this 5,000 pages in front of me is just
the start of what the SEC has done to hometown businesses and
farmers in places like Iowa. It represents all the new
financial rules forced on Iowa companies, and this is just in
the last year alone, and with this new rule, we are adding 886
additional pages to the stack. This does not include the
existing rules or regulations. By anyone's measure, this is
unconscionable. This is far more than what anyone would expect
a small town or hometown business to do, and, quite simply, it
is outrageous. I am perplexed how this Administration thinks
that businesses can thrive or even survive in this slosh and
deluge of red tape and the environment.
With that, Professor White, I would like to begin on the
rulemaking and the ripple-on effects of this for capital
formation. Conservative estimates suggest that an increase in
compliance costs from this rule that we are discussing today
alone will result in a 21-percent increase in how businesses
back home attempt to function. Do you think this will impact
their ability to stay open?
Mr. White. Yes.
Mr. Nunn. At the very least, will it prevent them from
going public?
Mr. White. For sure.
Mr. Nunn. Could you talk to us a little bit about how you
think this would impact a small or mid-sized company back in
Des Moines, which is going to be treated the same as a Wall
Street Titan?
Mr. White. Small and mid-sized companies that are not
exempt from the provisions in this rule would have an increase
in compliance costs. It is much more difficult for them to
amortize those costs over their assets, whereas a very large
company, even though this is a real cost, has more assets and
more ability to pass that on to customers.
Mr. Nunn. Absolutely. More compliance officers, a bigger
legal team, a bigger apparatus to do this. I am just from a
little farm State in Iowa, but what we grow well, we grow
agriculture and we grow wrestlers. And I can't imagine putting
160-pound high school wrestler in the same weight class as a
285-pound University of Iowa or Iowa State wrestler. The
regulations in this environment need to follow the same aspect
that we need to be able to treat different as different for a
good reason and allow each to thrive in their own in this case,
weight class or category to be successful.
Mr. Wright, as we all know, the SEC's mission is to
increase the ability for Main Street to have access to cash,
this keeps them going. Will this rule by Chairman Gensler help
with this goal to have increased access to capital?
Mr. Wright. No.
Mr. Nunn. In fact, I would suggest that this is actually
going to put America's markets at a disadvantage. Would you
agree?
Mr. Wright. I agree.
Mr. Nunn. Is there a solution that you would offer that
could move us in the right direction?
Mr. Wright. A financial risk regulator should not be
getting into climate policy and the complexities of greenhouse
gas emissions. I write materials every year trying to have a
more open, thoughtful dialogue about climate policy and energy
policy, and maybe we should have a little more of that.
Mr. Nunn. I fully agree with you, and, Mr. Chairman, this
is one of the reasons we will be writing a letter directly to
the SEC on this. We would love your analysis on this to really
shape this in the right place.
Mr. Stebbins, to switch gears, I am increasingly concerned
about the SEC's disregard for cost-benefit analysis and the
lack of flexibility in its rulemaking. This is evident in the
large number of companies that are suing the SEC now just to
get clarity, because they can't get through this and get any
consistency in what is coming out of the SEC. For example, the
SEC's stock buyback rule was recently vacated because the SEC
failed to complete a proper analysis and provide justification
for the rules. Do you see the climate rule facing a similar
legal challenge?
Mr. Stebbins. I see the climate rule being challenged on
three grounds: first, the major questions doctrine, which I
just discussed; second, the Administrative Procedure Act (APA),
whether there is, what you talked about in the share repurchase
case--in the Fifth Circuit, it was struck down under the APA by
not having an adequate cost-benefit analysis and not showing
that a real problem existed, so that will be a challenge. And
the third challenge will be the First Amendment. Those will be
the three challenges.
Mr. Nunn. I think it is important today that we should not
be in a situation where only the big guys get to sue and get
clarity. The impact is a trickle-down all the way down to every
farm and business in Iowa. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I thank
the committee. And I yield back my time.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. I will now
recognize the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. De La Cruz, for 5
minutes.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing, and thank you to the witnesses for being here to talk
about rules that just go above and beyond what not only the
companies have to deal with, but what the everyday investor has
to deal with. In fact, my colleague, Mr. Nunn, really made an
impact here when he showed us the amount of paperwork that a
company, a growing company is going to have to deal with when
they are looking at opportunities and growth. And let's just
talk about for their own companies, but what does that mean for
the everyday community member's economic impact, but let's just
talk about the investor.
I have my Series 6 and 63 licenses. I dealt with
investments. I understand giving the common everyday person
disclosures. Already, when we hand disclosures right now to
investors, we hand them a packet that feels overwhelming to
them, in fact, so much so that when I started in the 118th
Congress, we actually passed legislation right here in this
committee that would stop the paper version from coming to
people's households because it was so much paperwork, and we
made it into an electronic format so that it would go straight
to their email.
So, Mr. Roisman, are we really having a positive impact on
our investors where they feel informed, or will they feel
overwhelmed by not only receiving the disclosures that they
receive right now but the disclosures that they will receive in
addition because of this rule?
Mr. Roisman. Thank you for that question. I think there
will certainly be some investors who think this is important,
and there are going to be investors who don't find this
important. I think the concern you raised is one that, frankly,
Commissioner Peirce raised as well in her dissent, which is
entitled, ``green regs and spam,'' and she was concerned about
spamming investors with more and more information. And I think
that is sort of the line people always are concerned about is
you want to provide information that is decision-useful for
investors, but you don't want to overwhelm them. And I think
that is a constant balance that every company is trying to
meet.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you, and I think what you said is
very impactful, it is overwhelming to the average investor. So,
what may be important or informative to a small group, what
does the average investor feel when they receive it? And I
would say quite simply, being in the business and dealing with
the everyday investor, this is just simply overwhelming. But
when we talk about individuals' and investors' economic impact,
what about jobs? How will this ultimately affect job
opportunities for the everyday American when it comes to
companies having to deal with this climate rule? Would anybody
like to take that on the----
Mr. Roisman. I feel like this is probably Mr. White's.
Ms. De La Cruz. Mr. White? Yes.
Mr. White. Sure. I can jump in here. The rule is estimated
to raise costs by 20 percent, and there are many companies that
aren't operating at 20-percent margins. So, some of those
companies that have to take this cost and put it into their
business model are going to be able to hire less on the margin.
It might benefit jobs for accountants who work in this space.
But as it trickles down towards smaller companies and has an
impact on them going public or staying public, there is lots of
academic evidence showing that IPOs create jobs, so to the
extent that you disincentivize that, it would reduce
employment.
Ms. De La Cruz. As a small business owner myself, I
understand in that planning for the future, we look at changes,
whether it is growth or it is cost. And as a small business
owner myself, I will look at the cost of doing business in
increments of 2 to 5 percent that have a significant impact on
the everyday small business owner or corporation, 3 to 5
percent. So when you tell a business owner like myself that you
are estimating a public company will have a roughly 20-percent
change, this is an enormous change that the company has to
absorb, and will not only affect the way they do business, but
will affect their investors and their employees as well.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzgerald. I am sure that you can seek those answers.
I am next going to recognize the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
Ogles, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ogles. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Witnesses, thank you
for being here. We are coming to the end.
Mr. Chairman, if I may, I just want to point out that
Professor White is from the good State of Tennessee, Vanderbilt
University. I was actually on the Vanderbilt campus on Friday.
So, go 'Dores, and thank you for being here.
Mr. White. Thank you.
Mr. Ogles. But welcome again. Last month, the committee
traveled to my great State, where Representative Rose and I
hosted a field hearing on this very same topic, where we heard
then, just as we have heard today, about how the SEC's climate-
related disclosure rules play to the tune of the
Administration's obsession with their climate change religion.
And I think you spoke to that, Mr. Wright, that you don't
ascribe to this religion, nor do I. The rule is illegal and
unconstitutional.
By peppering investors with irrelevant information, as we
see by this stack of paper behind me, it will make them less
informed about what is important and will divert companies from
their core purpose of maximizing shareholder wealth and
creating products that increase everyone's standard of living.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to enter into the
record a letter by Advancing American Freedom, which is signed
by more than 60 conservative groups, encouraging Congress to
end the SEC's climate disclosure rule. The SEC's job is to
regulate securities, stocks and bonds, not to orchestrate a
destructive climate agenda behind the backs of Americans and
duly elected representatives----
Mr. Fitzgerald. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Ogles. And I would say, Mr. Chairman, what we have seen
with many of the agencies, including the SEC, is they are
creating laws by way of rule, and enough is enough. We have to
rein this in, and before us, we have a panel of experts who
have spoken to this.
Professor White, again, thank you for being here, go
'Dores. We have heard today about how the climate-related
disclosure rule will affect capital formation. Can you discuss
specifically both the long-term impact and the short-term
impact as it relates to capital?
Mr. White. Yes. In terms of the short-term impact and
capital formation, if it makes it more expensive for companies
to operate in terms of their compliance costs, then that is
going to increase their cost of capital potentially, it is
going to rely upon the tradeoff between the benefits and those
costs. As you look to more of a longer-term scenario, even
though the rule exempts some particular small companies,
eventually those small companies grow into medium-sized and
larger-sized companies that have to comply. So, I would expect
a negative capital formation impact both in the near and the
long term.
Mr. Ogles. Yes, sir. And really briefly, Mr. White, you
have a B.S. in finance, a Ph.D., and an M.B.A. in finance, and
you are a professor of finance, and a former Economist for the
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, so I think it is fair
to say you know numbers.
Mr. White. Yes.
Mr. Ogles. And you teach students?
Mr. White. I do.
Mr. Ogles. If you were teaching a course, and you assigned
a project, would the cost-benefit analysis done by the SEC meet
your standards?
Mr. White. I think that the SEC has likely underestimated
the costs. They are looking more at the direct cost of
compliance, and they are also relying upon estimates of
assessing some of these disclosures, some of which are
uncertain, inherently. So, I know I would think that it would
be below the standard for accurately assessing the impact.
Mr. Ogles. Yes, sir. And Mr. Chairman, votes have been
called, so I am about to yield back. But I just would like to
say that perhaps Gary Gensler should take one of your courses
before he does another cost-benefit analysis. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The gentleman yields back. I would like to
thank our witnesses for their testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:45 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

April 10, 2024

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
