- FOSTERING FINANCIAL INNOVATION: HOW AGENCIES CAN LEVERAGE TECHNOLOGY TO SHAPE THE FUTURE OF FINANCIAL SERVICES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FOSTERING FINANCIAL INNOVATION:
HOW AGENCIES CAN LEVERAGE
TECHNOLOGY TO SHAPE THE
FUTURE OF FINANCIAL SERVICES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL ASSETS,
FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY,
AND INCLUSION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

DECEMBER 5, 2023
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-60

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-099 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
SUBCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL ASSETS,
FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY, AND INCLUSION

FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts,
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                     Ranking Member
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio, Vice          BILL FOSTER, Illinois
Chairman                         JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 RITCHIE TORRES, New York
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               BRAD SHERMAN, California
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AL GREEN, Texas
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
December 5, 2023.............................................     1
Appendix:
December 5, 2023.............................................    37

WITNESSES
Tuesday, December 5, 2023

Epstein, Ann, Assistant Directer, Office of Competition and
Innovation, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB)........    11
Gibson, Michael S., Director, Supervision and Regulation, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed)...............     9
Mulholland, Mark, Deputy Chief Information Officer for
Management, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).......    13
Murphy, Donna, Deputy Comptroller, Compliance Risk Policy, and
Acting Deputy Comptroller, Office of Financial Technology,
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)................     4
Szczepanik, Valerie A., Director, Office of the Strategic Hub for
Innovation and Financial Technology (FinHub), U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC)..................................     8
Vice, Charles A., Director, Financial Technology and Access,
National Credit Union Administration (NCUA)....................     6

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Epstein, Ann.................................................    38
Gibson, Michael S............................................    43
Mulholland, Mark.............................................    49
Murphy, Donna................................................    61
Szczepanik, Valerie A........................................    70
Vice, Charles A..............................................    74

ADDITIONAL MATERIAL SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Epstein, Ann:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................    78
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Timmons.....................................    78
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................    79
Gibson, Michael S.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................    83
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Foster......................................    81
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................    86
Mulholland, Mark:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................    88
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Davidson....................................    93
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................    92
Murphy, Donna:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................    95
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................    96
Szczepanik, Valerie A.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................    97
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Timmons.....................................   100
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   101
Vice, Charles A.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................   103
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   105

FOSTERING FINANCIAL INNOVATION:
HOW AGENCIES CAN LEVERAGE
TECHNOLOGY TO SHAPE THE
FUTURE OF FINANCIAL SERVICES

----------

Tuesday, December 5, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Digital Assets,
Financial Technology,
and Inclusion,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. French Hill
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Hill, Lucas, Emmer,
Davidson, Rose, Steil, Timmons, Flood; Lynch, Foster, Sherman,
Casten, and Nickel.
Ex officio present: Representatives McHenry and Waters.
Also present: Representative Himes.
Chairman Hill. Good morning. The Subcommittee on Digital
Assets, Financial Technology, and Inclusion will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today,
and I now recognize myself for 4 minutes for an opening
statement.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Fostering Financial
Innovation: How Agencies Can Leverage Technology to Shape the
Future of Financial Services.'' The story of America is about
technological innovation and the application of the American
work ethic and capital. Over our 250-year history, steam, rail,
telephone, air, radio, television, fission, IT, the chip,
vaccines--all of these things are possible because we allow
innovation. We facilitate it in our society. Today, new and
emerging technologies like digital assets, distributed ledgers,
quantum computing, and greater use of artificial intelligence
(AI) are dominating the discussion.
We have to remind ourselves that innovation has always been
at the heart, too, of, financial services. In fact, financial
technology, or fintech as we call it, is hardly new. With the
advent of the credit card in 1950, the first ATM in 1967, the
first electronic securities exchange in 1971, computer-based
access to bank accounts in the 1980s, and peer-to-peer (P2P)
payments in the 1990s, innovation has always been transforming
the relationship between consumers, businesses, and their
financial services providers and their money.
But today, we want to talk about how government agencies,
while they are not frequently at the forefront of innovation,
they definitely can stop innovation dead in its tracks. We
recall President Reagan's very fond conversation about what he
thinks government thinks of the economy, ``If it moves, tax it.
If it keeps moving, regulate it. And if it stops moving,
subsidize it.'' And that is the challenge we always have in
here, in Congress, is making sure that we facilitate
innovation, and that we work with our regulators to do that.
Over the years, Congress has added ombudsmen in agencies
just to represent the people who are regulated, to make sure
they get a fair shake. We have added cost-benefit analysis
through the Administrative Procedure Act, to make sure that the
rules that are pronounced actually make sense and have some
common sense associated with it. And, of course, we apply our
oversight capability, which we are doing today.
It was only a few years ago that some of your agencies
began establishing specific offices dedicated to facilitating
responsible innovation, and many of you lead those offices at
your respective agencies. This hearing is the first time that
the committee has called upon each of you to testify about your
agency's work related to innovation. And regrettably, when I
look at the Government Accountability Office's (GAO's) recent
report, maybe some of that progress is lacking, so we will have
a good discussion about that today.
Let me recap some of the actions taken by President Biden's
regulators. The Federal Reserve announced a Novel Activities
Supervision Program in August for enhanced supervision on new
activities related to fintech and digital assets. The National
Credit Union Administration (NCUA) established its Office of
Financial Technology and Access in January of this year. While
the Office is engaging with stakeholders and hosting public
presentations, it has yet to establish a workforce planning
process to ensure the staff have the knowledge and skills
necessary to carry out its mission over fintech.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau's (CFPB's) Office
of Innovation was founded in 2018, to encourage consumer-
friendly innovation, but was replaced in 2022 by the Office of
Competition and Innovation, and two of the most innovation-
forward policies that had been previously established were
discontinued.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) was the
earliest regulator to establish an Innovation Office back in
2016, but that office was dissolved into the Office of
Financial Technology in March, and the individual who
reportedly lied about his extensive industry experience and
education was placed at the helm. So maybe, we should have some
oversight of that too.
I look forward to the discussion today, and I now yield to
the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr. Lynch, for 5
minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing to explore how financial regulators play an
important role in fostering and regulating innovation in the
financial services space. I would like to thank our witnesses
for their willingness to share their agencies' expertise and
their critical work with this committee.
Under the Trump Administration, several regulators
established Offices of Innovation to purportedly encourage
innovation and prevent unnecessary regulatory barriers.
However, in practice, it became evident that some of these
offices were simply a vehicle for lowering regulatory
standards. Agencies issued rules that received significant
pushback from consumer advocates and were the subject of
litigation initiated by State regulators.
For example, the CFPB issued a handful of no-action letters
that were criticized for protecting individual companies from
enforcement action when they broke the law, leading to the risk
of consumer harm. Additionally, the OCC attempted to issue
fintech charters, which would have allowed nonbank fintech
companies to operate like a bank without being subject to
comprehensive depositor oversight.
If we truly value innovation, we should want regulators to
police bad actors who are evading laws so that innovative
companies, playing by the rules, can have a level playing field
to be profitable while also working in the interest of
consumers. I am encouraged that under the current
Administration, regulators have transitioned these Offices of
Innovation to focus greater attention on market monitoring,
competition, and integrating innovation into existing
regulatory functions.
The CFPB has focused on improving competition in data
protection through its data portability rulemaking. The SEC's
Strategic Hub for Innovation and Financial Technology (FinHub)
engages in understanding distributed ledger technology and
artificial intelligence.
I also applaud the ways regulators have explored and
cautioned against the risks of digital assets. In January, the
Fed, the FDIC, and the OCC issued a joint statement that
cautioned banks against involvement in crypto assets, citing
heightened liquidity, volatility, and fraud risks. The collapse
of FTX and of Silvergate Bank last year, a prominent banking
partner for crypto companies illustrates the need for this type
of guidance.
Additionally, both the OCC and the FDIC have used their
innovation functions to increase scrutiny over bank-fintech
partnerships and the ways that can lead to regulatory evasion.
In October, the Federal Reserve issued an enforcement action
against Metropolitan Commercial Bank for failing to properly
oversee its fintech partner, MovoCash. An investigation found
that as early as January 2020, fraud actors opened fraudulent
MovoCash accounts to improperly route direct deposit and
government benefits. More than $300 million of pandemic
unemployment benefits were misdirected to fraud actors.
Moreover, innovation does not need to come solely from the
private sector, and we should be encouraging government
agencies to innovate to improve financial access and
opportunity. With 130 countries, representing 98 percent of the
global GDP, exploring a government-issued central bank digital
currency (CBDC), the U.S. should not risk falling behind. I
find it ironic that many of my colleagues on this subcommittee
want regulators to encourage innovation, and yet are pushing
legislation that shuts down a CBDC before agencies have
adequately researched and explored it.
There are countless other services that government can
provide, in coordination with the private sector, to expand
financial inclusion, and we should be encouraging this type of
exploration.
I am eager to learn more about the ways agencies are
encouraging innovation in the financial sector, and I yield
back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the Chair of the full Financial Services Committee,
Mr. McHenry of North Carolina, for 1 minute.
Chairman McHenry. I want to thank you, Mr. Hill, and to
each of you, I want to thank you for the task and the important
job you have undertaken. Fostering innovation at institutions
and firms under your supervision is vital and important. Since
my legislation to modernize and streamline how innovators
interact with regulators, many agencies have established
offices focused on innovation. That is welcomed and positive.
However, I am increasingly concerned that those offices,
your offices, are not operating as intended. It is critical
that firms, financial institutions of all sizes, and
entrepreneurs can go to market with innovative products sooner,
while maintaining important consumer protections. These offices
should not be used to smother innovation and technology or
simply ignore it.
It is also important that we have the highest-quality folks
in charge of those offices. It is clear the Administration
cannot continue to only regulate by enforcement, and I
encourage each of you to stay focused on your mission and to
work to provide regulatory certainty for the industry,
regulators, and consumers.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Hill. I thank the chairman.
Today, we welcome the testimony of Ms. Donna Murphy, the
Acting Deputy Comptroller for the Office of Financial
Technology, and the Deputy Comptroller for Compliance Risk
Policy at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; Mr.
Charles Vice, the Director of Financial Technology and Access
at the National Credit Union Administration; Ms. Valerie
Szczepanik, the Director of the SEC's Strategic Hub for
Innovation and Financial Technology; Dr. Michael Gibson, the
Director of the Federal Reserve Board's Division of Supervision
and Regulation at the Board of Governors here at the Federal
Reserve System; Ms. Ann Epstein, the Assistant Director of the
Office of Competition and Innovation at the CFPB; and Mr. Mark
Mulholland, the Deputy Chief Information Officer for Management
at the FDIC.
We thank each of you for taking the time to be with us
today. Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony, and without objection,
each of your written statements will be made a part of the
record.
Ms. Murphy, you are recognized for 5 minutes to give your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF DONNA MURPHY, DEPUTY COMPTROLLER, COMPLIANCE RISK
POLICY, AND ACTING DEPUTY COMPTROLLER, OFFICE OF FINANCIAL
TECHNOLOGY, OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY (OCC)

Ms. Murphy. Thank you, Chairman Hill, Ranking Member Lynch,
Chairman McHenry, and members of the subcommittee. I am pleased
to appear today to discuss the activities and initiatives of
the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency's Office of
Financial Technology.
I am currently serving as the Acting Deputy Comptroller for
the Office of Financial Technology, in addition to my permanent
position as Deputy Comptroller for Compliance Risk Policy. In
my acting capacity, I oversee the agency's work relating to the
analysis and evaluation of financial technology innovations,
trends, emerging risks, and implications for OCC-supervised
banks. My team of financial technology policy specialists
supports the development of policy guidance, outreach,
training, and supervision resources for fintech-related
business models, platforms, and applications.
Over the years, the OCC has adapted its supervisory
approach to address the many technological innovations by OCC-
supervised banks and to support responsible innovation in the
banking industry. In 2016, the OCC became the first Federal
banking agency to establish a dedicated Office of Innovation,
in order to provide a framework for activities related to
financial technology innovation.
For the last 6 years, the Office of Innovation has also
conducted outreach, such as designated office hours, in which
stakeholders, including technology firms, banks, trade
associations, academics, and consumer groups, interact with the
agency. Information gained from this outreach facilitates our
supervisory approaches to supporting banks and responsibly
innovating through the use of advanced technologies.
In October 2022, the OCC announced that it would build upon
this work by creating the Office of Financial Technology, which
incorporates the former Office of Innovation. The new office is
focused on supporting responsible innovation and ensuring high-
quality guidance and supervision for banks' financial
technology implementation.
The OCC's current financial technology focus includes
matters involving bank-fintech partnerships, and artificial
intelligence, digital assets and tokenization, as well as other
new and changing technologies and business models that affect
OCC-supervised banks. Banks' relationships with third parties,
including fintech companies, continue to expand. The use of
third parties has significant potential benefits, but strong
third-party risk management is essential to avoid harm to
consumers or weakening of bank safety and soundness.
Earlier this year, the OCC, the FDIC, and the Federal
Reserve published interagency guidance on third-party
relationships in risk management. This document reminds banks
of their responsibility to operate in a safe and sound manner,
in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, regardless
of whether their activities are performed in-house or
outsourced.
The OCC also recognizes the considerable and growing
interest by the banking industry in a wide range of uses for
artificial intelligence. When used appropriately, AI
applications such as chatbots, enhanced credit screening, and
fraud detection systems have the potential to strengthen safety
and soundness, improve banks' ability to address financial
crime, and increase access to the banking sector for consumers.
Banks also are exploring newly-developed kinds of AI such as
generative AI, which can be used to generate text, images, or
other outputs from a given prompt. OCC-supervised institutions
are approaching generative AI with caution, and its use is not
widespread in the Federal banking system.
For all uses of AI in the banking sector, the OCC remains
focused on the potential risks of adverse outcomes if bank use
of AI is not properly managed and controlled. We continue to
perform robust, risk-based supervision, monitor the industry,
and conduct research to ensure that the agency keeps pace with
financial sector changes.
In addition, the OCC recognizes the potential of other
technologies, including distributed ledger technology, and we
maintain a careful and cautious approach to their use while
industry standards develop and legal and ethical questions are
addressed.
Overall, however, the financial industry's attention in the
digital asset space appears to be shifting to the tokenization
of assets and liabilities. Tokenization is driven by solving
real-world settlement problems and shows promising potential.
In February, the OCC will host a symposium on tokenization to
explore its legal foundations, use cases, and risk management
and control considerations.
My written statement also discusses ways financial
technology innovation can be used to increase access to
traditional financial services, and it describes some of the
OCC's efforts to support this very important objective.
In closing, rapid financial technology innovation requires
a robust approach by financial regulators. The OCC is committed
to helping banks innovative, while evolving in a safe, sound,
and fair manner.
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer questions about
the OCC's work to support financial technology.
[The prepared statement of Deputy Comptroller Murphy can be
found on page 61 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you very much.
Mr. Vice, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES A. VICE, DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY
AND ACCESS, NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION (NCUA)

Mr. Vice. Chairman Hill, Ranking Member Lynch, and members
of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to discuss the
National Credit Union Administration's efforts to foster
financial technology. I am Charles A. Vice, Director of the
NCUA's Office of Financial Technology and Access. I began my
career in 1990, with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
serving as an examiner for 18 years. In 2008, I was appointed
Commissioner of the Kentucky Department of Financial
Institutions, a position I held for 14 years before joining the
NCUA on January 1, 2023.
During my 3 decades of experience, I have seen the
resiliency of the credit union and banking industries in the
face of such challenges as Y2K concerns, the Great Recession,
natural disasters, and the COVID-19 pandemic. I have seen how
technology can be both a benefit and a risk that must be
properly managed. On one hand, technology can improve
efficiency, facilitate better communication with members, and
offer round-the-clock services. On the other hand, technology
represents risks that must be managed, monitored, and
mitigated. The NCUA understands this fine balance.
The NCUA's Office of Financial Technology and Access
identifies barriers, challenges, and opportunities credit
unions face in adopting and using technology to provide
financial services to their members. In 2023, the NCUA board
adopted the Financial Innovation Rule which provides additional
flexibility for federally-insured credit unions to use advanced
technologies and opportunities offered by the financial
technology sector. The proposed rule received supportive
comments from the public during the notice-and-comment period
and was finalized in September.
In addition, the NCUA is committed to promoting effective
and efficient use of the emerging technology. The agency has
implemented several initiatives, including a virtual
examination program and a digital asset working group. With the
virtual examination program, the NCUA is exploring methods to
use technology to improve examination and supervision
procedures.
The NCUA's Digital Asset Working Group is an agency team
that develops guidance for the credit union industry's use of
distributed ledger technology in offering digital asset and
cryptocurrency services to members.
The NCUA is also evaluating digital identification
technology. The use of digital identification can be a useful
tool for verifying identity, and a number of States have issued
mobile driver's licenses. Some credit unions have completed
successful pilot tests using digital identification and are in
the process of updating their policies and procedures to
incorporate this technology for onboarding new members.
In 2024, ACCESS, which is an acronym for Advancing
Communities through Credit, Education, Stability, & Support, is
spearheading an initiative to improve access to financial
services in financial deserts. This will highlight
opportunities for the agency to assist regions where credit
union services are limited or certain segments of the
population are underserved.
The initiative will also identify outreach opportunities,
ensuring the NCUA's actions are timely, relevant, and
impactful. The ACCESS team will pilot a program to target
outreach for three communities in 2024. As part of the pilot,
the NCUA will catalog and track the impact of the agency's
financial inclusion efforts and identify additional gaps and
opportunities to foster financial inclusion.
Finally, the NCUA's lack of supervisory authority over
credit union service organizations and third-party vendors is a
noteworthy vulnerability for the industry. If Congress
reauthorizes the NCUA's third-party vendor authority per the
NCUA Board Chair's request, the agency will adopt a program and
prioritize examinations based on identified risks.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify about the NCUA's
efforts to foster financial technology and financial inclusion.
This concludes my comments.
[The prepared statement of Director Vice can be found on
page 74 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you so much.
Director Szczepanik, you are recognized for 5 minutes to
give your oral presentation.

STATEMENT OF VALERIE A. SZCZEPANIK, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF THE
STRATEGIC HUB FOR INNOVATION AND FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY (FINHUB),
U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)

Ms. Szczepanik. Thank you. Chairman Hill, Ranking Member
Lynch, Chairman McHenry, and members of the subcommittee, thank
you for inviting me to testify before you today about the SEC's
Strategic Hub for Innovation and Financial Technology, also
known as FinHub. It is my honor to appear before you today to
discuss FinHub's work. I am testifying today in my official
capacity as Director of FinHub, but my testimony does not
necessarily reflect the views of the Commission, the
Commissioners, or other members of the SEC staff. I am also
pleased to see in attendance those who represent similar
functions to mine among the SEC's regulatory partners.
I have served as the head of FinHub since it was launched
in 2018, and became its Director when, in 2020, it was
designated as a standalone office reporting to the SEC Chair.
FinHub was designed to be an agile hub-and-spoke structure with
eight full-time staff at the hub and experts from the agencies'
divisions and offices in order to create a rapid communication
and coordination network across the agency and to avoid
siloing. In this way, FinHub utilizes and augment's the
agency's expertise concerning leading-edge technologies and
innovations that foreshadow the future direction of the
financial industry.
FinHub helps the agency achieve its mission to protect
investors, maintain fair and orderly and efficient markets, and
facilitate capital formation by helping coordinate the agency's
oversight of and responses to emerging financial technologies
across numerous areas, including distributed ledger technology
and digital assets, automated investment advice, digital
marketplace financing, and artificial intelligence. FinHub
identifies and analyzes emerging financial technologies, builds
and enhances the agency's expertise, and engages with market
participants, regulators, and other organizations to advance
the SEC's mission.
More specifically, FinHub has three major functions. First,
we are an external resource. Innovators and other members of
the public can seek engagement with the SEC staff through
FinHub concerning technology, business models, and regulatory
issues. We also conduct active outreach with fintech
communities across the country, participating in outreach
events such as conferences, classes, and tech sprints. Our
website provides a clearinghouse of information regarding the
SEC's activities in fintech, and we encourage market
participants to use the materials on our website as a resource
and to reach out to staff if they want to discuss issues.
Second, we are an internal resource in that we evaluate the
impact of rapidly-evolving and often unpredictable technology,
and we onboard the knowledge, tools, and data that we need in
order to provide subject matter expertise within the agency.
FinHub is a dedicated and specialized resource, staffed not
only with attorneys but also with those having expertise in
computer science, financial analysis, and data research and
analytics.
We invest FinHub's time and resources to cultivate a deep
fintech expertise so that other Commission staff can quickly
benefit from our input and analyses, allowing them to perform
their day-to-day work. FinHub is committed to understanding the
technologies that impact our markets, and we are taking
proactive steps to make sure that the SEC staff has a hands-on
opportunity to work with new technology.
Third, FinHub is a liaison. We actively monitor domestic
and international developments related to fintech, and we have
an ongoing engagement, both domestic and foreign, to actively
monitor, understand, and respond to emerging issues.
FinHub's role is to help the agency strike the right
balance between fostering beneficial and responsible innovation
in our capital markets, on the one hand, and preventing
potentially harmful and illicit practices against investors, on
the other. The goal is to promote and maintain investor
confidence and integrity in our markets as the markets
incorporate financial innovation. We hope that through
thoughtful engagement with innovators and others, and through
understanding emerging technologies, we strike the right
balance.
I believe that industry participants and others who take
the time and effort to engage with the SEC staff and with the
staff of our fellow regulatory agencies will play a critical
role in shaping the future of fintech and ensuring that the
U.S. capital markets continue to adhere to the high standards
that have made them so deep, liquid, fair, and attractive for
decades.
On a personal note, before I became a lawyer I earned my
degree in engineering. It has been my great privilege to
combine my passion for science, the law, and public service in
my current role, and I am particularly grateful for the
opportunity to serve with extraordinarily-dedicated members of
my staff and the staff who work with FinHub from across the
Commission. These colleagues are fully committed to serving
their country and to the agency's mission and are a source of
inspiration to me.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering any questions
you may have.
[The prepared statement of Director Szczepanik can be found
on page 70 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you very much.
Director Gibson, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for
your oral presentation.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL S. GIBSON, DIRECTOR, SUPERVISION AND
REGULATION, BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
(FED)

Mr. Gibson. Chairman Hill, Ranking Member Lynch, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss supervision and regulation as it relates to innovation
in the financial system.
The Federal Reserve is committed to supporting responsible
innovation, both by the firms we oversee directly and in the
financial system broadly. We recognize that innovation can
reinforce the safety and soundness of banks and the stability
of our financial system, increase operational efficiencies, and
reduce costs.
However, innovation can also lead to risks, some of which
are familiar and others more novel. The Federal Reserve Board,
alongside the other Federal bank regulatory agencies, has a
statutory responsibility to supervise banks to help ensure they
operate in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with all
applicable laws. In keeping with that mission, we require the
banks we oversee to identify and manage the risks associated
with the new technologies they use.
Our approach to supervising and regulating innovation in
banking is based on the following overarching principles.
First, activities that present fundamentally the same risks
should be regulated in the same way, regardless of where or how
the activity occurs or the terms used to describe the activity.
Second, the Federal Reserve has not taken and does not take
a position on to whom banks can offer services so long as they
remain within the confines of the law. Banking organizations
are neither prohibited nor discouraged from providing banking
services to customers of any specific class or type, as
permitted by law or regulation.
Third, we have sought to be transparent about our
expectations and approaches to novel activity supervision and
regulation to provide a pathway for responsible innovation.
Finally, we recognize that we also must continue to learn,
which is why we engage in regular outreach.
In keeping with these principles, the Federal Reserve
recently announced the creation of a Novel Activities
Supervision Program to focus on the supervision of novel,
technology-driven activities at banks. These activities include
those involving crypto assets, distributed ledger technology,
and complex, technology-driven bank partnerships with nonbank
fintechs, each of which I discuss further in my written
testimony. By dedicating a team of supervisory experts to these
activities, our aim is to provide clarity as well as timely,
consistent, and relevant feedback to the institutions we
supervise.
The Federal bank regulatory agencies have also recently
issued guidance on third-party risk management, which lays out
the agencies' supervisory expectations for all types of third-
party relationships, including relationships with financial
technology companies.
I would like to pivot now to artificial intelligence, which
banks are leveraging for a variety of applications, such as
fraud monitoring and customer service. While the technology
offers several benefits, it also poses risks, including data
challenges, explainability, bias, cybersecurity, and consumer
protection. Federal Reserve staff continue to work closely with
the other Federal bank regulatory agencies to track and learn
more about emerging practices regarding banks' use of AI and
related risk management.
Finally, it is important to note that innovation is not
confined to the private sector. The Federal Reserve is focused
on finding opportunities to use innovative technology to
enhance our supervision of the banking industry. We are
evaluating industry-leading technology to determine if adoption
of such tools will enhance our supervision technology and
increase efficiency.
The Federal Reserve is committed to supporting responsible
innovation while also working to ensure that any risks
associated with novel financial products and services are
properly managed.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Director Gibson can be found on
page 43 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you very much.
Ms. Epstein, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF ANN EPSTEIN, ASSISTANT DIRECTER, OFFICE OF
COMPETITION AND INNOVATION, CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION
BUREAU (CFPB)

Ms. Epstein. Good morning, Chairman Hill, Ranking Member
Lynch, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you today.
Today's hearing is well-timed and critical, as innovation
is rapidly changing the competitive landscape, bringing new
opportunities and challenges for consumers, and financial
services more holistically. A competitive and innovative
financial sector is critical for our economy, for our global
competitiveness, and to create choice for consumers. Advances
in technology can improve our lives when done within a vibrant,
competitive marketplace that maximizes consumer choice and
safety.
The CFPB has significantly ramped up efforts to facilitate
market competition to ensure that consumer financial markets
are fair, transparent, and competitive. The Office of
Competition and Innovation is part of this broader initiative
to monitor for any obstacles to new entrants and to support
competition. I oversee this monitoring through conversations
with many firms in the fintech ecosystem and through gathering
data on new business models.
When the CFPB first opened its doors just over a decade
ago, technology companies in consumer finance were an emerging
trend. They were an anomaly. The world has since evolved.
Today, many traditional financial services companies see
themselves as technology companies, and large technology
companies, many with built-in customers and scale from other
business lines, are providing consumer financial services,
particularly in the payment space. Newer technologies, such as
generative AI, are increasingly being used to market financial
products and provide customer service, with potentially
unexpected outcomes. It is vitally important that we examine
what this means for consumers and for the industry.
As technology has increased in importance, the CFPB has
expanded our own in-house expertise. For example, we have added
a chief technologist and developed a technologist program that
recruits for technical expertise in areas such as data science,
AI and UX design, and embeds this expertise throughout the
CFPB.
The CFPB is also playing a role in setting up new rules for
the road in this landscape to ensure that the future state of
financial services is open to innovation. In October, the CFPB
published a proposal for the Personal Financial Data Rights
Rule, as required under Section 1033 of the Consumer Financial
Protection Act. We believe this rule, which would create new
standards that facilitate sharing consumer financial data, will
create an environment in which new entrants can thrive, while
simultaneously allowing consumers greater control and choice.
We have also focused on ensuring that newer technologies
are used in ways that comply with existing laws. For example,
if AI is used in loan underwriting, it must confirm with
existing rules that require lenders to provide consumers with
adverse action notices that explain reasons for loan denial.
Without transparency, consumers cannot effectively protect
their rights and understand the reasons why they may have been
declined for credit. The requirement also plays a vital role in
helping to detect and deter illegal discrimination.
We also work to encourage the development of innovative new
technology products and services that will provide real value
to consumers. My office is running a tech sprint, where private
companies use data to build technology products, in this case
to help consumers make more-informed credit card choices. Tech
sprints are a tool used by the CFPB to foster the creation of
private tools and to get feedback from external parties.
Two weeks ago, we announced that the CFPB would be working
with the Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA) to
test adjustments to mortgage disclosures in the unique context
of construction loans. This has potential benefits across the
housing market, and in particular to Americans living in rural
areas where existing housing stock is often in scarce supply
and new homes are seldom built on spec, but rather require up-
front capital from the borrower. Construction loan disclosures
have historically been more oriented toward the purchase of
existing homes that do not require significant funds for
renovation.
My office approved a proposal from the ICBA that will allow
lenders to apply to do in-market testing of these new
disclosures. This is the first application under the trial
disclosure policy and a great illustration of how we can work
together with industry to identify and address real market
needs supporting American families and communities.
Finally, I would like to highlight the importance of
collaboration and consistency across the regulatory framework.
My office chairs an organization called the American Consumer
Financial Innovation Network, where we meet regularly with
States on innovation topics. We are also a coordinating group
member of the Global Financial Innovation Network. Along with
most of the other regulators on this panel, we are able to
share approaches to similar challenges with regulators across
the globe.
In summary, my office, and the CFPB as a whole, is focused
on advancing a more sophisticated approach to competition and
innovation in support of our statutory mission to ensure that
the market for consumer financial services is fair,
transparent, and competitive.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you. I look
forward to responding to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Assistant Director Epstein can
be found on page 38 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you very much.
And Mr. Mulholland, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK MULHOLLAND, DEPUTY CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER
FOR MANAGEMENT, FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION (FDIC)

Mr. Mulholland. Chairman Hill, Ranking Member Lynch, and
members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to appear before you
today at the hearing on, ``Fostering Financial Innovation: How
Agencies Can Leverage Technology to Shape the Future of
Financial Services.'' My name is Mark Mulholland, and I am the
Deputy CIO for Management at the FDIC.
I have worked for the Federal Government for more than 34
years, having started with the General Services Administration
in 1989. In 1996, I began working for the FDIC's Office of
Inspector General, where I performed audits of the FDIC's
programs and operations with a particular emphasis on
information technology and security. In August of 2021, I
transferred to the FDIC's Chief Information Officer
Organization, or CIOO. In my current role, I oversee the CIOO's
budget and financial operations, procurement and contract
management activities, internal review and risk management
programs, and human resources management.
The FDIC relies heavily on technology to carry out its core
mission of maintaining stability and public confidence in our
nation's financial system. In 2023, the FDIC budgeted almost
$500 million to support the development, enhancement,
modernization, and maintenance of its IT infrastructure systems
and data. IT modernization is a top priority at the FDIC. The
FDIC is currently implementing a multiyear IT modernization to
brings its IT environment into alignment with modern IT
practices and standards, as well as with key Federal
priorities, including the Federal Cloud Smart Strategy.
Under the IT modernization program the CIOO is working to
migrate and modernize its systems and data from legacy, on-
premise data centers to cloud technology platforms that offer
enhanced IT capabilities, security, and resiliency. The IT
modernization program includes an objective to modernize our
risk management supervision and compliance examination business
processes and systems.
In June of this year, the FDIC began operating the first
major supervisory application that supports consumer compliance
of Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) examinations in the cloud.
The CIOO is also partnering with the FDIC's Division of Risk
Management Supervision on a new, multiyear effort to modernize
the FDIC's core risk management-related systems using cloud
solutions.
I also want to mention FDITECH, a key component within the
CIOO organization. FDITECH focuses on the adoption of
innovative technologies within the FDIC itself. For example,
FDITECH is partnering with the Division of Risk Management
Supervision to expand the use of machine learning to analyze
reports of examinations and other information of individual
institutions to identify risks across the banking sector.
FDITECH is also evaluating the benefits and risks of potential
applications of distributed ledger technology both at the FDIC
and in the banking sector.
Finally, the FDIC recognizes that financial technology
innovation in the banking sector offers a number of important
and potential benefits such as enhanced operations, reduced
costs, improved delivery of services, and greater financial
inclusion through expanded access to credit and other banking
services. At the same time, technology innovation presents
risks that financial institutions must effectively manage, such
as consumer protection, privacy, and data risks.
To ensure the FDIC understands the benefits of financial
technology innovation and is prepared to address the associated
risks, the FDIC routinely engages with industry stakeholders
through a number of channels. For example, the FDIC issues
periodic requests for information about innovative
technologies, reviews the use of technology in individual banks
and select service providers through the examination process,
and discusses technology issues with bankers through such
forums as the FDIC Advisory Committee on Community Banking.
The FDIC has also established various internal committees,
working groups, and component organizations within the FDIC
that focus on financial technologies. Collectively, these
activities help to inform the FDIC's supervisory strategies and
regulatory policymaking.
That concludes my opening statement, and I would be happy
to answer any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Deputy Chief Information Officer
Mulholland can be found on page 49 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you very much for your testimony. We
will now turn to Member questions, and I will recognize myself
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Epstein, you referenced the Global Innovation Network,
and Ms. Szczepanik, you talked about sort of coordination
responsibilities over at the Commission. Do the six of your
offices get together on a regular basis, not to talk about
global comparisons internationally and host a big meeting with
a nice dinner, but do you meet on a regular basis about common
innovation issues?
Who wants to answer that question, or try to?
Ms. Murphy. I can start. Our offices and other parts of our
agencies meet on a regular basis.
Chairman Hill. With a bias towards seeing how we can
advance innovation.
Ms. Murphy. With a discussion of how we can advance
innovation, what risks we are seeing, what use cases we are
seeing in the industry, on both an internal basis and an
external basis.
Chairman Hill. So, for example, Director Gibson, do any
exam preferences that you find from your Innovation Office get
coordinated through the Financial Institutions Examination
Council (FFIEC) so that there is one approach to examining on
these topics?
Mr. Gibson. We share a lot of information through FFIEC on
examination procedures. On these particular topics, I would say
the sharing is more from the staff who are specialists in
innovation.
Chairman Hill. You have issued this Novel Activities
Supervision rule, and I am curious, how do you see that
fostering innovation, Director Gibson?
Mr. Gibson. We did establish a Novel Activities Supervision
Program earlier this year, and the goal is really to make sure
that our examiners who are engaging with firms that are doing
these innovative activities have the expertise and the training
in order to effectively supervise them, understand both the
benefits that the firms are seeking with the innovative
technologies, and that the firms are managing the risks.
Chairman Hill. Mr. Vice, you have been a bank examiner for
a long time, and then Kentucky Commissioner, so you have seen
the good news and bad news out of bank examination out in the
real world. Some of your colleagues here maybe have not had
that great experience. Do you not think boards of directors
have, under the CAMELS examination process, the responsibility
for all of the things that are in the Novel Activities rule to
justify a third-party agreement, to have somebody do a website
or to solicit mortgage applications through an app? Do we not
already have that? Is the Novel Activities rule really needed?
Do you not think boards have that responsibility?
Mr. Vice. The board would be responsible for the operation
of the bank.
Chairman Hill. And they are supposed to convince their
supervisors that they have the right capital plan for that, the
right budget, and the right skills and abilities, right?
Mr. Vice. I think it is incumbent upon the agency to make
sure that we have staff who are knowledgeable and experienced
to go in----
Chairman Hill. Yes, I think the agencies have all done a
good job over the last 25 years of training their own staff to
come in and do an IT, internal-external penetration testing and
look at due diligence files for fintech. That has been a big
improvement by the agencies.
I am very concerned that this rule, without real clarity,
is going to create more confusion, and the idea of
preauthorizing it to take on a task when it is not material to
the bank, for example, in the judgment of the board, I think
could be overkill.
Director Gibson, could that create confusion and bog people
down if it is not done right?
Mr. Gibson. I think there is always that potential, but we
definitely want to send skilled examiners to engage with boards
of directors and bank management so they can have a good
dialogue.
Chairman Hill. On the third-party risk management
questions, I thought it was good that you are meeting together
and working together on that as a group. But I am hearing
anecdotally from community banks, particularly, that they are
receiving substantially more exam questions this year than they
did in previous years.
Director Gibson, have you heard that from your field
examiners, bank comments in that vein?
Mr. Gibson. What we have heard is that given all the
turmoil in the banking industry this year, and the heightened
risks, that we are definitely focusing on those risks, and
those conversations have been taking place.
Chairman Hill. You say, on page 7 of your guidance, that
agencies will develop additional resources to assist smaller,
noncomplex community banks to manage third-party risk. When are
those resources going to be published?
Mr. Gibson. Our staff are working on that, and we hope to
publish something soon, similar to what we have done with other
rules or guidance.
Chairman Hill. So, you put out a rule, and you make people
responsible for it, but do not first give them the guidance on
how to comply with it. Is that how I should read that?
Mr. Gibson. We are definitely engaging with firms as the
guidance has come out, and we do hope to provide additional
resources very soon.
Chairman Hill. Good. I yield back the balance of my time.
I now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr.
Lynch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, thank you all
for your service. I really do appreciate it. And thank you for
your guidance.
There is a dichotomy in the fintech world, and I suppose
that applies to crypto as well. In finance, our institutions,
our banks are guided by--we have a rules-based system, right? A
lot of our financial statutes, our regulatory regimes, come out
of disasters. Mr. Mulholland, thousands of bank failures
created your agency, and Ms. Szczepanik, yours as well. The Fed
itself was created after the panic of 1907. So, we had
financial disasters, and then we had responding statutory
language to try to correct that, and those experiences created
every single one of your agencies.
On the tech side, however, the motto for Mark Zuckerberg at
Facebook was, move fast and break things. That is not a good
approach for a bank. So, you have this clash of cultures. One
is rules-based, and the other one is, move fast and break
things, and that is playing out in the fintech world. And it is
going to be a decision, at some point, of how do we blend those
two cultures in a way that protects consumers and depositors
and investors, yet allows us to adopt all of this innovation?
Mr. Gibson, you have this new Office of--what is it called?
Mr. Gibson. The Novel Activities?
Mr. Lynch. Yes, I was looking for that--Novel Activities
Supervision Program, which aims to better supervise banks that
are engaging in novel activities. How are you evaluating the
risks? We have seen some notable disasters. FTX was a complete
collapse. Thankfully, 90-something percent of the investors
were non-U.S. citizens, because they had to operate offshore,
so that was a success for our regulatory framework, I think.
But how are we dealing with some of these risks, and how are we
evaluating those in real time?
Mr. Gibson. When banks are dealing with either complex
fintech partnerships or with crypto assets, some of these new
areas that post novel risks, as I said, there are definitely
some benefits to the innovation that we can see, but there are
also risks. Now, we are definitely seeing some of those risks
materialize with some of the complex arrangements that banks
are making with some of these fintech companies, and sometimes
that has, in some cases, obscured the risk to the bank, because
the fintech partner has the information about the end customer
that the bank lacks. And in some cases, we have seen risks such
as Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering (BSA/AML) risks that
materialize when banks do not have strong information on their
customers. So, that is just one example of the risks that have
materialized.
Mr. Lynch. We do have a fair number of criminal activities
that are favoring cryptocurrency, for example. We have a lot of
these hacks by criminal operations that seek to be paid in
cryptocurrency. That seems to be a favorite use of that
technology. Is that guiding at all your approach to this?
Mr. Gibson. Banks themselves are not holding those crypto
assets, but banks have been dealing with crypto-related
companies, and we have seen risks such as liquidity risk. We
have seen that the deposits from those crypto-related companies
have been unpredictable, and that has caused risks to banking
organizations.
Mr. Lynch. Yes. Explain to me how this office, this program
evaluates the technology itself, the architecture, and is that
exploration helpful given the fact that there are, I think, 130
countries out there that are exploring a CBDC right now?
Mr. Gibson. Our examiners are going to be focused on the
bank's evaluation of the technology and whether the risks are
well understood and managed. So, we are less into the details
of the technology as bank examiners; we are more into ensuring
compliance with the laws and regulations.
Mr. Lynch. I see. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Lucas of Oklahoma is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Szczepanik, as you know, the SEC recently proposed a
rule regarding the use of predictive data analytics used by
broker-dealers and investment advisors. Many respondents are
concerned that the proposed rule is overly broad in what is
considered a covered technology. I quoted the rules definition
to SEC Chair Gensler during his appearance before this
committee: ``A covered technology is defined as an analytical
technology or computational function, an algorithm, model,
correlation matrix, or similar method or process that
optimizes, predicts, guides, forecasts, or directs investment
behaviors and outcomes.''
Could you discuss what your office's role was in crafting
this, what role you played?
Ms. Szczepanik. Sure. Thank you. What the FinHub does is
act as a subject matter expert across the Commission, as the
Commission staff engages in various activities like rulemaking
or examination, policymaking or enforcement, as examples. So,
for any particular rulemaking, the staff who are working on the
rule may come to the FinHub staff and ask us, how do particular
things work, what is under the hood of this technology? Often,
we find ourselves analyzing a certain blockchain, a smart
contract, artificial intelligence, and how applications work,
and what those risks are, so we provide that subject matter
expertise to the people working on the rulemaking.
Mr. Lucas. In your testimony, you described the necessary
balance between fostering innovation and preventing harm. Can
you discuss the potential negative consequences if the
financial regulators, or the SEC in particular, upset this
balance by being hostile, so to speak, to certain kinds of
technology?
Ms. Szczepanik. Sure. I think the agency's approach, and
many of the approaches probably of the folks here at the table,
is to get the right balance. We cannot have innovation happen
at the expense of investors or market integrity, so offices
like the FinHub encourage people to come in and speak with us
about how the Federal securities laws apply. For example, we do
not give interpretations or legal advice but we can talk to
them about risks that we see, or ask questions, or answer their
questions about their projects.
In that way, through that engagement, we hope to provide a
little bit of a platform for public and private engagement to
reach a level playing field, I think, where people understand
this is what the innovation is trying to achieve, but the
regulatory agencies have missions and have very important
public policy objectives to maintain.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Gibson, you outlined in your testimony how
banks can benefit from generative AI, along with the associated
risks. Could you discuss how your office coordinates with other
bank regulating agencies on AI and machine learning practices,
including how your office engages with agencies with
technological expertise, such as the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST)?
Mr. Gibson. We do engage with other regulators and other
agencies, and with respect to NIST, they put out a lot of
standards on technology that are very useful, and they tend to
apply across the entire economy, and we tend to focus on the
financial sector. A lot of times, we are taking NIST standards
and seeing how they apply in the banking industry.
Mr. Lucas. Speaking of NIST, in preparing for this hearing,
I was fascinated to come across the fact that in 1920, NIST
conducted extensive research on the design and construction of
your Federal Reserve Bank vaults, including the gold vaults in
New York City. I just found that to be fascinating, how a
century ago, we were engaged in that. And it's an example of
how when we bring experts from across the government together
to address complex challenges, the results really do stand the
test of time.
I would like to also focus and shift a bit to the CFPB's
approach to emerging technology. Ms. Epstein, could you
identify some of the actions taken by the CFPB's Office of
Competition and Innovation that have encouraged--let's look at
the positive side--companies to innovate?
Ms. Epstein. Sure. I had used, for example, a specific
example in my testimony related to a tech sprint. This is our
fourth tech sprint that we are doing today. This particular
tech sprint is engaging with market participants to bring data
that we have related to credit card terms and conditions to
encourage better consumer shopping. We know that we are not, as
a Federal regulator, in the greatest position to bring that
data to consumers, so we are engaging with the private
marketplace to identify for them what market innovations could
come from this particular data that we are putting out. It also
helps us, because it gives us feedback as to how our data and
our technology that we use to produce this data is useful or
not useful, is it the right latency, is it those kinds of
things. That is one example. This is our fourth tech sprint, so
we have done this on other occasions, for other types of tech
sprints, as well.
Mr. Lucas. My time has expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hill. Thank you, Mr. Lucas.
Mr. Sherman is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. Mr. Gibson, one of the functions of
the Fed is to oversee the ACH system by which we wire money
from one account to another, and the greatest fear that you
come up with whenever you are dealing with buying or selling a
home is that the buyer will be tricked into sending the money
to the wrong account. People send an email to somebody. In
effect, their prospect of ever owning a home is on the line.
They have their down payment, and they get an email saying,
``Send the money to account number 12345,'' and it is signed by
their escrow agent, and of course, it is phony, and the money
ends up in the hands of a Nigerian prince.
For about a decade, or the better part of a decade, I have
been asking Chairs of the Federal Reserve in this room to do
what Britain did quite some time ago, and that is have payee
matching, so that when you send the money to an account, it
also has a name. That would pretty much eliminate this
practice. For the better part of a decade, the Chairs of the
Fed have said, ``We are not going to do that but we are doing
something else that will solve the problem.'' And then I ask
them, ``What?'', and they smile and walk away.
When are we going to solve this problem, so that when you
wire money to account number 12345, it is supposed to be going
to Encino Escrow, and you are not tricked into using the wrong
number?
Mr. Gibson. I agree that sort of fraud is a problem.
Mr. Sherman. Why do we not have a payee matching system?
Why do we not have a system where, when you wire the money it
is to a person as well as an account? When I write a check, I
put the name of the payee on the check. I do not just write in
a number. I know we are dealing with high technology here. This
is something we could have done in the last century. Why do we
not have payee matching?
Mr. Gibson. I do not have the answer on this specific
question.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. Well, neither has anyone else the last
five times I have asked this question over the better part of
this decade. Can you get me an answer?
Mr. Gibson. Yes, I am happy to work with you on that.
Mr. Sherman. Have you done any calculation as to how much
harm is done by the present system versus the costs of doing
what the U.K. has done and have payee matching?
Mr. Gibson. Generally, in the area of fraud, we see a lot
of fraud taking place, and a lot of risk, and banks putting a
lot of----
Mr. Sherman. Why don't you do something about it?
Mr. Gibson. We are happy to work with you on that specific
issue, and I----
Mr. Sherman. I would believe you if your predecessor's
predecessor--if Fed officials had not been telling me that for
the last 10 years and then not doing anything. And them working
on consists of telling me, ``Oh, well, we know the problem and
we will get back to you.''
Let's talk about this every week. I look forward to your
call next week, and every week until we solve this problem.
This is just crazy.
Now, I will turn to the bank regulators. If you make an
unsecured loan to an individual, you evaluate that in one way,
as a bank asset, another way if it is a loan secured by
valuable assets, such as Fortune 500 stock. If a loan is
secured by crypto, is that viewed as an unsecured loan or is
that security regarded as valuable? I will ask Ms. Murphy.
Ms. Murphy. In that kind of circumstance that you describe,
we would have to look at the specifics of the loan. There is
very, very limited activity of that type in the national
banking system.
Mr. Sherman. You are saying banks do not make loans secured
by crypto accounts?
Ms. Murphy. In order to engage in that type of activity,
our banks would have to engage with their examiners, and there
is very limited activity----
Mr. Sherman. What do your examiners do? Do they value it as
a fully secured loan or a completely unsecured loan if it is
secured by Bitcoin or Hamster coin, or do you just not know?
Ms. Murphy. I am not aware of a specific instance where we
have valued loans in that way, and I would have to get back to
you about that.
Mr. Sherman. Please do get back to me.
I will ask the same question of Mr. Mulholland, and I will
also ask whether any of the FDIC-insured banks hold crypto as
an asset on their balance sheet for which you give them credit?
Mr. Mulholland. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
The FDIC and the other regulators have issued guidance with
respect to holding, as principal, crypto assets and using those
as a principal for lending activities, and cautionary language.
Mr. Sherman. Do you list it as an asset, based on its
supposed value today?
Mr. Mulholland. I am actually working in the CIOO
organization, so I am not on the supervision----
Mr. Sherman. So, you also do not know the answer to that.
Mr. Mulholland. But I would be happy to get back to you.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
Next, the gentleman who wants very badly for Army to beat
Navy this weekend, the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Davidson, who
is also the Vice Chair of our subcommittee, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to our
witnesses for being here today.
Mr. Gibson, I did a quick Google search for open jobs at
the Federal Reserve, and the regional banks are using the
keyword, ``CBDC,'' or key acronym. It looks like the San
Francisco Fed and the Boston Fed are hiring for CBDC
development roles, programmers. Can you provide an update for
the panel on the Federal Reserve's development of a United
States central bank digital currency?
Mr. Gibson. The Federal Reserve is doing research on CBDC
technologies, trying to understand the technologies themselves
and how they might be useful. It is research and
experimentation at this point, and it is not an implementation
of a CBDC.
Mr. Davidson. When you hire people who write code, it
starts seeming like you are developing and building versus
researching. What is the nature of the research--we are going
to build it and test fire it and see how it works?
Mr. Gibson. I think the research is to understand the
technology, understand the different approaches that people are
talking about, understand the risks. It is a research effort.
Mr. Davidson. Near implementation, but we will run it for a
while and see if it really works, or are you building something
that would be functional, or it is just research?
Mr. Gibson. We are a long way off from thinking about the
implementation of anything related to a CBDC.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you. Mr. Gibson, I sent a letter to Fed
Chair Powell regarding Custodia Bank's denial of a master
account for, ``Custodia Bank proposed to engage in novel and
untested crypto activities that include issuing crypto assets
on an open, public, and/or decentralized network.''
Shortly after this denial, the Fed created what has been
referenced several times now, the Novel Activities Supervision
Program, to focus on digital assets, projects using distributed
ledger technology, and bank-fintech partnerships. This program
started in August, and I am curious if you could give us an
update on the activities there?
I will say, I would also like to know how the discovery
process is going, because I took the rare step of joining an
amicus brief of a company because, technically, Custodia met
every element of the stated requirement for a master account,
and they even promised to hold 108 percent of the assets on the
books. They were not lending against the assets. They simply
wanted to provide custody for the assets, thus the name,
Custodia.
Have you done any work to figure out how there is risk
involved in essentially a trust company holding with reserves
beyond the value of the assets? Have you solved it?
Mr. Gibson. In terms of terms that we are actually
supervising, we are definitely looking at the risks of their
activities, and----
Mr. Davidson. But you have chosen not to supervise the ones
that are actually working in fintech. Essentially, you have
said, ``It is a big club, and you are not in it, so don't ask
again.''
Mr. Gibson. If you are asking about the Custodia
application, the board did evaluate that application against
the statutory factors and the board's order on Custodia is
public. The order explains the findings on the statutory
factors.
Mr. Davidson. It is similar. The OCC made progress.
Anchorage is in, but nobody else. Essentially, it is a club you
are not in. Have you solved this riddle as to how somebody can
provide custody for an asset, not lending against it, just
custody? Has anyone figured this out? Because the market has,
but the regulators have not.
Ms. Murphy. If that is a question for me, I would say that
we have been looking at this issue. Obviously, we do have one
bank that has been chartered with that as a primary business
model. And one of the things that is challenging in that area
is compliance with the anti-money laundering laws and
regulations. There is a lot of progress being made there,
through financial technology innovations----
Mr. Davidson. It seems that it would be easier to track
something that is on a public blockchain than something that is
moving through swift accounts. It is similar kinds of
instructions.
The market really understands this. I am disappointed that
the regulators have essentially decided in Choke Point 2.0,
3.0, 20.0, whatever, but basically, you guys are not playing.
I am curious about the FDIC's approach to third-party risk
management. Mr. Mulholland, you talked about it in your opening
remarks and in one question. But how are traditional financial
institutions, third-party risk management processes being
examined, particularly with respect to fintech, and is there
any difference between normal activities and fintech
partnerships?
Mr. Mulholland. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
Yes, I did mention the third-party guidance and also due
diligence guidance that has been issued by the regulatory
agencies to help assist banks in doing selection for third
parties, such as fintechs, as well as the ongoing monitoring to
ensure----
Mr. Davidson. Yes, my time has expired, and I apologize for
leaving you too little time to respond, but I would love to
follow up with you on that. Thank you.
Mr. Mulholland. Certainly. Thank you.
Chairman Hill. If you could respond to the gentleman's
question in writing, that would be very helpful to him.
We now turn to Mr. Casten of Illinois for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Chairman Hill, and to all of our
witnesses here today.
Ms. Szczepanik, I hope you will humor me. I want to get
kind of nerdy here, and hopefully, I do not get too far in the
weeds. There was some reporting that Chair Gensler, last July,
had indicated that the SEC should consider the use of AI for
compliance and regulation. In September, Chair Gensler
testified to the Senate that the SEC is using AI models to do
market surveillance. And I am wondering if you could just speak
briefly to how the SEC is using AI right now, and specifically,
how you are sort of training datasets on AI to think about
that--briefly, because I want to dig into some other points?
Ms. Szczepanik. Sure, and there are some materials on our
website, at FinHub's website, talking about how the Commission
staff has used AI in the past, typically things like natural
language processing and machine learning to analyze datasets
and market data and other data to, for example, flag
aberrations or trends to inform what the Commission staff is
doing across-the-board.
I will note that there is pending guidance that we are
awaiting from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) that
will come out to give guidance to the agencies throughout the
government about the internal use of AI, and we will be
monitoring the progress of that guidance and incorporating that
going forward.
Mr. Casten. And are you making public what datasets you are
using to train the AI?
Ms. Szczepanik. To my knowledge, that is not public, but I
can follow up with you.
Mr. Casten. Okay, and that is not a leading question--I do
not know if it should be or not. But I ask because there has
been some reporting of private sector actors who are now using
AI to do it. I think there is a risk thinking AI in Bloomberg
that are putting this model sort of in anticipation of some
climate disclosure rules, looking at big datasets.
And what I am wondering--and I am not expecting you to
comment on the climate disclosure rules right now--but to the
extent those models are using the same datasets that your
models are using, that would seem to be mutually beneficial for
compliance. To the extent they are different, it would seem to
create headaches. And I am just wondering what you are thinking
about that?
Ms. Szczepanik. Sure. What I can say is that in FinHub, we
typically try to bring the people in who are producing new
types of technology so that we understand how it is being used,
what it is capable of, how our registrant population may use
it, how investors might use it, and how fraudsters might use
it.
That is the type of outreach and learning we are going
through now with respect to this new generative AI. And as I
mentioned before, our internal use will be guided by future
guidance and we will be monitoring and evaluating that guidance
going forward.
Mr. Casten. Okay. I raised the climate piece, number one,
because I am a broken record on climate, but also because it
strikes me that if we think about this as looking for market
manipulation, things people normally think the SEC does, I
suppose that data is--not to oversimplify--available to anybody
who has a Bloomberg terminal and can plug in the data. But as
we get to responsibilities that you have to have companies
accurately reporting risks and using other public databases,
there is this whole rich, ethical conversation we are having
about who is vetting the databases, and is there a single
database, and who is preparing those, and who is making sure
the data is good.
Ms. Szczepanik. Yes, and that is something that our Chair
is keenly focused on, and he has talked about how he believes
that this technology is transformative but also carries with it
some risks, and those risks, as you mentioned, have to do with
bias, explainability, how robust is the model, how can it be
used to deceive, is it being used in a way that is creating
conflicts of interest? These are all things that the staff is
really going to be focused on, and me, as the Director of
FinHub.
Mr. Casten. Yes, and a rich conversation about the ethics.
I am focused on the datasets just because you can run different
models on the same dataset and hopefully, if the models are
good, get consistent answers, but if the datasets are
different, there is conflict.
Just the last thing on that point. The Chair has warned the
financial institutions that they are going to rely on a limited
number of AI platforms, but I think he has been very open, and
I think very thoughtful, about saying that your regulation is
at the level of a given entity, but if those entities are now
relying on a single set of cross-company platforms, if the
problem is with that platform, do you all have the tools to
assess these questions? Do you need help from Congress? How are
you thinking about this question, if there is dataset
integrity, from ethics or otherwise, and it spans a lot of
different companies?
Ms. Szczepanik. I think you have identified one of the
issues that the Chair has raised about micro concerns and macro
concerns. This macro concern about concentrations and what can
happen if everyone is using the same dataset or there is
herding behavior, that is something that the staff will be
looking at closely as well.
Mr. Casten. Okay. I hear the tapping that I am out of time.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Casten. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Hill. The Chair now recognizes the Majority Whip
of the House, Mr. Emmer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Emmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to our
witnesses for joining us today.
When Bill Hinman was the Director of the SEC's Division of
Corporation Finance, he gave a speech on June 14, 2018,
entitled, ``Digital Transactions: When Howie Met Gary.'' In
this speech, he famously discussed how tokens can morph from
securities to non-securities, and he stated that Ether is not a
security.
Ms. Szczepanik, you reviewed and commented on drafts of
this speech, did you not?
Ms. Szczepanik. Yes, I did.
Mr. Emmer. When reviewing a draft, you said that providing,
``less detail,'' in the speech was better because the concept
of a token morphing from a security to a nonsecurity was a new
concept and would generate a lot of discussion. Do I have that
correct?
Ms. Szczepanik. I believe so.
Mr. Emmer. So, you thought the SEC should give less clarity
to the market rather than more. I understand you thought the
token morphing concept would generate a lot of discussion, but
when the industry complains about a lack of clarity, I see it
was a deliberate policy preference. Does the current SEC Chair
share that view?
Ms. Szczepanik. I cannot really testify about the current
Chair's view. What I can say is that the determination whether
any particular asset is a security is a facts- and
circumstances-based determination. And what I do, as the
Director of FinHub, with my staff, is to provide facts to the
folks at the SEC who are making that determination, and it is
typically going to be the Division of Corporation Finance.
Mr. Emmer. Reclaiming my time, because that is a perfect
segue, has FinHub issued any guidance since Chair Gensler took
office, to clarify how the securities laws apply to crypto?
Ms. Szczepanik. As I mentioned, FinHub's role is really to
be a subject matter expert.
Mr. Emmer. Reclaiming my time, ma'am, I am asking a very
specific question. Has FinHub issued any guidance?
Ms. Szczepanik. FinHub typically gets involved with other
divisions and offices at the agency who are issuing
statements----
Mr. Emmer. Reclaiming my time, I take it the answer is no,
because it is no. It seems to be rulemaking through enforcement
action.
In his speech, Mr. Hinman announced that Ether was not a
security, is not a security. Is that your view today?
Ms. Szczepanik. I cannot comment on a particular asset.
Mr. Emmer. Just to back up for a second, you provided
feedback on the speech, and so did Brett Redfearn, who was then
the Director of the SEC's Division of Trading and Markets. Yet,
first, the SEC argued in court that the speech was Mr. Hinman's
own personal opinion. Then, the SEC argued that the speech was
the opinion of only the Division of Corporation Finance, which
Mr. Hinman led.
But why would people across the SEC, from FinHub to the
Division of Trading and Markets, comment on a speech that has
the views of only one person or only one division? That does
not make any sense.
Ms. Szczepanik. I hope you can appreciate that I cannot
comment on pending matters that are in litigation or
investigation.
Mr. Emmer. Okay. Fair enough. The Southern District of New
York even called the SEC's arguments hypocrisy, that the SEC
would argue that the speech is not relevant to the market's
understanding of how the SEC will regulate crypto, while it is
a fact that Mr. Hinman obtained legal advice from SEC counsel
in drafting his speech.
The court said the SEC is adopting its litigation positions
to further its desired goal and not out of faithful allegiance
to the law. That is what all of us in Congress have seen, that
the SEC is not adhering to the law. That is why it keeps losing
in court.
Does the Chair of the SEC tell you to adopt positions to
further a specific goal, his own personal goal, rather than
allegiance to the law?
Ms. Szczepanik. Again, I cannot comment on any matters that
are pending in litigation, but I will say that----
Mr. Emmer. I do appreciate it. I reclaim my time. I think
you answered the question.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Illinois, Dr. Foster, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Chairman Hill, for hosting this
hearing and to our witnesses for joining us today.
Emerging technologies like artificial intelligence present
new opportunities to make our financial system more secure,
inclusive, and efficient. They also present new risks that, if
not mitigated, can be a threat to consumers and the U.S.
economy. One of the most immediate of those threats is that
deep fakes created with generative AI models can mimic an
individual's appearance or voice. This makes scammers much more
convincing and makes it harder for financial institutions to
verify the identities of their customers.
Now, countries like India, Estonia, Korea--there is a long
list--have taken national steps to provide citizens who wish
with a secure form of digital identification that could be
presented online. A secure digital ID, biometrically synced to
your smartphone, allows individuals to remotely verify that
they are who they say they are, saving costs, reducing the
likelihood of fraud, and allowing individuals to defend
themselves against deep fake identity fraud.
Mr. Vice, in your testimony you mentioned that the NCUA is
evaluating digital ID technology and that, in fact, some credit
unions have completed successful pilot tests of this
technology. Could you describe the experience of the credit
unions that you referenced? For example, were the credit unions
able to streamline the process of onboarding new members?
Mr. Vice. Again I would be reporting what they have
reported to me, but it gives them a secure method to identify
and certify someone's identification, and it reduces the time
to onboard.
Mr. Foster. Yes. For example, if this was in place during
COVID, when we had to onboard massive numbers of unbanked
customers, but the customers had had a secure digital ID, would
that have been a big improvement in our response to COVID?
Mr. Vice. One of the things that I was very amazed with
during the COVID period was how advanced technology had become
to be able to offer financial services to individuals. As long
as the tool was used properly, it could have been a help.
Mr. Foster. The mobile ID rollout in the United States has
been fragmented, with some States moving much faster than
others to adopt the technology. Have you identified any
barriers that are keeping States from adopting this technology,
and do you see a use in national standards to promote this?
Mr. Vice. That would be a State decision that the NCUA
would not be involved with, but definitely pointing to NIST,
and the standards have been established by NIST on the digital
identification.
Mr. Foster. Yes. Do any of our other witnesses have any
comments on this area, the utility of a national standard for a
secure digital ID provided by States?
No one is jumping for the microphone. Okay.
Ms. Epstein, several States, including Arizona, Colorado,
Maryland, and Georgia, currently issue mobile IDs attached to
their smartphone. Has the CFPB received any requests from
financial institutions regarding the use of the mobile ID for
identity verification in consumer finance?
Ms. Epstein. I am not aware of any particular request.
Mr. Foster. Okay. And do you believe that a secure digital
ID might protect consumers and save them time when addressing
areas such as consumer online transactions and so on?
Ms. Epstein. I think we have certainly seen, in our
consumer complaint database and other forums, that scammers and
other types of identity theft continue to be issue throughout.
So to an extent, that would be helpful, but I do not have any
particular----
Mr. Foster. Specific things. Okay.
Mr. Vice, the NCUA has long advocated for restoration of
its statutory authority over third-party vendors providing
services to federally-insured credit unions. Our office has
been trying to get some action on this for a long time, with
limited success. But just a few days ago, what we worried about
actually happened. Roughly 60 credit unions experienced outages
when a shared third-party vendor was hacked by cyber criminals,
and because of Congress' inaction on this, you do not have the
authority you need to make sure the cyber hygiene was what it
should be.
Does the NCUA have a regulatory blind spot in that you
cannot oversee these third-party vendors, and what can we, in
Congress, do to help?
Mr. Vice. Yes. It definitely has a regulatory blind spot.
Our Chair has asked for this authority. The GAO has also
recommended that the NCUA should have it, in addition to our
own Inspector General. And one of the things that was talked
about at the very beginning of this is, do we coordinate with
each other, and because we do not have that third-party vendor
authority, in many instances, when things come up we, do not
have a seat at that table because of the lack of authority.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. My time is up. I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Rose, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Hill, and thank you, Ranking
Member Lynch, for holding this important hearing today. And I
want to take this opportunity to wish Chairman Hill a Happy
Birthday.
Mr. Vice, the NCUA established the Office of Financial
Technology and Access earlier this year, which you lead. While
your office is still relatively new, can you speak about what
you have done over the past year and what your office hopes to
accomplish within the next year?
Mr. Vice. From a big-picture perspective, I think some of
the things we have talked about already are very important, and
that is there is a balance between the use of technology--
technology is a tool, how it is used, is it used in a positive
manner, is it used to enhance member experience and service and
offering fair, equitable service--but there are also some risks
associated with it. We want to take a look at both the balance
of what technology needs to be adopted, having a lot of
conversations with not only the credit union industry but also
the technology industry as well, and then making sure that is
balanced to make sure that the credit union industry remains
safe and sound.
Mr. Rose. Based on your progress so far, would you say that
you are reactive or being proactive about new technology in
this space?
Mr. Vice. My opinion is that I am very proactive.
Mr. Rose. Okay. Can you give us an example of something you
have done that you believe is proactive?
Mr. Vice. There are a couple of things that we are looking
at, but I have had many conversations with the industry itself,
with technology companies. One of the things that our board
member started before I got there, but we are continuing, is to
have a fintech series where we invite fintech companies in to
the NCUA to do a virtual presentation on their technology, how
it is being used, and how it is being used to enhance member
services and financial inclusion.
Mr. Rose. Would you say that the attitude of your office at
this juncture is to try to facilitate implementation of new
technologies, or do you approach them in a more circumspect
way?
Mr. Vice. Our approach, because of the size of our office,
is to make sure that we are having an impact, that we are
having relevance, and that we are collaborating; I think our
main focus is those three things, plus maintaining that
balance.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. Ms. Murphy, last year, the OCC
solicited academic and policy-focused research on the impact of
fintech entities on banking and the markets for lending,
deposit taking, and payment services. Do you believe that a
constructive dialogue with the financial industry is a good way
to stay informed on new developments?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, I do.
Mr. Rose. And does your office prioritize input from
stakeholders when considering how to approach and regulate
financial innovations?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, we do.
Mr. Rose. Can you give me an example of how that has led to
a productive outcome?
Ms. Murphy. The Office of Financial Technology regularly
engages with stakeholders across the industry, including both
fintech companies, banks we supervise, consumer advocates, and
academics, as you mentioned, and we disseminate and make sure
that information is used to support our policymaking and
guidance. For example, in the recent third-party risk
management guidance that was produced, the Office of Financial
Technology was supportive of the part of the agency that had a
lead on that.
Mr. Rose. Kind of playing off of the question I asked Mr.
Vice, do you think that the posture of the agencies should be
to be reactive to new developments or to be proactive in
hastening their adoption?
Ms. Murphy. I think it has to be a balance between the two.
We are proactive in reaching out and engaging and ensuring that
we are keeping up with what is happening in the industry. It is
a constantly-evolving process. But we are also reacting to what
is going on in terms of our banks' approach, their supervisory
teams, and we support their efforts to explore innovation,
explore new financial technology, and then help to ensure that
they are identifying the risks and managing the risks that are
associated with it.
Mr. Rose. Based on what you have seen so far, what scares
you the most, from a regulatory perspective, that you see
happening in the fintech innovation space?
Ms. Murphy. I think that the challenges in the cybercrime
area are the ones that we are most concerned about. The
criminals are constantly evolving their technology approaches,
and there is a need for the regulators to be constantly
vigilant, which we are, and we are very much coordinated on an
interagency basis in that area.
Mr. Rose. And in keeping with that observation, do you
think the OCC has the resources it needs to stay ahead of the
fraudsters?
Ms. Murphy. We are constantly updating and evolving our
resources. The challenges continue to change, and we continue
to change with it, and I think we have good programs in place
to make that happen.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Nickel, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you, Chairman Hill. Happy Birthday. Also,
thanks to Ranking Member Lynch.
Ms. Szczepanik, as you know, I am the Democratic lead on
the Improving Disclosure for Investors Act, or eDelivery, which
passed out of this committee with bipartisan support and would
make it easier for investors to receive documents
electronically. This is a much-needed innovation for consumers,
businesses, and the environment.
We would save two million trees a year with just that one
small change. In recent years, numerous government agencies
have made great strides in minimizing wasteful paper usage. As
far back as 2016, the Social Security Administration eliminated
paper as the primary method of delivering statements to
Americans. In 2020, the Department of Labor permitted e-
delivery of 401(k) documents to retirement plan participants.
In 2023, the Thrift Savings Plan defaulted to electronic
delivery of quarterly statements. And the IRS, through its
recent Paperless Processing Initiative, as required under the
Inflation Reduction Act, has already achieved the goal of
enabling 94 percent of filers to send tax documents digitally.
Ms. Szczepanik, knowing that an overwhelming majority, 79
percent, of retail investors have opted to receive investment-
related documents electronically, can you please explain why
the SEC's rules still require an investor to receive paper
documents when they open new investment accounts, and why has
your office not pushed to update these rules?
Ms. Szczepanik. Thanks for the question, and I agree that
evolving technologies can present new ways to have investors
interface with the markets, including with issuers and funds,
for example. At the FinHub, we invite people to come in. We
have had what we call peer-to-peer meetups, and these are
events where we pull people in to talk about innovations in
particular areas. One of those areas was in investor engagement
and investor connectedness to the markets and issuers.
We will continue to pull people in and try to talk about
new technologies in this area and invite staff around the
Commission who are thinking about things like disclosure by
issuers or funds as they think about potential rulemakings or
changes to the rules of the Commission.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you for your answer, but with respect, I
am just a little incredulous at your response and what the SEC
is doing here. You are the Director of the Strategic Hub for
Innovation and Financial Technology. eDelivery was considered
an innovation years ago. I would argue that your office is
behind at the expense of investors and our planet. Why are you
not focused specifically on this issue?
Ms. Szczepanik. The FinHub is not a policymaking part of
the agency, nor is it a rulemaking part. We provide the subject
matter expertise to others at the agency, so I will have to
respectfully defer to them.
Mr. Nickel. Do you think we should be using eDelivery
instead of paper?
Ms. Szczepanik. As I said, there are many technologies that
we are evaluating as they are coming to market, and we will
continue to do that.
Mr. Nickel. I am also concerned about the SEC's proposed
rule on predictive data analytics and the adverse effects it
will have on innovation and retail investors. The proposal's
scope is extremely broad and could be applied to virtually any
technology used by broker-dealers and investment advisors. The
proposed rule seeks to eliminate the risk of investor harm
resulting from conflicts of interest between financial
institutions and clients when working with AI. I agree, and I
think that is a great goal, but this the scope, this proposal
would lead to higher costs for brokers and advisors, which will
be passed along to investors, and fewer technology and online
tools for investors and lower rates of retail participation and
financial inclusion.
Ms. Szczepanik, how involved was your office in creating
this rule?
Ms. Szczepanik. As I said, when rulemaking is undertaken by
the staff at the Commission, by the various divisions that
undertake rulemaking, the FinHub is often called on to talk
about the technology being considered. So, we would provide
technical assistance to staff working on rules about emerging
technologies, how they work, how they are being used in the
market, and what risks they might present.
Mr. Nickel. We have seen the reports explaining that the
U.S. blockchain developer market is shrinking and that China is
quickly advancing. The U.S. must remain the global leader in
all segments of financial services, including digital assets.
This technology moving overseas only puts U.S. consumers at
risk.
In your role at FinHub, are you doing anything to promote
innovation in blockchain technologies here in the United
States?
Ms. Szczepanik. Sure. We promote innovation in a number of
ways. One of them is to invite folks like entrepreneurs,
innovators, and their advisors to come talk to the staff about
issues they are facing, including in digital asset, distributed
ledger technology. We also do a number of outreach events,
going to industry conferences, tech sprints, build-a-thons,
that kind of thing, to encourage beneficial innovation.
Mr. Nickel. My time has expired, and I will follow up in
writing.
Ms. Szczepanik. Thank you.
Chairman Hill. Thank you, Mr. Nickel. Your time has
expired.
Now, we turn to the gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Flood, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Also, Happy Birthday
from everybody in Nebraska.
I would like to focus my questions today on the Federal
Reserve's Novel Activities Program. This supervision program
applies to all banks that are members of the Federal Reserve
System, regardless of size. The Federal Reserve would require
State member banks to go through a supervisory, nonobjection
process in order to issue stablecoins or custody digital
assets.
I specifically have interest in this topic and this program
because I wrote and passed legislation in Nebraska, as a State
Senator there, that would allow State-chartered banks to
custody digital assets, and legislation that would also allow
State-chartered banks to issue stablecoins. The Federal Reserve
has published five broad parameters it will use to determine
the relative risk of these activities.
I would like to start with a kudos, and a thank you. I
reached out to Kelly Lammers, the Director of the Nebraska
Department of Banking and Finance, in advance of this hearing,
and he assured me that he has been in very productive
conversations with the Federal Reserve on the Novel Activities
Program. I thank you for maintaining an open dialogue with the
State of Nebraska. I am exceptionally proud of our Department
of Banking and Finance, and Nebraska is a leader on this issue.
Dr. Gibson, I thank you.
Just to kind of get into the questions here, the Nebraska
Department of Banking and Finance has already issued several
examination manuals that walk through how to comply with State
law in great detail. They know these issues very well, and they
are already working on solutions that create a pathway for
innovation, while also ensuring the safety and soundness of the
banks in our State.
Dr. Gibson, can banks expect further guidance on exactly
how the Federal Reserve non-objection process will work, and
will more guidance and examination manuals be issued, and will
those be publicly available?
Mr. Gibson. All of our examination materials are publicly
available, and we have issued guidance and statements around
the supervisory nonobjection process to try to make it clear to
firms, if they want to investigate that or undertake that
activity, what are the steps they can go through. And we do
partner with the States, because as the supervisor of State
member banks, we are always in partnership with the State
supervisor on our examinations and our oversight.
Mr. Flood. Do you foresee more guidance coming out, or is
the Federal Reserve pretty confident with what it has right
now?
Mr. Gibson. We are always looking at areas where more
transparency or explanation could be helpful, but we have
issued quite a few guidance statements over the past year or
two in this area, so for now, there is nothing imminently
coming out, no.
Mr. Flood. When you put together this guidance for banks
across the State or the nation, do you look to State laws to
see where they are at, States like Nebraska, to kind of give
you an idea as to how you should put your program together?
Mr. Gibson. If we are examining a particular new activity,
we are going to be doing that. In the context of State member
bank supervision, we are going to be partnering with States,
and we feed back what we learned from those exam activities
into our guidance and policy process. We are always learning
from what is happening out in the States, and we take that into
account when we make our own guidance.
Mr. Flood. How many examiners are dedicated to the Novel
Activities Program? If the number of banks interested in these
activities increases due to State pathways being created across
the country, will the Federal Reserve have the resources and
the bandwidth to be able to examine these institutions and work
with them?
Mr. Gibson. I think we will. So far, we have allocated
dedicated examiners to our Novel Activities Supervision
Program, and they have specialized training in these
activities. So, we are using those examiners already on exams,
partnering with our local supervisory teams, and if that
activity scaled up, we would plan to add more resources.
Mr. Flood. I find that interesting because we could be
looking at a new pool of applicants for examiners, given the
digital innovation effort. Where do you see that coming from?
And when you look to hire new examiners, are you finding a
renewed interest in this area, given that we are talking about
digital currency, digital assets?
Mr. Gibson. We have staffed our Novel Activities Program
mostly with internal examiners who have some expertise, and
then get more training. We also hire from outside as well, so
it is a mix for us.
Mr. Flood. That makes sense. It sounds safe and sound. I
appreciate your work. And I appreciate you having and
maintaining such a good dialogue with the State that I
represent. That Federal-State partnership is important, and you
should be credited for doing that.
With that, thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
The ranking member of the Full Committee, Ms. Waters of
California, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you so very much. I guess I would like to
direct this question to Ms. Szczepanik.
We have recently seen another large crypto company,
Binance, held accountable for breaking the law. This time,
Binance knowingly engaged in money laundering, violated U.S.
sanctions, and did not register as a money transmitter. For
example, it knowingly refused to report more than 100,000
suspicious transactions to law enforcement. Binance has been
ordered to pay $4 billion, which includes the largest fine ever
for Treasury to levy, to settle various criminal violations,
and its CEO has pled guilty to criminal charges. This comes on
the heels of Sam Bankman-Fried's conviction for stealing from
FTX customers. This also comes after the SEC filed a lawsuit
against Binance and its U.S. subsidiary for the sale of
unregistered securities, fraud, conflicts of interest, and lack
of disclosure.
How does the SEC's FinHub research and evaluate illicit
activity in the crypto system? How do you assist the SEC in
ensuring that other bad actors in the crypto space are held
accountable?
Ms. Szczepanik. Thank you for the question. FinHub and its
staff are made up not only of attorneys but also specialists in
computer science, in data analytics, and in financial analysis,
and we use those skills and special resources to scan the
market. So, we understand what is happening in the digital
asset market. We have the tools and technology that we need to
do so. And we are looking proactively to analyze trends we see
that may present harms to investors in the market, and we are
passing that information along to our colleagues who are
engaging in the activities of the Commission, for example in
the Examinations, Enforcement, or Rulemaking Divisions, as they
consider what needs to be done to protect investors in the
markets.
We also participate as subject matter experts on a number
of domestic and international bodies that are addressing such
things, including the Financial Stability Board (FSB), he
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO),
and the Financial Action Task Force (FATF).
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. I am going to ask what
could be a sensitive question, but I hope you will try and help
me with this. These crypto companies are coming to Congress and
to the Members of Congress. Some Members of Congress are truly
interested in the role that crypto is going to play in the
world, and particularly in the United States, but many of them
need more information. They need more education. Have any of
you thought about holding some special sessions with Members of
Congress to talk about the problems and the pitfalls that may
occur and give some information that would help them not to
believe that somehow they should be advancing, or even
advocating, because maybe they just do not know enough? How
could you help us with that?
Ms. Szczepanik. We are happy to provide that assistance
through our Office of Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs
(OLIA). I would invite Members to reach out to OLIA if they
want technical assistance on such matters.
Ms. Waters. Do you know whether or not crypto companies are
making huge contributions to Members of Congress?
Ms. Szczepanik. I cannot comment about that particular
issue.
Ms. Waters. I said it was going to be sensitive. But what
other ways can you help us?
Ms. Szczepanik. That is a great question. We stand ready to
provide any technical assistance through our Office of
Legislative Affairs, and the FinHub itself provides a
repository of information concerning activities that the
Commission engages in, with respect to distributed ledger
technology, digital assets, and a number of other technologies
on our FinHub website, so there are a number of resources
there.
Ms. Waters. I thank you for being here today, and I
appreciate your testimony, but I would like to try and organize
small groups of Members of Congress to be able to ask more
questions and get more involved in what is really going on with
some of these companies. So if any of you are willing to
participate at any time with smaller groups, where you can
answer more specific questions, I would appreciate it very
much.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hill. The gentlewoman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Timmons, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Office of Innovation was created by the CFPB in 2018
during the tenure of then-acting Director Mick Mulvaney. Its
primary objective was to focus on creating policies to
facilitate innovation, engage with entrepreneurs and
regulators, and review outdated or unnecessary regulations.
However, in 2022, Director Chopra replaced this entity with
the Office of Competition and Innovation, making a departure
from its predecessor's focus. The new office is more inclined
toward generating reports termed, ``issue spotlights,'' which
concentrate on specific innovative products and services.
The hallmark to the CFPB's former Office of Innovation were
the No-Action Letter and Compliance Assistance Sandbox
programs, both of which limited regulatory uncertainty by
allowing companies to offer innovative financial products to
consumers upon approval from the CFPB. In September of 2022,
both policies were allowed to expire under the current
leadership.
Ms. Epstein, do you believe that letting these policies
expire would facilitate innovation within the financial
industry, and what policies has the office introduced to foster
an opportune environment for innovative companies and products
in the wake of the No-Action Letter and Sandbox programs
expiring?
Ms. Epstein. Thank you for the question. First, I did want
to point out that we still do have the only Federal-level
sandbox in existence, and as I mentioned in my testimony, we do
have a current approval, a recent approval for the Independent
Community Bankers of America to test disclosures related to
construction loans, which is, I think, a very exciting place
where we can innovate with the community bankers to understand
where there might be improvements in the disclosures----
Mr. Timmons. Are you saying that the Sandbox program
deposit insurance did not expire, or you have replaced it with
something similar?
Ms. Epstein. There were multiple sandbox policies, so that
sandbox is still in effect, and we have a current approval.
Unfortunately, for the two policies that you did mention, they,
unfortunately, did not yield, in implementation, the expected
results. So they were, sort of in summary, higher costs than we
had expected, the benefits were a little more illusory, and
then, the other piece of this, which was an inadvertent side
effect, was that we created advantages for the companies in the
sandbox in a competitive environment, which was not an expected
or desirable outcome.
Mr. Timmons. It seems we are moving in the wrong direction,
so thank you for that. The CFPB's Office of Competition and
Innovation has a broader initiative than its predecessor, the
former Office of Innovation. Can you describe how this expanded
mandate has impacted the Office's interaction with market
participants? Just generally speaking, are we making it easier
for people to compete or is it more regulation and less
streamlining the challenges that they face?
Ms. Epstein. We continue to engage very fulsomely with the
entire fintech ecosystem, and try to understand, on a very
broad level, what are the barriers to new entrants? We talk to
fintech companies. We talk to venture capitalists, seeing where
the money is going, where they see, on sort of a broad level,
some of these things are of issue. We talk to bankers. We talk
to large groups in the industry. The focus is more on a market
level as opposed to a particular fintech.
Mr. Timmons. I appreciate your comments, but I still have
concerns about the Office's new direction. I have introduced
new legislation to revert this office back to its original
form, and I urge your office to once again adopt the No-Action
Letter and Sandbox policies that were previously in effect,
which laid the groundwork for innovative companies to thrive.
One final question. The CFPB does not seem to be feeling
the Christmas cheer this year. Two crucial comment periods come
to an end right after the holidays. Can the CFPB and Director
Chopra commit to saving Christmas by providing comment period
extensions for both its 1033 and large participant proposals?
Ms. Epstein. I am not on the rulemaking team, but I am sure
that the rulemaking team will take all extension requests
seriously.
Mr. Timmons. I think some more time would be appropriate.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Steil, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thanks
for holding today's hearing.
Financial innovations help millions of Americans navigate
wealth, make payments, and manage cash flow, and I think a lot
of technological developments we have had have been incredibly
positive. I think the real key here is that we are working with
the regulatory bodies, as policymakers, to provide clarity, to
allow innovation to develop here in the United States, and that
we have a pro-innovation perspective of this.
I want to start with you, if I can, Ms. Epstein. The CFPB
has proposed new rules for popular fintech products and
services, and some of these regulations, in my opinion, will
have a significant impact on the development of products and on
competition, broadly.
I am interested in your role at the CFPB in how you
interact with the CFPB rulemaking process. Could you walk us
through your involvement with that, and in the context of the
larger picture of navigating the rulemaking process at CFPB and
your role of assisting in innovation?
Ms. Epstein. Sure. My office is part of the Research,
Monitoring, & Regulations Division at the CFPB. We fall under
the monitoring category, so along with the statutory offices in
markets, which look at specific market segments as well as the
populations teams, which look at the specific populations and
the impact on, particularly things like military
servicemembers, older Americans, and so forth, we are
specifically looking at some of the more longer-term and
technological aspects----
Mr. Steil. Let me dive in if I can, because I like where
you are going, but we are limited in time. But as it relates to
the CFPB rulemakings, do you opine on the impact those would
have on future technological developments?
Ms. Epstein. Very similar to my colleague, it depends on
the regulation itself, but we do offer technical assistance
related to various rulemakings, particularly in terms of
implementing----
Mr. Steil. Maybe, I can use an example then. We had CFPB
Director Chopra here a couple of days ago, and he was talking
about the CFPB examining earned wage access under a new light.
It is a highly-developing area where people have access to
their wages that they have already earned. Do you have
conversations with your colleagues? What does that look like as
it relates to an area that is innovating quickly?
Ms. Epstein. Yes. For example, on earned wage access, we do
provide information about where the market is developing, the
different business models----
Mr. Steil. But do you provide comments as it relates to
whether or not a rule would actually hinder innovation or
development?
Ms. Epstein. We would have input into a rule.
Mr. Steil. You would. Okay. That is helpful. Thank you very
much.
I am going to shift gears, if I can, just because we are
limited in time, and jump over to our friends at the SEC. Ms.
Szczepanik, in your opening statement, you were talking about
how FinHub actively monitors international fintech
developments, and engages in dialogue with foreign
counterparts. Can you note any of the specific foreign
developments that you are seeing from your foreign counterparts
that we should be looking at developing in the United States?
Ms. Szczepanik. Sure. At FinHub, we are actively monitoring
developments as they occur both domestically and
internationally. We get involved, as subject matter experts, in
the various work that is being done by international bodies
that the SEC is involved with, for example, the Financial
Stability Board, IOSCO, and the FATF. And what I am seeing is a
broad consensus internationally about the risks that certain
technologies are posing, and I do see a broad consensus around
responses to the risks.
Mr. Steil. Great. So, you see a broad consensus in
responses. Do you see that in a regulatory framework being set
forward or in favor of an enforcement-first approach?
Ms. Szczepanik. What I see is that there are high-level
recommendations being put forth by these authorities that
really talk about same activities, same risks, same regulation,
and that is a guiding principle, as well as technology
neutrality.
Mr. Steil. But in the enforcement-first approach I think
the SEC has taken, do you see your counterparts engaging in a
similar fashion?
Ms. Szczepanik. What I see is that there is a broad
consensus internationally about the risks posed by new
technology.
Mr. Steil. But not a broad consensus about how those risks
should be managed, meaning whether or not a regulatory
framework being set forward, as we have here in Congress
legislation that we have moved on, and hopefully the Senate
will act on, I think that is a better approach than the
enforcement-first approach we have seen at the SEC.
I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman from Wisconsin yields back.
I want to thank our good panel today and congratulate you
on your work and innovation in your agencies in a safe and
sound way. We look forward to following up with you.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
I ask each of you to respond as promptly as you are can.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:55 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

December 5, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
