- OVERSIGHT OF THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE SECURITIES
AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 27, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-49

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-314 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
September 27, 2023...........................................     1
Appendix:
September 27, 2023...........................................    81

WITNESSES
Wednesday, September 27, 2023

Gensler, Hon. Gary, Chairman, Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC)..........................................................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Gensler, Hon. Gary...........................................    82

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Donalds, Hon. Byron:
``Retail Investors-Curiously-Jump Into SEC Activist Battle,''
dated July 13, 2023........................................    94
Garcia, Hon. Sylvia:
Chart of Securities and Exchange Commission Chair History....   101
Hill, Hon. French:
Letter to Hon. Charles Schumer, Senate Majority Leader; Hon.
Mitch McConnell, Senate Republican Leader; Hon. Kevin
McCarthy, Speaker of the House; and Hon. Hakeem S.
Jeffries, Minority Leader of the House, from the States of
Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Iowa, South Carolina,
Utah, and West Virginia supporting the Protecting
Investors' Personally Identifiable Information Act, dated
August 15, 2023............................................   102
Editorial from The Wall Street Journal, ``The SEC Wants to
Spy on Your Portfolio,'' dated September 24, 2023..........   108
Lucas, Hon. Frank D.:
Letter to SEC Chair Gary Gensler from various Members of
Congress, dated July 12, 2023..............................   110
Nunn, Hon. Zach:
Letter to SEC Chair Gary Gensler from Hon. John Boozeman,
Hon. Glenn ``GT'' Thompson, Hon. Debbie Stabenow, and Hon.
David Scott, dated July 20, 2023...........................   112
Letter to SEC Chair Gary Gensler from various trade groups,
dated September 12, 2023...................................   114
Pettersen, Hon. Brittany:
Bloomberg, ``How Fake AI Photo of a Pentagon Blast Went Viral
and Briefly Spooked Stocks, '' dated September 5, 2024.....   119
Rose, Hon. John:
Letter to SEC Chair Gary Gensler from various Members of
Congress, dated May 1, 2023................................   124
Tlaib, Hon. Rashida:
Letter to SEC Chair Gary Gensler from various Members of
Congress, dated September 26, 2023.........................   128
Gensler, Hon. Gary:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Donalds.....................................   171
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Fitzgerald..................................   182
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Foster......................................   208
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Garbarino...................................   194
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Gottheimer..................................   205
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Himes.......................................   212
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Lawler......................................   174
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Loudermilk..................................   168
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Meuser......................................   187
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Mooney......................................   200
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nickel......................................   208
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nunn........................................   176
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Sherman.....................................   204
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Steil.......................................   199
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Timmons.....................................   170
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Velazquez...................................   205
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Wagner......................................   136

OVERSIGHT OF THE SECURITIES
AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

----------

Wednesday, September 27, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick McHenry
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives McHenry, Lucas, Sessions,
Posey, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Wagner, Barr, Williams of Texas,
Hill, Emmer, Loudermilk, Davidson, Rose, Steil, Timmons,
Norman, Meuser, Fitzgerald, Garbarino, Kim, Donalds, Flood,
Lawler, Nunn, De La Cruz, Houchin, Ogles; Waters, Sherman,
Meeks, Scott, Lynch, Green, Cleaver, Himes, Foster, Beatty,
Vargas, Gottheimer, Gonzalez, Casten, Pressley, Horsford,
Tlaib, Torres, Garcia, Nickel, and Pettersen.
Chairman McHenry. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Oversight of the Securities
and Exchange Commission.''
I now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Welcome back, Chairman Gensler. The last time you were
before this committee, I voiced my concerns regarding your
reckless approach to rulemaking, including the lack of a
capital formation agenda, a crusade against the digital asset
ecosystem, and unresponsiveness to Congress. Many things have
changed, but so many things remain the same. Those are the same
issues on the docket today. This means that in the last 5
months, you have done nothing to remedy the legitimate and
often bipartisan concern expressed by this committee and these
committee members, and it is disgraceful. So, let's run through
them again.
Let me be clear, Chairman Gensler, our patience is wearing
thin. First, the Securities and Exchange Commission's current
approach to rulemaking jeopardizes the integrity of our
financial markets and puts investors at risk. There is a
critical need for comprehensive economic analysis of the rules
you have proposed and their interaction with one another. Under
your leadership, the Commission has failed to adequately assess
their interplay and cumulative impact. That is shoddy work for
an important agency and does not adhere to the SEC's mandatory
statutory authority.
While the Securities and Exchange Commission has engaged in
a wide-ranging regulatory agenda, you seem to have overlooked
the importance of public input, resulting in bipartisan and
bicameral concerns.
First, Members on both sides of the aisle have raised valid
concerns regarding the Markets in Financial Instruments
Directive (MiFID) relief, swing pricing, and hard close, as
well as your equity market structure overhaul. The Securities
and Exchange Commission has taken no action to address these
concerns.
Second, you continue to fail to prioritize capital
formation. Among your expansive rulemaking agenda, there is not
a single initiative aimed at improving access to capital or
enhancing market competitiveness.
Third, your efforts to choke off the digital asset
ecosystem, which has created real harm for consumers and our
markets overall. You said the law is clear, but your actions
have created more confusion and lasting damage. Chair Gensler,
you have also said your goal is consumer protection, yet your
actions have pushed legitimate digital asset activities outside
of regulated financial institutions where consumers are best-
protected.
On one hand, we have seen bipartisan votes in Congress and
in this committee to provide clear rules of the road and real
consumer protection, and on the other, we have seen your ad
hoc, regulation-by-enforcement approach to digital assets on a
losing streak in the courts. You refuse to be transparent with
Congress regarding your interactions with FTX and Sam Bankman-
Fried. That is the investigation we started last Congress.
Finally, your lack of responsiveness to this committee's
legitimate oversight continues to be unacceptable, and I want
to finish here. In February, this committee made multiple
requests for documents to the Securities and Exchange
Commission. This is normal congressional oversight. Yet, 7
months later, the committee has not received a single non-
public document that was not part of a Freedom of Information
Act (FOIA) production. As I said, our patience is wearing thin.
The SEC is not above the law nor is it unique. Other financial
regulators have routinely complied with congressional
oversight, so let me be clear: I do not want to be the first
chairman of this committee to issue a subpoena to the
Securities and Exchange Commission, and you should not want to
be the first SEC Chair to receive a congressional subpoena.
Either we find a path forward where the SEC recognizes
Congress as a co-equal branch of government and is responsive
to our oversight duties, or my only option is to issue a
subpoena. It is time for you to consider the lasting
consequences of your actions and what that means to the
Securities and Exchange Commission's reputation in the long
term. While your time in this role may be temporary, the
repercussions for your actions may be permanent for the sgency.
I yield back.
I now recognize the ranking member of the committee, Ms.
Waters, for 4 minutes for an opening statement.
Ms. Waters. Good morning. The chairman just indicated that
his patience is running thin. Mine is thinner with the opposite
side of the aisle and the extreme MAGA Republicans who have
taken over the House of Representatives and who are gleefully
forcing the government of the greatest country in the world to
shut down and forcing millions of government workers, including
U.S. servicemembers protecting the country, to work for free or
not at all. Likewise, in 3 days, the Securities and Exchange
Commission, which is in charge of overseeing our $110-trillion
capital markets, will also be shuttered. This extreme MAGA
shutdown would cripple the SEC's ability to stop fraud, help
businesses raise money, or finalize rules that are critical to
investors, but you won't hear the Republicans today express any
concern about the SEC or the countless businesses, workers, or
investors that may be harmed when Republicans unilaterally
defund Wall Street's cop on the beat.
Chair Gensler, I know that you and your agency are likely
concerned about what will happen later this week. I, too, am
concerned. Earlier this year, we saw Fitch downgrade the U.S.
credit rating after Republicans tried to force a default, and
now Moody's is also considering downgrading the U.S. rating if
Republicans and Trump get the shutdown they so desperately
want. I hope we can discuss today how undermining the SEC's
mission by furloughing 90 percent of your staff will affect
this country and your ability to protect our markets.
That said, I want you to know that you are doing exactly
the job that the American people want. Under your leadership,
the SEC is providing investors with the information they need
to evaluate climate change risk, you are reforming the stock
market, which failed investors during the GameStop trading
event, and you are working to empower investors to exercise
their votes over companies they own.
I am also pleased to see that you are finalizing rules that
will bring transparency to private funds, like private equity
funds, and although Republicans will likely claim that the SEC
is implementing too many rules, too quickly, the fact is that
you are moving thoughtfully and effectively. In fact, your SEC
has issued fewer rules than the Trump, Obama, and Bush
Administrations at this point in their tenure, and you have
provided twice as much time to comment than is required by law.
The SEC is very much implementing the priorities that I and my
Democratic colleagues championed when we were in charge and is
shaping up to be the most pro-worker, pro-investor, and pro-
small business SEC since FDR created the agency.
Chair Gensler, I appreciate that you are here today, even
as you and your staff prepare to close the agency. I hope that
if nothing else comes of this hearing, the American people will
understand that this extreme MAGA Republican shutdown is the
biggest threat to our nation's investors, small businesses, and
working families. My patience is wearing thinner than the
chairman's patience. Let's get on with it. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The ranking member yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentlelady from Missouri, Mrs. Wagner, who
is also the Chair of our Subcommittee on Capital Markets, for 1
minute.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Chairman McHenry. Yes, let's get on
with it. The SEC's mission is to protect investors; maintain
fair, orderly, and efficient markets; and to facilitate capital
formation. Unfortunately, your leadership has undermined these
core objectives, sir. None of the 50-odd proposals that your
SEC has proposed promote capital formation. Instead, the focus
has shifted towards imposing costly regulatory and disclosure
requirements, and equally troubling, potential violations of
the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), as recent SEC proposals
lack a comprehensive analysis of market dynamics and their
consequences, especially for SEC rules that have been changed.
Here is the way forward, sir: one, begin with a robust
engagement with market participants to shape your thinking
before proposing rules; two, conduct investor testing; three,
conduct economic analysis looking not just at the individual,
but the cumulative; and four, do not ignore Congress when we
send bipartisan letters expressing concerns about detrimental
effects of the proposals. We need market integrity. I yield
back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired. I will
now recognize the ranking member of our Capital Markets
Subcommittee, Mr. Sherman of California, for 1 minute.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Gensler, you have done more than anyone in
government to thwart the creation of a deficient ecosystem that
would allow corrupt politicians to not have to have hundreds of
thousands of dollars of cash and gold bars in their home where
they could be discovered by the FBI. You prevented a system
where we could have anonymous unhosted wallets, providing an
efficient method for the corrupt politicians of the future. You
are providing additional regulations which provide clarity to
the market participants and protect investors, but according to
a Bloomberg study, you are actually producing fewer regulations
than your recent predecessors. You are generally right, we
accept swing pricing, and finally, ESG is material to
investors. It will affect trillions of dollars of investment
decisions. That is why corporate America is trying to prevent
you from getting that information to the investors who want
to----
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. We will
now turn to our witness.
I now recognize the Honorable Gary Gensler, the Chair of
the Securities and Exchange Commission, for 5 minutes for an
oral presentation of his testimony. And without objection, his
written statement will be made a part of the record.
Chair Gensler, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE GARY GENSLER, CHAIRMAN, SECURITIES
AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)

Mr. Gensler. Good morning, Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member
Waters, and members of the committee. Thank you for inviting me
here today. As is customary, I would like to note that my views
are my own as the Chair of the SEC, and I am not speaking on
behalf of my fellow Commissioners or the SEC staff.
For 90 years, the Federal securities laws and our work to
oversee them have played a crucial role for the public both in
good times and in stress times. The core principles of the U.S.
securities markets regulation have contributed to America's
economic success and geopolitical standing. At this remarkable
agency, we serve investors building for a better future and
issuers raising money to fund innovation, while overseeing the
$100-trillion capital markets where investors and issuers meet.
The essence of this is captured in our three-part mission:
protecting investors; maintaining fair, orderly, and efficient
markets in the middle; and facilitating capital formation, as
Chairwoman Wagner mentioned earlier and Chairman McHenry.
The SEC is the cop on the beat watching out for
constituents. The dedicated staff of the agency does an
extraordinary job with limited resources. America is blessed
with the largest, most sophisticated, and most innovative
capital markets in the world, but we cannot take this for
granted. Even a gold medalist must keep training. That is why
we are updating our rules for the technology and business
models of the 2020s. My written testimony details those
efforts, and I am sure I will get questions on this rule or
that rule, but I would like to just point out, overall, a
context.
We are updating our rules to promote the efficiency,
integrity, and resiliency of the markets in the middle, and
that helps capital formation on one side, and investors on the
other. And we do so with an eye on those investors and issuers
and making sure the markets work for them rather than issuers
and investors working for Wall Street and the markets in the
middle.
We are working to help lower costs, increase access, and
promote financial stability, and each of the proposals we have
made in the last 2 years further this three-part mission, given
the authorities granted by Congress, and our Division of
Economic and Risk Analysis provides robust economic analysis,
which considers the cost and benefits as well as effects on
efficiency, competition, and capital formation as Congress
mandated. We greatly benefit also from public input regarding
economics.
The policies themselves are legal authorities, and we get
that feedback. And in the last 2 years, we provided the public
ample time to comment, with an average of 70 days to comment
from the time the proposal is published. And since January of
last year, 2022, we have always had a minimum of 60 days from
when it is on our website, and sometimes as long as 100 days.
When comment periods close, we often continue to get additional
comments through meetings and otherwise, which staff has
considered as well, including really helpful letters from
members of this committee.
Based on the public feedback, the staff and the Commission
consider possible adjustments to the proposals and whether it
is appropriate to move forward with the final rule. This
process normally takes 12 to 24 months, and we move to adopt
rules only when the staff and the Commission think they are
ready to be considered. We are focused on getting it right
based upon the economics, and the authorities promoting the
mission, not against the clock. The SEC now has issued
proposals for most of that unified agenda 2 years ago. We
finalized 24 rulemakings, nearly all of which have changed from
the proposals based on the public feedback, including from
members of this committee. I am grateful to work alongside a
remarkable staff and fellow Commissioners to promote
efficiency, integrity, and resiliency.
With the possibility of a government shutdown, I would
note, as you are our oversight committee, that we would be down
to a small, skeleton staff, about 7 to 8 percent of our staff,
with everybody else being furloughed. Normal oversight of the
markets, given this, will not be possible in the SEC during the
pendency of a shutdown, so we look forward to the day when we
can get back to work, hopefully, and fulfill our mission in
support of the public. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Chair Gensler can be found on
page 82 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. I will now
recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Chair Gensler, the last time we were here, I asked you
about Ether. In 2018, you said that Bitcoin, Ether, Litecoin,
and Bitcoin cash were not securities, so I want to focus today
on Bitcoin. Why do you believe bitcoin is not a security?
Mr. Gensler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I think you are
referencing remarks I made as a professor at MIT. And as I
wrote in that paper, at that time, it was really about
something called the Howey Test. And the Supreme Court, as the
law of the land, talks about if the public is anticipating a
profit based on the efforts of others. And I think I noted in
that paper back in 2018 that I didn't see that Bitcoin met that
standard.
Chairman McHenry. But your review on Bitcoin--you have made
comments that you believe Bitcoin is not a security. Is that
true?
Mr. Gensler. I think the staff of the SEC have also and the
prior Chair----
Chairman McHenry. I am just asking you this question, and
this is not a, ``gotcha.'' I thought this was going to be an
easy softball into harder questions. Do you think Bitcoin is a
security?
Mr. Gensler. I think I have said in the past that I think
that----
Chairman McHenry. I am asking you to answer my question
now. This is not supposed to be hard.
Mr. Gensler. I know. I said it does not meet the Howey
Test, which is the law of the land about being an investment--
--
Chairman McHenry. It doesn't meet the Howey Test, so,
therefore, it is a commodity. Is that fair?
Mr. Gensler. I would say it is not a security, and the test
is otherwise for other laws.
Chairman McHenry. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(CFTC) says they don't have the authority over Bitcoin and
digital commodities. Do you think legislation is necessary to
protect consumers in the world of digital assets, in
particular, given that gap around just Bitcoin?
Mr. Gensler. I think as I have testified here in this
committee room 4 years ago as a private citizen, that for the
parts of the crypto ecosystem that are not securities under the
Commodity Exchange Act, the CFTC has some anti-fraud
authorities. They don't have what is called plenary authority
to write rules around that, and as I have said in the past--I
have been supportive of our sister agency, if I can say that,
an agency that I once was honored to chair and I liked quite a
bit--doesn't have that plenary authority. And if Congress moves
forward, that can help them.
Chairman McHenry. So, the spot market lacks a regulatory
paradigm and established law? Should we take action there?
Mr. Gensler. I'm sorry. I am not sure I follow. The U.S.
stock market, you are talking about the securities market?
Chairman McHenry. No, the CFTC. I am continuing with your
answer. My follow-up there was because there is not a
regulatory remit. The Congress has given them clear regulatory
remit. We should step in--let me just move on. I have talked
about your noncompliance with document requests made by this
committee. You believe the Commission must vote in order to
produce nonpublic information to this committee, do you not?
Mr. Gensler. Under the Exchange Act, I do believe that the
Commission needs that vote.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. Have you scheduled the vote
necessary to provide the non-public documents to this
committee?
Mr. Gensler. We, I think, have been working with your staff
and believe in the oversight of this committee. We have
provided somewhere over 40,000 payments documents.
Chairman McHenry. Yes. As I said in my opening statement,
you did not provide anything that was nonpublic. In fact, you
produced one of the letters that we wrote to you as a
responsive document, which shows the absurdity of it.
So, the General Counsel's office has indicated to my staff
that after a 10-week review process, these documents are ready
to be transmitted. It just needs a vote. When do you intend to
schedule that vote?
Mr. Gensler. We continue to work with you and your staff.
The Commission has approved that some senior staff will be
taking transcribed interviews, I think, with your staff and
we----
Chairman McHenry. But that is not responsive to my document
request. This should not be the hard work of a chairman to
answer these questions. You have 30 major rulemakings, but you
won't even provide basic documents to us. Your unresponsiveness
is noncompliance, and we will have to take action if you are
not willing to comply. You have a 10-week review process, and
you have not provided documents. Furthermore, you haven't even
done the economic analysis of your interplay of these major
rulemakings that are going to affect anybody who owns a stock,
bond, or any type of security.
So, you have serious questions to answer to the public and
to Congress, and we intend to get your compliance. We can do it
the easy way or the hard way.
And with that, I yield back. The ranking member is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. There are a number of
questions that I would like to ask, but since we started out on
Bitcoin, let's go further into crypto. Chair Gensler, I have
heard you often say there is mass noncompliance by crypto firms
in the marketplace today. I am very concerned with what sounds
like gross violations of the law that end in investors getting
ripped off. The failures and fraud of crypto firms like Terra
Luna, for example, cost investors as much as $60 billion, which
was larger than the Madoff Ponzi scheme in 2008. I know that
the SEC has brought enforcement actions against Sam Bankman-
Fried and FTX, the failure of which caused investors $9
billion.
Since we are talking about everything today, can you please
describe the actions that the SEC has taken to shut down crypto
firms and recover funds of our harmed investors? How much in
penalties have defendants paid, in cases you have set up? Are
crypto firms getting the message?
Mr. Gensler. Thank you. I do share your concerns that this
is a field that is rife with fraud and manipulation and scams,
and the American public is still getting hurt by the
noncompliance in this field. In terms of the SEC's approach, it
is through both policy and rulemaking, and, yes, enforcement.
The SEC had finalized rules with regard to Special Purpose
Broker-Dealers (SPBDs) in crypto, and we also addressed
questions that came up about crypto exchanges, the custody of
crypto in a custody rule that I imagine we will chat a little
bit about later today, and even best execution. But
unfortunately, as you noted, we have brought numerous cases in
this field to try to protect the American public and be a cop
on the beat with regard to so many of these schemes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. I just wanted to make sure
that the opposite side of the aisle, who protects too often, in
too many different ways, crypto firms, knows what you are
doing.
Let me move on. I am going to ask a few questions about the
impact of the government shutdown on the SEC's operation. Chair
Gensler, approximately how many people work at the agency, and
what percentage will be furloughed during a government
shutdown?
Mr. Gensler. We have just under 5,000 employees, and
probably 92 or 93 percent will be furloughed, so we will be
down to a skeleton staff.
Ms. Waters. Which divisions would most be impacted, and
describe for us what these divisions do?
Mr. Gensler. It is really across the whole agency, but the
bulk of our workforce is in examinations and enforcement and
disclosure review, but let me say what the public won't have:
They won't have somebody really at full force overseeing the
market. For companies that want to go public, we won't be able
to really review the documents or what is called documents
going effective if you want to do an initial public offering
(IPO), which is so critical to capital formation. I want to say
this for the public. We will keep open our tips, complaint, and
referral lines, and we will keep open comment files so people
can still submit comments on our rulemakings and the like, but
we won't really have individuals behind the scenes to follow
up, except for a skeleton staff.
Ms. Waters. I, too, am worried about public offerings. I
have worked with the opposite side of the aisle to improve the
ability of those who want to do IPOs, but as you explain it,
this will have a negative impact, this shut down, on the
ability of IPOs to be initiated. Is that correct?
Mr. Gensler. I think that is just a practical reality, yes.
Ms. Waters. What happens if a whistleblower comes to the
Commission with urgent information that could protect
investors? Would there be staff to process this? Could the
Commission deploy resources in response to this information?
Mr. Gensler. Although we will be able to do intakes, there
won't be the usual investigative force of individuals to follow
up as readily unless it is an emergency and it is specifically
about protection of property.
Ms. Waters. What will happen if there is a major disruption
in the capital markets' operations and infrastructure during
this shutdown? Could the SEC be there to respond?
Mr. Gensler. It is a very good question. If there were
market events, as you say, senior leadership would be there,
but again, we would be down to a skeleton staff.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. I will now go to the Vice Chair of the
committee, Mr. Hill of Arkansas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Gensler, it is good
to have you here. I want to start out today and talk about
equity market structure as a topic. Just yesterday, Congressman
Foster and I sent you a letter signed by 16 Democrats and 16
Republicans to express our concerns about the equity market
structure proposals that the Commission has initiated. The
letter urges you, quite simply, to stop your rulemaking on that
broad set of proposals until you finalize the trade execution
data rule, the so-called Rule 605, and that that be done first
so that you can rely on that data for an appropriate
rulemaking.
And this speaks to Chairman McHenry's point about the
interplay between the rules, which, contrary to the ranking
member, I think there are 50 pending proposals. Many of them
interact. They are confusing and sometimes in conflict with
each other, and I think this is a classic example. And I think
it is particularly true where you are failing to do a rigorous
cost-benefit analysis for many of the rules. For instance, the
SEC's dealer proposal, which uses the word, ``uncertain,'' 15
times to describe its impact on efficiency and competition for
the most important financial market in the world: U.S.
Treasuries.
So, Chairman Gensler, I would just say that this is not
MAGA Republicans who are sending you a critical letter of
concern, it is a very bipartisan view, and 32 Members of this
body that think the SEC should reconsider. Would you wait for
the Rule 605 data before you finish the other equity market
proposals?
Mr. Gensler. I thank you for the letter. I did read it last
night around 9:30 when it came in, and it is part of our
comment file, and we will take it and think of it very
seriously. But I would say, in terms of the equity markets, the
rules have largely not been updated since 2000.
Mr. Hill. That may be, but that means that we need to do it
in a comprehensive way, in an interoperative way to make sure
we have the right data. So, I will take it that your short
answer is, no, that it is a comment, but I really urge you to
get these equity markets' proposals in order and to rely on
data and not just emotion or one memes talk event to make
policy.
Let me change subjects. Let me talk about my favorite kitty
cat, which is the Consolidated Audit Trail (CAT). For over a
decade, this bad idea has been floating around the Commission
since the flash crash in 2010, to collect and store private,
personal information on every American, and every American with
a brokerage account, and every broker-dealer. In my view, this
is massive overkill. This is an unnecessary invasion of
privacy. This is a massive new tax on the brokerage accounts of
individual American citizens. And maybe worst of all,
considering the 9 years I have been here, this is another
massive, centralized government database that is going to be
hacked, like the IRS, like the CFPB, and like OPM. I have real
concerns about it, and I expressed those concerns to previous
SEC Chairs Mary Jo White and Jay Clayton, and now to you. In
fact, you inherited this albatross. Why don't you just bury it
and say that we are not going to do the CAT?
Mr. Gensler. I not only inherited that from them, but I
inherited from my dad, a real allergy to cats, and it is
really----
Mr. Hill. Oh my god.
Mr. Gensler. Oh my god.
Mr. Hill. Yes, but we don't have time for that. I am
reclaiming my time. We can do the kitty part later. Do you know
what a targeted exam letter is by the Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority (FINRA)? Do you know what that is?
Mr. Gensler. I am familiar with exam letters.
Mr. Hill. Yes, and do you know what a Blue Sheet is?
Mr. Gensler. Sure, I am generally familiar--I don't know
where you are headed, but I am generally familiar with it.
Mr. Hill. And you know that all of our markets have
regular, daily, inter-day, and overnight global market
surveillance on trading, right? That is a general feature of
all of our self-regulatory organizations (SROs), right? Do you
agree with that?
Mr. Gensler. SROs are responsible to do that, sir.
Mr. Hill. Yes, I understand that, and you regulate the
SROs. So what I am suggesting to you is, there is no
justification for capturing all of these trades when you have,
right now, market surveillance data available to your
Enforcement Division. And you can right now do a sweep exam
through a Blue Sheet, which is where you go to large traders
and you look at everybody who traded in Apple, you can get all
the personally identifiable information (PII) you want because
you have a probable cause for doing that, and that is why CAT,
I think, exceeds what you should be doing. Why is the Blue
Sheet targeted exam process inadequate for you to do your job?
Mr. Gensler. I think you raise a good question, but the
Consolidated Audit Trail gives the self-regulatory
organizations and the SEC a look at those orders and matches up
sometimes across.
Mr. Hill. They have the ability to do that now. They don't
need to capture every trade in every retail brokerage account
in America. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. I will now
recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, who is
also the ranking member of our Capital Markets Subcommittee.
Mr. Sherman. As the chairman points out, it is about
capital formation. You are at the nerve center of the world's
capitalist system, where capital is deployed to the operating
businesses. If we have a shutdown of the government, I think it
has already been pointed out by the ranking member that we will
stop all IPOs in their tracks. Does this also apply to
companies that are already public but are issuing additional
shares, and would this also apply to new bond issuances?
Mr. Gensler. I would be glad to follow up and have staff
chat with you. It is more nuanced. It really depends on whether
they have filings that they can----
Mr. Sherman. So, a few of them are sophisticated----
Mr. Gensler. Many public companies would be foreclosed from
doing additional offerings. Others would be allowed. It really
depends on the nature of their filings.
Mr. Sherman. So, a huge portion of our $100-trillion
capital markets would not be available to raise additional
capital, or a huge portion of the initial capital that would be
raised for operating businesses would be blocked. We also, as I
understand it, as far as providing assurance for the honesty of
markets, you would continue to collect emails as they come in,
but you won't be doing any investigations or opening any
additional investigatory files, correct?
Mr. Gensler. It is really prescribed and narrow. It relates
to a 19th Century law called the Energy Efficiency Act, but we
can protect public property, but it is really----
Mr. Sherman. Okay. So, nobody is going to be stealing your
computers, but it is going to be the Wild West on Wall Street,
all while we are fighting for capital with other countries and
other capital market systems and we put up a sign that says,
``closed.'' I can't think of a worse thing we could do to
American capitalism.
Next, I don't think swing pricing achieves its purpose. We
should want people to invest in mutual funds and diversify and
invest in America. But the swing pricing rule you have put
forward has been criticized by a letter signed by the vast
majority of Democrats on our Capital Markets Subcommittee, and
many Republicans, I think the vast majority, as well as the
Consumer Federation of America. It seems to be an unfair rule
in that giant players can participate in collective investment
trusts (CITs) rather than mutual funds, get the same benefits,
and not be subject to this rule. Investors will be told, you
may not get your net asset value. People who live in the
Pacific Time Zone are disadvantaged. Any chance you will be
taking this rule back to the drawing board?
Mr. Gensler. We have a lot of comments. I am very familiar
with the letter that you and Representative Wagner co-authored.
It is really going at a core feature that when you have a
mutual fund, if you redeem that mutual fund, you should redeem
at the right price so that the remaining shareholders don't get
dilution. It works well in normal times, and less well in
stress times, but we are taking all of that into consideration.
Mr. Sherman. I understand. I will simply point out that for
many years, thousands of mutual funds, all competing for
capital, could have adopted this rule, and not a single one of
them thought, oh, this is what investors want. This is what
will seem fair to investors. You have the safeguarding rule. I
will simply comment that I think we need a safeguarding rule
for intangible assets. I would hope if you feel tangible assets
such as real estate need a safeguarding rule, that you would
write a separate rule. Is the safeguarding rule that you are
writing pretty much structured around the intangible assets,
such as crypto?
Mr. Gensler. No. Its genesis came from Congress itself as
part of the Dodd-Frank Act 12, 13 years ago. There was a new
provision that the SEC address the custody of all customer
assets by investment advisers, so it expanded it from just
funds and securities to all assets. That was the genesis of
this.
Mr. Sherman. I would hope that the rule would have separate
sections and a completely different approach for real estate on
the one hand and crypto on the other. In real estate, the title
is public, and the asset isn't moving anywhere, and intangible
assets and crypto are very different. I believe my time has
expired.
Mr. Gensler. It does have separate sections, but we will
take that under advisement, and it is so good to see
Representative----
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. We will
now recognize the gentleman from Oklahoma making his valiant
return after tussling with a bull. We're happy to have you
back, Frank.
[applause]
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I very much
appreciate that. And I would note to my colleagues, it has been
a long time since I have sat this far down in the committee
hearing.
[laughter]
Mr. Lucas. But after my interaction with a 1,000-pound
bull, I am just happy to be here. So with that, thank you.
Chairman McHenry. I ask unanimous consent to restore the
gentleman's time. We are happy to have you back, Frank.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you.
Before I begin my questions, I would like to reiterate a
few points made in the bipartisan letter that I sent regarding
the SEC's two proposed rulemakings on security-based swaps and
security loans, and I would like to enter that letter into the
record, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Lucas. These proposals, I believe, could impair market
liquidity while increasing risks and costs. And to avoid
unintended negative consequences, the SEC should study the data
for regulatory purposes before moving forward with public
dissemination. This is consistent with the Dodd-Frank Act, and
I hope the Commission will give serious consideration to this
approach.
Now, Chairman Gensler, I would like to focus on the
proposed rule branded as the safeguarding advisery client
assets. The proposed rule would impose requirements that are
inconsistent with the CFTC rules--and you have spent a good bit
of time working on CFTC rules in your past life--and would
indirectly give the SEC, I fear, authority over the CFTC's
regulated markets. And in addition to being outside of the
SEC's authority, this would create significant problems, I
think, across the entire financial markets. Have you consulted
with the CFTC on the impact of the proposed rule, and if so,
for curiosity, what was their feedback?
Mr. Gensler. First, Representative Lucas, it is so good to
see you, and your letter with regard to securities-based swaps
not only gained my attention, but there are many people at the
SEC who would say, this is Representative Lucas' letter, will
you please take a close look at it.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you.
Mr. Gensler. But on your topic and your question about
safeguarding of assets, the staff has consulted with fellow
regulators at the CFTC about that safeguarding rule, and taken
their thoughts into consideration. We are some time away. This
was only proposed earlier this year, and it usually takes 12 to
24 months before we even consider adoption, but I think that
there are paths forward in terms of the intersection between
their Rule 1.25 and these custody rules.
Mr. Lucas. I just think it is imperative that the SEC
refrain from applying the proposal to CFTC-regulated markets.
And I hope that you will be able to commit to that, even if it
means perhaps at some point withdrawing the rule entirely.
Now, second question. The Commission has also recently
proposed a rule regarding the use of predictive data analytics
used by broker-dealers and investment advisers. The proposed
rule cast a broad net over what is considered a covered
technology: ``A covered technology is defined as an analytical,
technological, computational function, an algorithm, model, a
correlation matrix, or similar method or process that
optimizes, predicts, guides, forecast, or directs investment-
related behaviors or outcomes.'' What a mouthful. The included
economic analysis explains that the rule would require
substantial resources to comply with and would prevent smaller
firms from entering the market or adopting new technology at
all.
So, Chair Gensler, could you clarify what technologies are
covered, and is the intent of the rule to make it difficult for
firms to employ certain kinds of technology?
Mr. Gensler. The intent of Rule A is to be technology-
neutral, and one really core thing is that when investment
advisers or broker-dealers interact with investors, that
interaction that if they are using, as you said, a covered
technology for predictive data analytics, that they continue to
put the investors' interests ahead of their own, and not the
reverse, putting the investment advisers' interests ahead of
the investing public. That is the core of this proposal.
Mr. Lucas. I would simply add that given the rapid advances
in machine learning and generative artificial intelligence
(AI), the United States should lead the way in the development
of innovative technologies that would unlock new economic
opportunities. And we should be careful not to be so hostile to
new technologies that we stop innovation in its tracks.
With that, I will simply say thank you, Chairman Gensler.
And Chairman McHenry, I spent 7 weeks being calm and at home. I
have not been that calm and that long at home since 1986, so I
am happy to be back with all of you, and with you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. Well, Frank, we are happy to have you
back and as a current Chair of one committee, and a former
Chair of another committee, we honor the old bulls.
Mr. Lucas. And I missed the ranking member, too.
Chairman McHenry. I will now recognize Mr. Meeks of New
York for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Chairman
Gensler, for appearing before us today.
Over the course of the last few months, I have had the
opportunity to ask both the SEC's Director of the Division of
Economic and Risk Analysis, and the Director of the Division of
Investment Management about the private funds rules. In
particular, I am asking about revisiting the economic analysis
to ensure that it adequately considered the disparate impact on
emerging minority- and women-owned asset management firms,
minority- and women-owned businesses, and historically-
underinvested communities. Dr. Wachter assured me that the SEC
shared my concerns, and Director Birdthistle testified that the
economic impact analysis was expanded to look into these
concerns.
So my question to you is, one, can you confirm that the
economic analysis was expanded, and if so, can you speak to the
specific changes that were made in response to the findings
from that expanded analysis?
Mr. Gensler. The rule, as other rules do, considers the
effect on small businesses. And in this rule particularly, the
economic analysis looked at small businesses, including those
that are women-owned and minority-owned investment advisers
running private funds.
Mr. Meeks. I would like to follow up on that, but I have so
many questions I want to ask you because it is really important
to get more details of what those findings were. But I will ask
you more about that in writing and get a response because I
want to shift to a related issue that I find to be disturbing.
On page 553 of the private fund rules, the Commission seems
to seriously suggest that smaller investment advisers, whom we
know are likely to be predominantly minority- and women-owned,
consider reducing their assets under management to avoid
registering with the SEC to help mitigate the impact of the
rule to them. Now, Mr. Gensler, we know that minority-owned
firms are 3 to 4 times more likely to fund minority enterprises
and their portfolio companies. So wouldn't telling these firms
to stifle their own growth perpetuate the lack of diverse
representation in the industry and, therefore, decrease the
amount of funding going to diverse entrepreneurs?
Mr. Gensler. As the economic analysis noted and you just
read, there are often some firms, whether it is in a rule like
this or other rules, that are right at a cutoff point where
they might be registered and regulated, that they might make
different choices. But overall, this rule is actually really
helpful because it promotes competition and transparency. The
biggest fund managers would have to provide greater
transparency to their investors. And the smaller asset managers
can actually benefit from that greater transparency and
competition around the side letters that they might be cutting
with large asset pension funds and the like.
So, it is really a balancing of these economic
considerations. It was pro-capital formation, it was pro-
investor because it promotes transparency in the middle of the
market, that asset managers would have transparency about their
fees, their performance, and the so-called side letters that
they enter into.
Mr. Meeks. I just have problems with it because it seems to
me, again, you are telling these asset managers to not grow, to
not continue to build where they can do more because of the
people that they serve, so it is an issue for me, which I will
follow up on.
Under your leadership, the SEC has been incredibly active,
and I will leave it to others to discuss the pace and the
breadth of the Commission's rulemakings. But what I wonder is
whether or not the SEC considers how their proposed rules will
interact with existing and draft rules during the rulemaking
process, particularly when it comes to the economic impact of
the finalized and pending rules, and do you think there would
be any value to doing a holistic analysis?
Mr. Gensler. We do in each economic analysis, which often
runs between 100 and 250 pages. Each of those considers other
rules that may have been adopted and adjusts the baseline in
each of those analyses.
Mr. Meeks. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. I will now recognize the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Sessions, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, and I
appreciate the gentleman, my friend, Mr. Meeks, for his
conversation with the chairman. Chairman Gensler, welcome once
again to the committee.
Mr. Gensler. It's good to see you, sir.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you very much. Chairman Gensler, I
think there is a lot of happy talk and smiling that takes place
from you and your agency as they come up here, and they try and
talk about the two principles of listening to stakeholders and
industry participation. And yet, I think you are hearing across
this committee that we wish we could have a better relationship
with you and your entire organization. And we have applauded
them, sent letters, done everything nice that you can do, and
yet we show up here and we find a way to provide feedback. We
would like to sincerely turn that around.
As you know, you and I spoke a couple of years ago about an
issue that is still unresolved because the SEC would not even
let this firm know what their problem was, and you told me it
would take at least 214 days, because that is how long it takes
before you are able to turn issues around, when your Fort Worth
office already knew the answer. And I think it is this kind of
action on behalf of the SEC that causes Members of Congress to
react the way we do.
Last November, the SEC announced a massive increase in
enforcement fines--$6.4 billion in 2022, up from $3.8 billion
in 2021--and you have launched a regulatory crusade against the
financial services industry through enforcement. You have told
us that. We see that. Can you please tell me what you have done
with the money from these enforcement actions, and where that
money goes?
Mr. Gensler. First, sir, if I may, I think in the matter
you talked to me about a week or so ago, we filed a civil
litigated matter against that company, so I think that is all a
matter of public record.
Mr. Sessions. Then, I have learned that now. Thank you.
Mr. Gensler. Right.
Mr. Sessions. But for the 2 years prior to that, there was
attempted resolution. And you even blocked that company from
their counsel, who was very capable, from engaging in that,
knowing what that was, where they could have corrected that or
found a way to work with it because it put at least $50 million
directly at risk. Mr. Chairman, can you explain where the money
from these enforcement penalties is winding up?
Mr. Gensler. There are a number of places. Much of it goes
into what is called fair funds. Congress helped set up a
process where the public can actually get money back. Those
that are harmed can get money back, and some of the penalties
and so forth go into the U.S. Treasury, so some in fair funds
and back to those who have been hurt, but some, of course, also
go into the U.S. Treasury.
Mr. Sessions. So, the SEC takes the money and follows the
laws that have been established.
Mr. Gensler. Yes. We are funded separately, of course. We
are appropriated----
Mr. Sessions. I didn't know that.
Mr. Gensler. ----in that we are funded by fees that are
fees on transactions and----
Mr. Sessions. Yes, sir. I just wanted to make sure that it
is as a result of what Congress has established with the fair
funds about what they would do with that money, and testimony
today is that is what you have done with the $6.4 billion?
Mr. Gensler. Not all of it, sir.
Mr. Sessions. Then, please add a comment and add the rest.
Mr. Gensler. We can follow up with the details because of
that----
Mr. Sessions. I am interested in following up on the
details, and I would ask that your staff--just like Congressman
Lucas sends a letter and your staff knows, oh, we got a letter
from Congressman Lucas, let's respond very quickly here, I
would like to send you a letter today asking for those details.
Mr. Gensler. Thank you. The actual breakdown is a matter of
public record. We put it in our financials each year. I just
don't have it memorized.
Mr. Sessions. That is fair. I would not either. Mr.
Chairman, we really, I think, would like to, on a bipartisan
basis up here, have better interaction with your organization
and with you, and I think what you have heard today is another
calling on a bipartisan basis for us to do that. We believe if
we express our opinion, you should express yours back, not just
delay that. I want to thank you for being here, sir, and I will
engage you on this matter. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman yields back. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much. First of all, Chair
Gensler, I agree with our ranking member, Ms. Waters. I believe
you are doing an excellent job at a very difficult and
challenging time facing our economy and especially our
securities markets.
On July 12th, my good Republican friend, Congressman Frank
Lucas, and I sent you a follow-up letter with respect to the
SEC's proposed rule regarding the impact of publicly disclosing
proprietary positions in large security-based swaps above
certain reporting thresholds. And specifically, Congressman
Lucas and I raised concerns with how this move could impair
market liquidity and hinder the SEC's core mission to maintain
fair, orderly, and efficient markets.
My question to you is, first, I know you have previously
said you understood the law to require some public availability
of this sensitive information. But where can you expand on
whether widespread public access to large security-based swap
(SBS) positions could in any way impair the ability of market
participants to operate their trading business or limit their
ability to hedge effectively?
Mr. Gensler. We continue to consider at the staff level and
the Commission level, not just your comment letter with
Representative Lucas, but others about this, that securities-
based swaps can be used to basically replicate the positions
that are taken in the stock and bond markets, but particularly
in the stock markets. And you might recall about 2 years ago,
there was a family office called Archegos that did that and did
that in quite some size. That is one of the reasons, not the
only reason, but one of the reasons as we look at this, we say,
Congress gave us this authority. This is one of the remaining
authorities we had not addressed from Dodd-Frank.
And so, we took it up. We put a proposal out about the
possible requirements to report to the Commission, and then in
some cases report publicly these large either credit default
swaps or total return swaps that, of course, credit default
swaps were at the center of the 2008 crisis, and total return
swaps were at the center of this one example, this Archegos
example.
Mr. Scott. Yes. Now, let me ask you this question. Do you
see any risk in allowing the public to take advantage of this
information, for example, by facilitating front-running and
copycat trading, which could drive up the costs for all market
participants?
Mr. Gensler. I believe we have gotten that comment from a
number of commenters. It is taken up in our economic analysis,
but it is an important issue of all public transparency. The
markets can benefit from transparency, but sometimes, there is
somebody that had an advantage of the opacity. When I was on
Wall Street, we used to have a saying at the firm I was at,
that darkness was our friend, and it was about how sometimes
opacity helps make more money as a dealer. But it is not
necessarily the case that the markets themselves--economists
tend towards the transparency, which helps the proper pricing
in the markets and also helps capital formation.
Mr. Scott. I am delighted with your presentation. I
understand with low economic and finance that I handle at
times, particularly with the stock market. Keep up the good
work. Don't get discouraged. We will get out of this mess in
our financial markets. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. I will
now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And it's good to see
you, Chairman Gensler.
Mr. Gensler. It's good to see you, sir.
Mr. Posey. In spite of the SEC Inspector General and
Government Accountability Office (GAO) recommendations, the SEC
continues to assert that as an independent agency, the
Commission is not required to do the same kind of regulatory
analysis and cost-benefit analysis as other agencies. Why is
the agency so defiant about the suggestion to be as accountable
as other agencies?
Mr. Gensler. Actually, sir, we follow the mandate. In 1996,
Congress put in our statute that we had to do economic
analysis, and we follow that. And then, after a number of court
cases 20 years ago or so, we updated our guidance to ensure
that we followed Congress' mandate, so we do economic analysis,
again, sometimes measuring in a couple of hundred pages. In
every one of our releases, we get feedback from the public, and
then we adjust, and we modify.
Mr. Posey. So, the Inspector General is wrong? You don't
need to do any further analysis?
Mr. Gensler. In fact, we do need to do analysis because
Congress mandated it. We have to analyze the efficiency, the
competition, and the effects on capital formation, and in doing
so, we lay out an economic baseline. And then, we have to look
at alternatives to the proposal, reasonable alternatives, and
we look at cost and benefits. We do all of that.
Mr. Posey. And any rules are in conformance with the
Administrative Procedure Act?
Mr. Gensler. Yes, we do that in compliance with the
Administrative Procedure Act, but also, Congress added these
other provisions in 1996, and, as I say, after a number of
court interpretations, so that in 2005 and so forth, we updated
how we did this, and we follow guidance that has been in place
since 2012. I think I am the fourth Chair who has been
following similar guidance for 11 years now.
Mr. Posey. Does the Commission assess and analyze
cumulative economic impacts of the rules that it makes and the
interrelationship with other agencies?
Mr. Gensler. We analyze for each one a baseline, as I
mentioned. So if, for instance, there was an interaction and we
finalize a rule, then we necessarily update the baseline for
the next consideration for the world as it exists at that point
in time.
Mr. Posey. Okay. In your climate disclosure rule, are you
requiring that firms pursuing ESG-directed investments also
disclose the risks they face from favorable regulations not
materializing or climate subsidies drying up or slowing down?
Mr. Gensler. The proposal is really to capture the risks
that investors want to understand. The proposal was about both
the opportunities and the risks, and I think you did use this
word--it is about, ``materiality.'' We are not a climate
regulator. We are really a disclosure-based regulator, and
thousands of investors, more than thousands but representing
tens of trillions of dollars of assets today, are making
investment decisions, and I will share a statistic with you. Of
the Russell 1000, the top thousand companies in the U.S., 81
percent currently make climate risk disclosures, and 57 percent
disclose their greenhouse gas Scope 1 and Scope 2. So, what we
are trying to do is just try to bring some comparability to
that, in a sense, too, for investors, but also to avoid some
greenwashing, frankly, so to bring some comparability to that,
which is already happening.
Mr. Posey. Based on your strategic planning, which of your
proposed rules is most vulnerable to the major questions
doctrine set down in West Virginia v. EPA.
Mr. Gensler. We really do everything we can to stay within
the laws as Congress had passed and how courts interpret them.
We are familiar with the case, the Supreme Court case. It is
the law of the land, as you mentioned, and we take a very close
look at that to ensure that when we finalize rules, it is
within the laws and how the courts interpret it.
Mr. Posey. Are you trying to resolve any of those major
questions at this time?
Mr. Gensler. I would broaden it out, sir. It is like any
time the Supreme Court speaks to us broadly, the administrative
state's authorities, we take a look at that, and we take a look
at every comment we receive from the public to stay within our
authorities.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Posey. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. I will now recognize the gentleman from
Missouri, Mr. Cleaver, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Chairman Gensler, for being here today. I am one of those
people who believes that there is such a thing as climate
change, and I agree with the scientists, I guess. Most of the
warming that we are experiencing actually took place over the
last 40 years, and the last 9 years are the warmest
temperatures that we have had since keeping track of the
weather temperatures.
And I am from Kansas City, Missouri. The Missouri is the
second-longest water system in North America. The water heads
up in Montana, snakes its way all the way through Missouri, and
then meets up with the Mississippi in St. Louis. It goes
through seven States. And the only reason I am mentioning that
is that we are experiencing all kinds of events along the
Missouri River system. We have had droughts, flooding is
becoming more volatile, and weather events are becoming more
extreme and are impacting the Missouri River, and this becomes
uneconomical in the sense that the low water levels, which are
reaching sometimes record lows, disrupt business.
We do a lot of barge trafficking on the Missouri and
Mississippi Rivers, and that is being disrupted, and the crisis
puts into question our viability and long-term dependability.
So, I was pleased that in March of last year, the SEC released
the proposed rules to require public companies to make a
variety of quantitative and qualitative disclosures regarding
climate-related risks. Is there any company, any kind of
economic interest in the United States that you think would be
immune from climate risk as we are dealing with this? We may
not be dealing with it as powerfully as we should, but are
there any exemptions that you can think of--companies or
corporations--that would not be impacted or are not being
impacted today?
Mr. Gensler. Again, I understand your views. We are not a
climate regulator.
Mr. Cleaver. I understand.
Mr. Gensler. It is a matter of investors making investment
choices, and for some companies, investors are getting
disclosures, and we are trying to bring some comparability to
those disclosures. For some companies, it is viewed as
material, and for some companies, it is not. That is an
important distinction, of course. But there are so many
different sectors and so many different industries in this
country, and we are merit-neutral, but we are not disclosure-
neutral. And right now, 80-plus percent of the housing
companies are already making disclosures. It is really our
responsibility to bring some consistency and comparability for
investors to get decision-useful information.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes. I am not suggesting that you are the EPA
or some kind of climatologist. I just want to make sure that
the SEC continues to measure the impact through its disclosures
of what is going on dangerously with climate change and that it
will all impact corporations.
Mr. Gensler. I would say this. We have 16,000 comments. We
have heard very consistently from investors that they find this
information decision-useful and they would benefit from more
consistency and comparability in the information they are,
frankly, already receiving, so that is what we are focused on.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. We will
now recognize the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who
is also the Chair of our National Security Subcommittee, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Gensler,
my good colleague here, Mr. Cleaver, and I wrote to you in May
regarding the SEC's re-proposed Rule Number 192, prohibition
against conflicts of interest in certain securitizations, and
our concerns about the potential treatment of mortgage
insurance-linked notes (MILNs). Our letter was filed under the
bulk of all comment letters, and the first sentence asked for a
clarification of the language that is in your rule. So, we are
disappointed with the interpretation of our letter, which is
pretty plain from the standpoint that we would like to have an
answer. But mortgage insurers are a significant source of
private capital in the housing finance system, and these
transactions are an important tool to reduce taxpayer risk
exposure and cost.
Question number one, do you agree that Federal policy
should encourage more private capital in the housing market,
especially when it involves well-capitalized and highly-rated
entities?
Mr. Gensler. I think there are other agencies that are
responsible there, but certainly our role at the SEC is to
facilitate a mortgage market. We oversee, I don't know, an $11-
trillion or $13-trillion mortgage securitization market. And
what we are trying to do in that market, like other markets, is
to drive for greater efficiency and, as you say, opportunity
for homeowners.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The question is, can you be a partner with
the private sector? In other words, reinsurance for these
companies is very important to allow the spread of risk and
then, of course, the reduction of cost. The question is pretty
simple: Would you support something like that?
Mr. Gensler. I think, if I understand the question, it's
that mortgage originators also rely on mortgage insurance, and
I agree that is an important part of the market.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. In our letter, we say that the
rulemaking may unintentionally prohibit private insurers from
procuring reinsurance by the capital markets through these
MILNs, which would negatively impact homebuyers, lenders, and
taxpayers. Are you considering changes to the rule to clarify
the treatment of mortgage insurance-linked notes?
Mr. Gensler. Without prejudging any adopting release, we
are considering all the comments, including yours, these
individual letters you reference. Congress gave us a mandate
that we had to help ensure that underwriters and sponsors of
certain mortgage securitizations be bet against their
investors, and that is what we are trying to do.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Gensler, the letter should not be
canned with the comment letters. It is a request for you to
clarify what you are trying to accomplish here, and the letter
pointed out what we need clarification of, so we would
appreciate a response. Thank you for that.
I also sit on the House Select Committee on the Chinese
Communist Party. And as a result of my position there, and the
chairmanship of our National Security and Illicit Financing
Subcommittee, in 2022, the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (PCAOB) inspection reports of Mainland China and Hong
Kong accounting firms, which audit U.S.-listed Chinese
companies, were scathing, and a reminder that financial
statements produced by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP)-
controlled companies should never be trusted. Both reports
showed unacceptable rates of Part I.A deficiencies, which are
deficiencies so large that PCAOB staff believe the audit firm
failed to obtain sufficient audit evidence to support its work
on the public company's financial statements. Essentially, the
audits were useless. Is it correct that under the Holding
Foreign Companies Accountable Act, these two firms, which
failed so spectacularly, will not be inspected again by the
PCAOB for another 2 to 3 years?
Mr. Gensler. I am not familiar enough with the PCAOB's
rotating schedule, but it is accurate that when the PCAOB goes
to inspect an auditing firm in any country, they don't have the
staff to go in on an annual basis.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The premise is correct that they only have
to do it every 2 to 3 years, so Mr. Sherman and I have
introduced a piece of bipartisan legislation that would require
them to have an annual audit. In 2020, there were 1,000
companies on the exchange, and it now stands between 250 and
300. A lot of them are shell companies, and when were
threatened with an audit, they suddenly disappeared. The
funneling of our capital to Chinese companies/the Chinese
Government and the Chinese Communist Party has to stop, and we
would appreciate your support for something like that, and just
a quick comment, yes or no?
Mr. Gensler. Look, I think it is really important. If
somebody wants to issue stock in the U.S., they need to comply
with their laws.
Mrs. Wagner. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Gensler. Usually, with China, that is very important.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Connecticut, Mr. Himes, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Himes. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thanks for
joining us today, Chairman Gensler. I want to talk with you for
3 minutes or so about my ongoing efforts to codify insider
trading into law, but I do want to take a minute here, since we
are on the verge of a government shutdown, to just see how that
affects you and your organization.
It is sort of taken for granted around here that a shutdown
is going to occur because my friends on the other side of the
aisle can't find the coherence to pass a rule on the House
Floor, much less do what we know needs to be done to avoid a
shutdown, which is to pass a bipartisan continuing resolution.
The Senate has figured that out. They are working on that. We
will figure that out eventually. In the meantime, to
demonstrate the importance of doing that, we are going to shut
down the government because of some MAGA extremists.
Now, we get asked all the time about the very visible
stuff. We will be treated in the next couple of weeks to the
sight of 19-year-old Marines and sailors lining up at food
banks because they won't know if they are getting paid. The
Small Business Administration (SBA) will be shut down, and they
will not be able to lend to small businesses, and those small
businesses may go under. We could go on with all of the public
stuff.
But you lead an organization that has an awful lot of
people who could be making a lot more money at a bank or at a
law firm, who are going to be told that they are nonessential,
and who may be furloughed. So, let me just give you a minute or
so here. I am curious, even though it is not going to make
headlines, what would a shutdown do to morale and capability
inside the Securities and Exchange Commission?
Mr. Gensler. It is a remarkable, dedicated staff. We are
looking at probably 90 to 93 percent of our staff will be
furloughed, so we will be down to a skeleton crew of about 7 to
8 percent of our staff. In terms of what it would do for
morale, I think that history shows, because we had one of these
in 2018, for 35 days at that point in time, that it is hard on
people. It is hard because they are not getting a paycheck. It
is hard because, as you rightly say, they can get jobs at law
firms and elsewhere, and they are just really dedicated public
servants.
In terms of the markets, I would say if a company were
deciding to go public or raise offerings, they would want to go
effective before Friday if they are ready to. If not, they
might be in a sort of a subliminal state where they can't
access the markets because we can't effectively review those--
--
Mr. Himes. Let me redirect you for a second to, a company
is raising capital, but your SEC is a whipping boy. You know
that, but the truth is the organization is full of people who
are out there prosecuting fraud, who are stopping insider
trading. Are we going to see, if there is a meaningful
shutdown, fraud go unprosecuted, and insider trading? You won't
have the capacity to address these things which hurt the
American public, correct?
Mr. Gensler. Yes. While somebody can still file a tip,
complaint, and referral, or somebody could file as a
whistleblower, there won't be the people on the other side to
really review it and investigate it.
Mr. Himes. Thank you. Okay. Speaking of insider trading, I
want to just briefly discuss with you something I have worked
on for 7 years now, which, as you know, is trying to define,
``insider trading,'' in law. It is not defined in law today, as
you know, and as a result, we have court-made law, Newman,
Solomon, and Martoma overturning each other, creating a great
deal of uncertainty, prosecutions being overturned, convictions
being overturned, a great deal of uncertainty. I am a believer
in this idea that if we are going to send somebody to jail, we
should be very clear about why we are doing that.
So, I would love to get a minute or so from you about,
where are we? Would we benefit from a codified statute on
insider trading law? Would that remove some of the uncertainty
and remove some of the chance that the courts will overturn
your traditional activities?
Mr. Gensler. I think that we have had the benefit at the
agency of robust, as you said, largely court-made law from the
1980s on, and you referenced some cases even in the last 6 to 7
years. But I think we have provided you and other Members, if I
remember correctly, technical assistance on a legislative
package that you had last year, if I recall, that almost made
it into the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA), if I
recall. But again, I think that we have good, robust
authorities, but the technical assistance, I recall, supported
what you were trying to achieve.
Mr. Himes. And I think you gave us this technical
assistance if we could preserve those authorities that are
legacy authorities, if you will, but if we could----
Mr. Gensler. That was the key, that we didn't want to in
any way lose the authorities all the way up to the Supreme
Court that we had had.
Mr. Himes. Right, but I see you nodding. If we could codify
a definition of, ``insider trading,'' and reduce some of the
risk of overturning of case-made law, that might, in the long
run, simplify your task and create confidence in the in the
markets, correct?
Mr. Gensler. Yes, and, again, we should follow up with
staff, but our major concern was that we not somehow undo some
of the really good law that is in place.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Himes. Thank you, Chairman Gensler.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes herself for 5 minutes. Chair Gensler, while you were
a professor at MIT, you spoke at length about how technology
could be used to democratize finance. In fact, in a podcast
entitled, ``Paying it Forward with FinTech with Professor Gary
Gensler,'' you stated, ``What I was drawn to at MIT was this
sense that maybe we can democratize capitalism a bit more, that
we can use technology to make finance more inclusive and more
accessible to many more millions of people in our country and
many more hundreds of millions of people around the globe.''
Now, sir, as Chair of the SEC, you have put forward a
predictive data analytics proposal that jeopardizes the
innovation and technology that has made investing available to
millions more Americans than ever before.
And I am confused as to which Gary Gensler the American
public should believe, the academic version, who spoke
glowingly about the power of technology to help more investors
participate in U.S. and global capital markets, or the SEC
version, who apparently thinks all use of any technology by
broker-dealers and investment advisers is inherently conflicted
and that firms should just stop using technology altogether.
Chair Gensler, could you please briefly explain this change in
your views?
Mr. Gensler. I thank you for the question. It's a clever
question. It is the same Gary Gensler. It is not my identical
twin brother, Rob, or anything. It is me, and I believe
technology is so transformative, and I think artificial
intelligence and machine learning is transforming this decade
and so forth. I think robo advisers and brokerage apps, whether
they are using these new technologies or some of the older
predictive data analytics, should just stand by the basic
concept that the investor is first, not the investment adviser
is first. That is all.
Mrs. Wagner. We agree there. And this proposal fails to
acknowledge the already-existing and well-functioning SEC
regulations, such as Regulation Best Interest (Reg BI), and the
fiduciary standard that protects investors. I would really urge
you to withdraw this regulation, as we already have this in
place.
During your last appearance in front of this committee, I
asked you, sir, if you were planning to rewrite Regulation Best
Interest (Reg BI), and you said that it was not currently on
your agenda. However, the Commission's proposal on conflicts of
interest associated with the use of predictive data analytics
effectively rewrites Reg BI by holding broker-dealers and
investment advisers to a higher standard of conduct and
conflict neutralization than Reg BI. Were you intentionally
withholding your plans to supersede Reg BI, sir, with a new
proposal, when you testified in April?
Mr. Gensler. I feel the same as I did in April. I think
this doesn't change Regulation Best Interest or the fiduciary
interpretation. This does build on them an important area
around using predictive data analytics. It is a little bit of a
math thing, but if the math is basically putting the investment
advisers interest ahead of the investors, if it is making a
recommendation or it is giving a nudge, a behavioral nudge, to
steer somebody somewhere, therein lies a conflict. That is what
we are trying to----
Mrs. Wagner. It is too broad. We don't even know what
technology would be applied here, and at the core, Reg BI has a
fiduciary standard, the best interest, that is already there.
You are now superseding that, and it is not just duplicative;
it potentially throws out the fiduciary rule in Reg BI, so I,
again, would encourage you, and I think we have bipartisan
support, to withdraw this rule as soon as possible.
And let me just ask you this question since I have limited
time, because this is a question I have sent you to which we
haven't received a response: How many staff with the Division
of Trading and Markets, the Division of Investment Management,
and the Division of Economic and Risk Analysis were actively
involved in drafting the predictive data analytics proposal?
Mr. Gensler. I don't have a number, but I would say that
generally speaking----
Mrs. Wagner. Do they have advanced degrees in computer
science, data science, or engineering, sir?
Mr. Gensler. A number of them have advanced degrees in
economics and computer science, but I don't know how many of
them do.
Mrs. Wagner. I have sent you a list of questions, and I
would love to have those answers. My time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Foster, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I want to
thank our witness for staying up until 9:30 p.m. to accept and
analyze the just-in-time delivery of our bipartisan letter with
16 Republicans and 16 Democrats on it, that French Hill and I
prepared.
I want to make sure that you understand what the meaning of
that letter is. It is not that you should stop working on the
market reforms in parallel with 605 upgrades. Our intention is
that you actually get the 605 done so that you have upgraded
reporting of quality of order execution and so on and have that
in place so you can have a look at the data, then finalize the
market reforms and watch, hopefully, the quality of order
execution improve. And so, the meaning of the letter is to
sequence those in that way, but not to cease all work on the
planning and so on of the market structure reforms, so please
read the end of the first paragraph carefully. One of the
reasons it was late is that we did a certain amount of
wordsmithing to get that right.
And I also want to comment a little bit on, it was on your
shift when we had the flash crash, right? You were running the
CFTC during the flash crash. I remember when we had a hearing
maybe 4 days afterward. The CFTC had, the night of the flash
crash, 30 people with the entire trading history on their
laptops figuring out what the heck happened, and 4 days later,
the SEC, which did not have a Consolidated Audit Trail-like
structure in place, was still collecting the data to figure out
what the heck happened. And I think that is why we should not
lose sight of making the Consolidated Audit Trail a success and
really do it, and I think that is a separable discussion from
the beneficial owner and cybersecurity issues there.
And in particular, one of the things that I raised with you
last time you were in front of our committee here, was I asked
you about the possibility of actually using the Consolidated
Audit Trail to simplify much of the reporting requirements
under Rule 605, so that instead of making a requirement of
every one of the zillions of companies that would have to do
it, that you would simply use the fact that the Consolidated
Audit Trail has the information necessary to make a public
report on a quality of order execution for the different
brokerages so that you could simply have either FINRA or some
competent private subcontractor, like an S3 or similar, just
have them write a piece of software that is run that provides
this report based on the Consolidated Audit Trail. This
actually will relieve the regulatory burden on a lot of the
market participants and get something that was guaranteed to be
an apples-to-apples, well-defined comparison of the quality of
order execution.
Have you had time since we spoke on this to put any thought
into that idea and see if that is a useful way to simplify and
speed up the 605 reporting?
Mr. Gensler. I want to compliment you on your excellent
memory of 13 years ago when I was at the CFTC----
Mr. Foster. It was seared in pain.
Mr. Gensler. What did you say?
Mr. Foster. It was seared in pain when----
Mr. Gensler. Seared in pain?
Mr. Foster. It was like we were in a car accident.
Mr. Gensler. It was the very next morning that the CFTC had
all that information. The SEC did not. You are raising an idea
as to whether the Consolidated Audit Trail could be used for
data about the quality of order execution. And although it is
possible that technologists could figure and sort that through,
that in and of itself would raise costs and benefits as well,
and everybody has encouraged us to always look at cost and
benefits. I would just say, currently, market participants,
brokers, can quantify their order quality. That is what this
Rule 605 actually----
Mr. Foster. That is right, but then you have to make sure
it is an apples-to-apples comparison. If there is an ambiguity,
they will resolve it in favor of making their numbers look
good. You are going to have to have some of your employees
looking over that, whereas if you just say, okay, find a
competent entity, S3 seems to have a pretty good market share
of doing that already or FINRA, to just write one piece of
software, make it public, and run that piece of software in the
Consolidated Audit Trail so that everyone understands exactly
what numbers are being reported.
Mr. Gensler. One thing is the Consolidated Audit Trail does
not capture and compare the orders--you put an order out and
here is the actual quality, so more requirements, I think, go
into the Consolidated Audit Trail, but we can follow up on that
further.
Mr. Foster. No, I think it actually could----
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Barr. Chairman Gensler, have you ever spoken to Senator
Menendez about the Security and Exchange Commission's Director
of Enforcement, Gurbir Grewal?
Mr. Gensler. No.
Mr. Barr. On May 20, 2021, your public calendar notes a
call with Senator Menendez. What was discussed during that
call, if you can remember?
Mr. Gensler. It was 2 years ago, sir, but if I recall,
there was a discussion about possible disclosure by public
companies of political contributions.
Mr. Barr. You hired Mr. Grewal as the SEC's Director of
Enforcement shortly after that May 20th call. Are you aware of
the glowing statement in support that was put out by Senator
Menendez praising your hire?
Mr. Gensler. I thank you for letting me know that, but
until you told me or until today----
Mr. Barr. I am deeply concerned about this, and I will be
following up with your office with additional questions, and I
expect a written response.
Mr. Chairman, I really liked your colorful testimony. And
you are right, we are blessed with the largest, most-
sophisticated, most-innovative capital markets in the world,
but we cannot take this for granted. Even a gold medalist must
keep training. With all due respect, Mr. Chairman, if the U.S.
capital markets are a gold medalist, you are the Tonya Harding
of securities regulation because you are kneecapping the U.S.
capital markets with the avalanche of red tape coming out of
your Commission.
On your climate disclosure rule proposal, you say that the
SEC is merit-neutral, that your focus on consistency and
comparability of disclosure is not the merit of the investment,
so that is just not believable. Requiring Scope 3 emissions
will lead to wildly inaccurate and immaterial disclosures that
will be of little practical use to investors. They would also
unfairly and inaccurately portray companies as major polluters
that, in reality, have very low carbon footprints.
Let's be honest, the agenda here is not to provide
investors with relevant information but instead to redirect
capital away from fossil energy. Your proposal would
discriminate against fossil energy. And you have repeatedly
claimed that these disclosures are rooted in investor
protection, but the largest U.S. energy exchange-traded fund is
up 15 percent over the last 3 months. It is near its highest
level in 9 years. How is it protecting investors to deter
investment in profitable companies?
Mr. Gensler. This is not doing that, with all due respect.
All it is about is trying to bring some comparability to
disclosures being made. We are not a climate agency.
Mr. Barr. I know. I have heard you say that.
Mr. Gensler. We are really not, sir.
Mr. Barr. Let's be honest. We know what is going on. You
are trying to, ``Scarlet Letter,'' fossil energy.
Mr. Gensler. We are not. We are not, sir.
Mr. Barr. I know you say you are not, but we got the joke.
Everybody knows what you are doing. You are trying to redirect
capital away. You are trying to discriminate against fossil
energy, notwithstanding your protests. Most American investors
find all of the Scope 3 emissions nonsense and immaterial. It
is immaterial. I know institutional investors talk about this,
but this is about an agenda to discriminate against fossil
energy, which is profitable. That is not protecting investors.
That is hurting investors. It is steering them into less-
diversified lower-performing funds.
Let me move on to the perfect storm of regulations. Have
you consulted with Vice Chair Barr about the Basel III Endgame
and the interplay between what you are doing on capital markets
regulation and what is happening in commercial real estate? I
am very concerned about this because Basel III will increase
the cost of credit, diminish lending capacity, and undermine
the role that banks play in lending and financial
intermediation in commercial real estate.
Have you talked to the Federal Reserve about how this
interacts with the conflicts of interest in securitization
rule, the Rule 15c2-11 private funds custody rule, and others,
because I am really worried that Basel III Endgame and all of
your regulatory proposals would lead to a death by a thousand
cuts for commercial real estate, when we are looking at
maturities of $1.5 trillion in commercial real estate over the
next 3 years. And it is not just about refinancing from 3
percent to now 8 percent. It is the fact that Basel III and
then all of the non-bank activity is going to be sidelined as a
result of the interplay between Basel III and your regulations.
Mr. Gensler. We have ongoing conversations with the Federal
Reserve about a number of our rules, but they really have the
lead on Basel III. That is not something we consult with them
on.
Mr. Barr. Okay. I think----
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired. I would ask
you to submit the answer for the record.
Mr. Barr. ----the interplay is important. I yield back.
Mrs. Wagner. The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from
Ohio, Mrs. Beatty, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you,
Chairman Gensler, for being here today. I am going to get to a
question that I would like to ask you on the proposal regarding
predictive data analysis. But in light of the colorful
questioning and use of language with, ``discrimination,'' and,
``kneecapping,'' I want to ask you about the shutdown, because
I think my Republican colleagues are kneecapping the American
people and those who serve this country and those that we took
an oath to protect, and certainly, at least the last five
government shutdowns have happened under Republican leadership.
You represent this large organization, and if there was a
government shutdown, would that grind the SEC to a halt, yes or
no, in your opinion?
Mr. Gensler. We would have a skeleton staff.
Mrs. Beatty. And does that mean if there was a shutdown
with your approximately 4,600 employees, you would be left with
maybe only 400 employees who were not furloughed?
Mr. Gensler. That is correct.
Mrs. Beatty. And the remainder would be furloughed without
pay?
Mr. Gensler. Yes, that is correct. Even though they are
working, it would be without pay.
Mrs. Beatty. Right. And these are hardworking American
people with families and children who would be considerably,
``kneecapped,'' by my Republican colleagues, who have so much
concern about what we are doing. And would that have some
effect on the registration statements for new users, and offers
of securities, and surveilling the functionings and operations
of capital markets?
Mr. Gensler. I think you could say, largely, the initial
public offering market would be shut down with the government.
Mrs. Beatty. And would you say investors would be
vulnerable to fraud, and businesses would be deprived of their
opportunity to access capital markets?
Mr. Gensler. I would say that while we will have a skeleton
staff, it will be hard for us to oversee the markets.
Mrs. Beatty. And that is what you are charged with doing,
like we are responsible for keeping the government open and
protecting the American people. You probably would agree with
that. I am not going to ask you to answer that.
So now, let me get on to my question, after I feel a little
renewed in letting the American people know that while we are
here, we can ask all kinds of questions. But if we want to talk
about economic analysis, if we want to talk about threats of
subpoenas for not being direct, let's talk about what is
happening to the American people in real time. But with that
said, I am going to give you an opportunity to talk about this
proposal that we have heard a lot about.
I understand that the proposal is currently very broad in
scope, covering the range of investor interactions, including
communications through covered firms' public websites. There is
concern that it could even encompass financial education tools
for investors, and it could cover things such as an application
that analyzes an investor's future retirement assets by
changing the inputs for different mixes of assets. Can you
address the concerns or take the rest of my time to talk about
this proposal so we can understand it better?
Mr. Gensler. One thing I would say is this hearing comes at
a timely moment, because the comment period is open until
October 10th on this particular rule. But this rule really just
has a basic concept that if you are engaging with investors,
that those investors' interests come before that of the
investment adviser or broker-dealer, and if you are using
predictive data analytics to determine how to nudge them or
guide them, you should be not putting your interest.
Look, in my downtime, I like to watch romantic comedies on
streaming apps. If the streaming app figures out that I am a
romcom guy, which I am, and they are doing it because they make
more money because I watch the streaming app more----
Mrs. Beatty. There you go.
Mr. Gensler. Okay. But in finance, if you are doing it and
you are nudging somebody to trade more and churn up their hard-
earned assets, or nudging them to margin or options trading or
higher fees on a robo adviser, and it is not in their interest,
but it is in the investment adviser's interest, therein lies a
conflict. That is what we are trying to address.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentlelady's time----
Mrs. Beatty. And my time is up.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentlelady yields back, and the Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. The
SEC's recent climate rule proposal was 500 pages of mandatory
disclosures that will now require companies to report on
emissions data and climate risk management strategies. Now,
this proposal is a major concern for business owners back in my
district, who are worried--I am a small business owner also--
about the SEC's recent push to implement costly environmental,
social, and political regulatory requirements that are not even
relevant to the company. The SEC's proposed climate
requirements will cost companies millions of dollars to ensure
they properly comply with these burdensome rules. This will
force business owners to hire more lawyers and compliance
officers rather than investing back in their employees and
operations, which would help their businesses grow and bring
more in revenue, and I have seen that happen in my business.
So, businesses are already struggling to operate within
tight margins, and an increase in compliance costs could be
their tipping point. And on top of that, the Scope 3 emissions
disclosure will direct companies to speculate on the emissions
output for their suppliers and products, which requires
substantial information in order to get a proper estimate. This
could lead to smaller businesses being left out due to how
difficult it is for them to obtain this complex information.
And the SEC crusade is extremely out-of-touch and exceeds their
intended missions and statutory authority, so the SEC needs to
stop their abuse of the rulemaking process before they cause
any further damage to the industry.
Mr. Chairman, what is the average amount of time and
resources everyday companies will need to ensure they are
properly complying with the excessive climate risk disclosures,
and how can mandating companies to file on indirect emissions
related to their company provide consistent information for
investors?
Mr. Gensler. Mr. Barr, sitting behind you, asked a similar
question. Let me just put it in context, if I may. Investors
today are making investment decisions based on climate risk
disclosures. We are trying to bring some comparability. You and
other members have raised this question about greenhouse gas
emissions, so-called Scope 3, and for the listening public,
this is of the value chain. It is not about the company itself.
It is about their suppliers or their customers.
And we got a lot of comments in the public file about this,
not just from Members of Congress, but from small and mid-sized
enterprises in your district and other districts, from farmers
and ranchers, and the like. We are taking a very close look at
this. Our remit, our legal authority is about public companies.
It is about the public companies, and over half of the top
1,000 are already making disclosures around their emissions,
but we understood even in the proposal that so-called Scope 3
is less-developed, and is less-used. And we got a lot of
feedback, and we are taking that under consideration and
looking at it very closely.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Because when you make small
businesses smaller because of regulations, it is not going to
work.
Mr. Gensler. And let me assure you, sir, and I said this in
the Senate hearing 2 weeks ago as well, our remit is just about
those public companies. It is not the private companies in your
district. My dad had a very small company, too. That is not the
remit of the SEC.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. The SEC's rulemaking process
is unprecedented, proposing over 50 rulemakings since the
spring of 2021. The SEC has failed to understand the impact of
these rules and how they will each affect the industry, as well
as the aggregate amount of impact. It is crucial that the SEC
conduct cost-benefit analysis, and solicit industry feedback of
these proposals and what it will cost for the participants that
the Commission oversees. I was proud to sign on to a letter led
by Chairman McHenry to you highlighting our concerns with the
rulemaking agenda in substantial volume. It is vital that the
SEC understands the regulatory and financial burdens that they
are unjustly placing on market participants, just like we
talked about.
In closing, Chair Gensler, has the SEC engaged in any
roundtables, field hearings, or investor testing to really
solicit feedback before rulemaking?
Mr. Gensler. Again, it was good to read your letter at
about 8:00 p.m. last night. It was a good letter. But in terms
of your question, we solicit feedback in the formal way through
the comment period. We solicit feedback and have hundreds of
meetings sometimes on any one rule with market participants,
and then we detail them in the files, and we benefit from that
feedback.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Vargas, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I want to
thank the chairman and the ranking member for giving me the
opportunity to speak. And I want to say, Chairman Gensler, it
is good to see you, but I have to say it is even better to see
Chairman Lucas. Chairman Lucas was the chairman of the
Agriculture Committee when I first came to Congress 11 years
ago. He was eminently fair and a good person to work with. And
we have an 1,800-pound bull on our property, on our ranch, and
I have to tell you, don't mess with those animals. Those are
big animals. They can do a lot of damage. So, it is great to
see him here today. Like I said, I think everyone on this
committee has great respect for him.
But it is great to see you here. You were asked somewhat of
a Catch-22 question earlier, and that was you were supposed to
produce some documents. And within those documents was a letter
that was given to you by this committee, and then in that
situation, it is either you disclose that letter is in there
and they say, ha, you disclosed the letter that we sent you,
how typical, or if you didn't, he would say, boy, he didn't
even disclose the letter that we sent him. So, you were sort of
caught in a Catch-22 no matter which way you answered. I am
glad you disclosed the letter.
But then you were asked, I think, a very ugly and
unfortunate question about a recent Senator and your
interactions with him, because he has been indicted. I think
there was an insinuation there that something that you did was
inappropriate or improper. Could you comment on that, please?
Mr. Gensler. I can't comment about a criminal prosecution.
Mr. Vargas. No, not about the criminal prosecution, but the
insinuation that you possibly did something that was
inappropriate in your conversation with him on the phone.
Mr. Gensler. No. I didn't discuss anything with the Senator
in May of 2021, except for his concerns about Federal
securities laws and disclosure, if I recall, but there might
have been other topics that he talked about around disclosure,
around diversity by investment advisers.
Mr. Vargas. Yes. I just wanted to give you an opportunity
to say that because, again, I think that was a bit of an unfair
question.
Mr. Gensler. In a role like mine, I engage with Senators
and Members of the House of Representatives, and we benefit
from those engagements.
Mr. Vargas. No, I agree, but, again, thank you for being
here, and thank you for answering that question. Now, I take a
very different view of climate-related risks, of course, on
this side, and I think it is one of the biggest issues that we
face as a world and certainly as a country. And the reasonable
standard, again, was created by Thurgood Marshall, and that is,
on materiality, what would a reasonable person want to know?
And it seems to me with all the headlines that we have and all
the information that we have about climate-related risks, and I
could go through a whole bunch of headlines here, which I
won't, but it seems to be that this is a gigantic issue, and
people want to know, and, in fact, people do want to know, and
companies have been disclosing this for a while, so I think you
are on the right track. But you are not a climate change
organization, are you? You are not the cop on the beat for
that?
Mr. Gensler. No, no, we are a securities regulator and a
disclosure-based regulator, and that is what we are trying to
do here. As I have often said, investors are making decisions
today about public companies based on their climate risk
disclosures, and it is trying to ensure that it is truthful, it
is accurate, and it is decision-useful.
Mr. Vargas. Yes, and, in fact, this is what people want to
know today, isn't it? Any investor today who reads the
newspaper, especially if they are invested in insurance or a
company like that, they say, well, why isn't my company
insuring in California or along the areas in Florida that get
swamped all the time with these huge hurricanes, and it is
because of climate change.
We used to have climate deniers who said, no, we have the
scientists who say that climate change isn't real. Now,
basically, all of the scientists agree. Then, you have some
knuckleheaded column writers who say this isn't true, but they
are not scientists. Pure scientists don't dispute it anymore,
and it is real, and it is a big deal. And I am glad you are
looking into it because investors want to know about this,
especially long-term investors.
Mr. Gensler. I would say from the SEC's perspective, it is
about whether investors are making investment decisions and
find it material, as you mentioned, the Supreme Court, the law
of the land, that a substantial likelihood that a reasonable
investor finds it significant in the total mix of information,
and that is what we know to be the case today. If 80-plus
percent of the top 1,000 companies are making some climate risk
disclosures, they are not all making Scope 3.
Mr. Vargas. Right.
Mr. Gensler. We had lively discussions about that, but in
terms of climate risks, a lot of companies are making
disclosures already.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you again for being here. My time is up,
so in my last 7 seconds, I thank the Chair again. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from Minnesota, the Whip, Mr. Emmer, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Emmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chair Gensler, I have a
series of questions that require a yes-or-no answer, and in the
interest of my limited time, I would appreciate it if you would
comply with that.
Mr. Gensler, is it fair to say generally that large
institutions in any given industry benefit more from regulatory
uncertainty than everyday market participants or smaller
institutions which don't have the scale or the capital to fund
expensive compliance teams?
Mr. Gensler. Large institutions could benefit from
uncertainty.
Mr. Emmer. Reclaiming my time, the answer is, ``yes,'' sir.
Mr. Gensler, you had an 18-year career at Goldman Sachs where
you were partner and co-head of finance, correct?
Mr. Gensler. Yes, sir.
Mr. Emmer. Thank you. And is it correct to say that you
made most of your personal wealth directly through your
employment at this bank, Goldman Sachs?
Mr. Gensler. I have done well since then, too, sir.
Mr. Emmer. I will take that as a, ``yes,'' as well. You
describe the SEC under your leadership as the cop on the beat
watching out for our constituents, correct?
Mr. Gensler. I think that is the mandate that Congress has
given us.
Mr. Emmer. Reclaiming my time, the answer is, ``yes,'' sir.
If you could just comply with what I have asked, I would
appreciate it. But given your 18-year career at one of the
biggest banks in the world and the personal financial fortune
you amassed there, do you think it is possible for you to serve
as an impartial regulator and not favor large financial
intermediaries?
Mr. Gensler. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Emmer. Mr. Gensler, do you believe the vast majority of
digital assets meet the investment contract test and are,
therefore, securities operating illegally outside of the U.S.
regulatory umbrella?
Mr. Gensler. As I have said, many of these assets,
basically, the public is anticipating----
Mr. Emmer. Sir, is that a, ``yes?''
Mr. Gensler. ----profits based on the efforts of others.
Mr. Emmer. Is the answer then, ``yes?''
Mr. Gensler. Again, without prejudging anyone, I do think
that the significant majority are investment contracts.
Mr. Emmer. Reclaiming my time, I will take that as a,
``yes.'' And to be clear, sir, this perspective has nothing to
do with a concern you noted in a speech last year, where you
said, ``Over the past year, several bank executives have shared
their concerns with me about the sheer number of depositors who
have moved money from their bank accounts into crypto-related
exchanges and wallets,'' right?
Mr. Gensler. The concern that those bank executives raised
was that those customers----
Mr. Emmer. Again, I am reclaiming my time, sir.
Mr. Gensler. ----were getting hurt.
Mr. Emmer. No. I have asked you to answer the question as
briefly as possible so I can I can use the time I have, and it
is clear that you would like to avoid answering the question,
in my opinion. An Obama-appointed judge in the Southern
District of New York, a bank-friendly jurisdiction where you
bring most of your cases, recently found that decentralized
financial technology, ``not only removes the so-called
middlemen from these transactions, but it also allows users to
interact through a variety of methods in an easy and efficient
manner.'' The court also said underwriters, like the ones at
banks where you work, sir, are, ``precisely the types of
individual roles that decentralized exchanges were designed to
eliminate.''
Mr. Gensler, can you assure this committee that your style
of regulation by harassment towards digital assets innovation
is for the benefit of every American and not driven by your
desire to protect industry incumbents?
Mr. Gensler. This is a field that is rife with fraud and
manipulation, and I am looking out for the American investors
who have been hurt by the crypto fraudsters and scammers.
Mr. Emmer. I will reclaim my time. Mr. Gensler, despite
your years of rhetoric, like today, I am convinced you are not
an impartial regulator. Instead, it is clear that you are
working to consolidate your own power, even though it means
crushing opportunities for everyday Americans, and, frankly,
the financial future of this country. Even the Federal courts
are highlighting the damage you, sir, are doing to our
constituents, and they are telling you that you don't have the
legal authority to accomplish your goal of squashing
competition in the financial markets. Congress has been telling
you that, too.
Now, Mr. Gensler, I believe our great financial system is
the definition of freedom in this country, and congressional
policies must provide room for the traditional financial system
to evolve alongside the disruptive digital asset ecosystem.
That said, it cannot be understated that a common theme
throughout your career, sir, is your relentless loyalty to the
largest financial institutions at the clear expense of
innovation, competition, and everyday Americans. I yield back.
Mr. Gensler. I suspect some large financial institutions
would not agree with that.
Mr. Emmer. There is no question now, sir. I have yielded
back my time.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman
from New Jersey, Mr. Gottheimer, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Chairman
Gensler, L'Shana Tovah. It is good to see you.
Mr. Gensler. L'Shana Tovah. May this year bring you health
and happiness.
Mr. Gottheimer. You, too, sir. If I can begin, in your
testimony, you said that it generally takes 12 to 24 months for
the SEC to proceed from issuing a new rule proposal to adopting
it as a final rule. That may seem like a long time, but I
assure you it is not a very long time for some of the smaller
stakeholders that I speak to, who are spending so much of their
time and resources in running their business and trying to
compete. And, of course, I am getting concerned, and I wanted
to get your thoughts on this as well. Are you worried that all
these rules are putting small and mid-sized businesses at a
disadvantage and inadvertently benefiting the larger ones that
can better handle the deluge of all the proposals? Is there an
unintended consequence of actually limiting the flow of capital
to small and mid-sized businesses and favoring the larger ones?
Mr. Gensler. We have talked about this in your office as
well. I think that we benefit from hearing from the small
businesses. We often then look to adjust the rules based on
those comments, and also, if the rule is adopted, the
implementation and compliance dates, and sometimes we stage
that, whether it is over 12 to 24 months after a rule is
adopted.
Mr. Gottheimer. Part of my concern is, and I appreciate
there are ongoing discussions on this front, by my count, you
have issued 50 separate rules, and there are another 14 new
rules on your most recent unified agenda that are scheduled to
be proposed in the coming months. And I was just trying to
figure out the volume, what this means for the smaller
stakeholders who just don't have the regulatory backend to
engage with the SEC and don't know how to engage with the SEC
in some ways. What do you think about that? How are you trying
to shape the agency to really allow for them to also have a
fair shot at the comment period?
Mr. Gensler. In part, by putting out the agenda itself 2\1/
2\ years ago. We have now proposed the bulk of that. We take
meetings even after comment periods all the way up to sometimes
a few weeks before we adopt so they can keep engaging with us,
and certainly, if there is not a shutdown, we are here. We are
ready to take those meetings.
Mr. Gottheimer. Yes. You should know, just some feedback,
that they often feel they don't know how to come into the
agency, how to utilize the agency, and that it can be
intimidating. Especially if you are a smaller player, you just
don't know really how to do it, and they don't have these big
regulatory teams.
Mr. Gensler. I would say that sometimes those are the best
meetings. They are not necessarily the meetings that show up on
the calendar as much, but they really are very helpful to hear
from those smaller asset managers, those smaller broker-
dealers, or public companies.
Mr. Gottheimer. I would like to shift gears to digital
assets. In July, I was proud that this committee passed
comprehensive digital asset legislation, bipartisan, including
my amendment directing the SEC and the CFTC to do a joint
rulemaking, creating a process for delisting an asset. Since
2019, I have said that clear rules of the road for digital
asset firms are critical to protect consumers and promote
innovation here in the United States. You have claimed that you
have all the authority you need, but a rulemaking process
hasn't started yet. Can you explain to us why, please?
Mr. Gensler. Because there are already laws and rules on
the books that apply to cryptosecurity tokens like they apply
to others. There is nothing incompatible because you are
storing something of value on a blockchain ledger. We talked
earlier about being technology-neutral. Whether you are storing
that at DTCC, the public clearinghouse, or you are storing it
on an accounting ledger called blockchain, it is still a
transfer of value, and the public is maybe depending on the
token, anticipating a profit based on the efforts of others. As
it relates to the so-called crypto exchanges, they are doing
what we wouldn't even allow anywhere else. They are
commingling, co-bundling, trading against the public, and
sometimes front-running the public on their platforms.
Mr. Gottheimer. Memorandums of understanding (MOUs) have
long been used and adopted in a number of contexts. In June
2022, you told the Financial Times that you are working on an
MOU with the CFTC to avoid regulatory gaps for crypto. Can you
give us an update on the status of the MOU, please?
Mr. Gensler. I was hopeful that we would do something
there, but what we do, on a case-by-case basis and an issue-by-
issue basis work, is with the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission with regard to this crypto field. They have
important authorities. They execute against those authorities.
We do against our authorities, really both with the same goal
of protecting the public.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you. May you have a sweet New Year.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and it's good to be
back. I was out of order here because I was in a bipartisan
meeting with the Speaker talking about a debt commission, and I
hope that is going to be part of the path forward that we are
dealing with for government funding and our long-term debt. But
I want to move quickly.
I want to follow up on some of Chairman McHenry's questions
and remarks, and I am not going to belabor the whole situation,
where the public documents that you have given us on our
request that has been out there for over 7 months, with no real
information except for that which was already available through
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests by the public. Our
request simply seeks to obtain information to better understand
the black box of the SEC's activities on climate-related
measures and its rulemaking authority, and you had said in your
own remarks, ``based on authorities granted by Congress.''
Well, I dispute the assertion that you have been granted that
authority in this particular case, and we are a co-equal branch
of government, and this is routine congressional oversight.
Let's talk a little bit about the Commission vote for the
climate request. When Chair McHenry asked if you have scheduled
a vote for the Commission, I did not hear an answer on that or
when a vote will be scheduled. I did not hear an answer on
that. There are 13,000 emails and documents we have been told
are ready to be produced but are being held up by a provision
within the Exchange Act that requires a vote of the SEC
Commissioners, is your assertion or the Commission's assertion.
Lawyers differ on that, and it is my understanding that you
claim that you don't have the votes necessary on the
Commission, but Mr. Gensler, I want to ask you this: Are you
personally ready to vote, ``yes,'' to produce these documents
to this committee?
Mr. Gensler. We continue to work with your staff. We have
voted as a Commission on the, I think they are called
transcribed interviews of----
Mr. Huizenga. The transcribed interviews are very different
than the documents that we have requested. I am not asking you
about the Commission. Are you voting, ``yes,'' and will you
vote, ``yes,'' on giving that information to our committee as
requested?
Mr. Gensler. Again, as I have said, I truly believe in the
oversight of this committee and working with the committee
and----
Mr. Huizenga. Yes or no?
Mr. Gensler. ----working with my fellow Commissioners, and
we are----
Mr. Huizenga. I want to know what you are going to do, not
speaking for anybody else. You.
Mr. Gensler. Again----
Mr. Huizenga. Yes or no?
Mr. Gensler. Sir, again, we are working through this at the
Commission level and with your staff.
Mr. Huizenga. Come on. This is ridiculous. Okay. So, let's
assume your answer now is, ``no.'' What have you done to try to
produce a vote of any sort? Are you talking to your fellow
Commissioners? Are you asking them to vote for that?
Mr. Gensler. We have ongoing discussions. We, of course,
have to have it one-on-one because of the Government in the
Sunshine Act.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Frankly, we have been pretty cloudy
over here on the congressional side. You are fulfilling FOIA
requests, but you will not give that same information to
Congress. That is a problem. Under 24(c), the delegated
authority by the Commission allows you to do those FOIA
requests without a vote of the Commission. It seems to me that
maybe we need to help you out. Does that seem reasonable?
Because here is our problem, what happens if you never get the
votes? What is your plan, to ignore Congress?
Mr. Gensler. We are going to continue to work with you.
Mr. Huizenga. What is your plan, because we have a plan.
The chairman outlined the plan, and it begins with a, ``P,''
and ends in, ``oxy,'' and it is not a fun word that any of us
want to fulfill.
Mr. Gensler. Again, we are continuing to work and trying to
get you documents on a regular basis.
Mr. Huizenga. But you are not. You are giving us publicly-
available documents. That is not the role of oversight. Are you
open to legislation that would clarify that the SEC is not
required to have a full Commission vote to comply with the
requests from Congress or this committee?
Mr. Gensler. Again, I would have to have staff look at the
legislation. We would give technical assistance as we have
given on other provisions of----
Mr. Huizenga. I am pretty sure we don't need your technical
assistance because so far, the technical assistance has gotten
us nothing. I enthusiastically support the Chair's discussion
of using compulsory process, and it is shameful that you are
hiding behind this 24(c) process and that the Commission is,
and we are going to have to remedy that apparently based on
your lack of cooperation. One last quick question: Did you ever
receive a memorandum or agency document in writing assessing
the Supreme Court's decision on West Virginia v. EPA on the
SEC's rulemaking authority?
Mr. Gensler. I know that we have had discussions. I don't
remember any memo.
Mr. Huizenga. I am going to ask you to follow up.
Mr. Gensler. I have the Supreme Court's----
Mr. Huizenga. My time has expired.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Huizenga. We are going to have you follow up in
writing.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Gensler. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Casten,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's nice to see you
again, Chair Gensler. I want to talk about your climate
disclosure rule. I know it surprises you that I want to talk
about that, and I realize that with it coming out soon, we are
not going to be able to get into specifics, but I do just want
to expand a little bit.
You had mentioned to Mr. Cleaver that investors were asking
for more clarity because of all of the voluntary disclosures
that are out there, and I think, but I don't want to be
presumptuous, that there is some history there that I am hoping
you can share, because I think in 2010, the SEC entered a draft
that is sort of interpretive guidance regarding more voluntary
disclosures. Can you clarify what happened between 2010, and 12
years later in March of 2022, when the SEC decided that it was
necessary to provide some more disclosure, and specifically, if
you can comment on what was industry asking you for?
Mr. Gensler. A lot changed in the 12 years particularly.
Investors got more and more interested making investment
decisions, and here in the U.S., companies responded. Their
investor relations and their CFOs and corporate executives
responded to meet those requests by investors, and they started
following something that was called the Taskforce on Climate-
related Disclosures (TCFD) framework. You are probably familiar
with this international framework, which, interestingly, was 32
people who were mostly from industry. They weren't from the
government sector. And by 2021, 80-plus percent of the top
1,000 companies were making some climate risk disclosures. That
is what really changed--investor demand for investor decision-
making--and that is where the SEC has a role.
Mr. Casten. I appreciate that. That certainly is consistent
with my experience in the private sector, and I think it is sad
that we need to keep reminding folks that this was really an
industry-led initiative in the first instance. I want to move
to the State level, because a little while ago you had
mentioned to The Wall Street Journal that if California
finalized some rules, I think you said, ``This may change some
of the economic baseline of the Commission as it relates to the
pending order.'' And of course, last month, the California
legislature did pass a package of climate disclosure bills,
which I understand only relate to companies beyond a certain
size that do business in California. But given your earlier
comments, can you speak to how, if at all, that is factoring
into how you are thinking about the disclosure and whether you
are still on pace for an October release, as you had earlier
indicated?
Mr. Gensler. We look at the economics very seriously, and
that law that was passed in California is not yet signed. But
if it were signed into law, as I understand it, that would
require companies of a certain size to report on their climate
risk, I think over half a billion dollars in revenues and those
over a billion dollars in revenues to report greenhouse gas
emissions, and for the listening public----
Mr. Casten. And on a Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3 basis.
That is what you are pointing at.
Mr. Gensler. Yes, all three of these scopes, but for the
listening public, it is estimated that somewhere between 1,400
and 1,500 public companies might need to report under that law.
We have not confirmed that number. That is just an estimate
that is in the press, and that may change the baseline. If
those companies were reporting to California, then it would be,
in essence, less costly because they have already been
producing that information. It is also important, because the
investing public is making decisions based on those public
reports, that the reports are accurate, and that they are
truthful, because the investing public benefits by making sure
of the accuracy of the disclosures.
Mr. Casten. And you had indicated that you are targeting an
October release date for the final rule. Are you still on that
pace? Can you speak to that? And do California's actions in any
way change that?
Mr. Gensler. Let me just put this a little in context.
Twice a year, working with the Office of Management and Budget
(OMB), we put out what is called a Unified Agenda, and we put
dates on all of the proposals really and two different dates of
the year, so I wouldn't, with all due respect, put too much
emphasis on that. With 16,000 comments, we have gone through it
15, 16 months since we made the proposal. It tends to take,
again, 12 to 24 months, but we are not doing this against the
clock, but when the staff is ready, and when the Commission is
ready.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. I have more questions, but I am out
of time, so I yield back. Thank you again for being here.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. We will now go
to the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Gensler,
thank you for being here.
Mr. Chairman, without objection, I would like to submit for
the record a Wall Street Journal article by Warren Stephens and
Paul Reilly, entitled, ``The SEC Wants to Spy on Your
Portfolio.''
Chairman McHenry. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Gensler,
as the op-ed points out, prior to the Consolidated Audit Trail,
the government needed legal cause to force financial
institutions to report their customers' personally identifiable
information. In your opening statement, you refer to the SEC as
the cop on the beat, but law enforcement has to comply with due
process.
And I am concerned--no, I am convinced--that the
Consolidated Audit Trail has the potential to become another
warrantless surveillance program. And as we have all
experienced, if you extend the government power, that power
will inevitably be abused, as we saw with the FISA courts,
especially if that power does not have direct oversight and
control by Congress.
My first question, Mr. Gensler, is, have you read this
article that just came out the other day in The Wall Street
Journal about the Consolidated Audit Trail?
Mr. Gensler. I may have. I feel like in the last 2 days, I
saw the headlines.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. It goes on to explain the problems
that I have laid out several times when you have been here
before about the collecting of personally identifiable
information and, quite frankly, a lot of information about
individuals and their buying of stocks. In fact, when you were
here last time, I believe that you expressed that the purpose
of this is so you could peruse to look for any potential
illegal activity. That is a blatant violation of the Fourth
Amendment. That is what this article is spelling out, and it
has gotten the attention of a lot of people, even outside the
financial services arena. So I would encourage you to please
read it, because I think it explains the concerns that many of
us have about this program.
Also, Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the record a
letter that was sent by me and my colleagues to Mr. Gensler----
Chairman McHenry. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Loudermilk. ----regarding the Consolidated Audit Trail.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr. Gensler, regarding this
letter, in the letter, I ask about the 3,000 individuals, the
estimated number of people or institutions that would have
access to the Consolidated Audit Trail or the customer account
information system, and 3,000 would have access to it. Who are
these individuals, and how will they be vetted for access to
such sensitive information?
Mr. Gensler. One, I will read the article that you
mentioned. Two, in terms of individuals, this Consolidated
Audit Trail is only allowed to be used at the SEC and by the
self-regulatory organizations. At the SEC, it is our Division
of Enforcement, our Division of Economic and Risk Analysis, and
our Division of Trading and Markets.
Mr. Loudermilk. How are all these 3,000 individuals getting
access to personally identifiable information and details about
stock transactions by even just a factory worker who has a
Robinhood account? What is the vetting process on this, and how
are we going to ensure that they do not use this in violation
of personal rights?
Mr. Gensler. I just want to say I am not familiar with that
number, but in terms of at the SEC, these are people who are
dedicated public servants, who are full time at the agency,
either in our Division of Enforcement, our Division of Economic
and Risk Analysis, or our Division of Trading and Markets----
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Well, if you respond to the letter,
that may be helpful, and I would like to move on because we are
getting short on time. This is really just a yes-or-no
question. Will the SEC use data collected via the Consolidated
Audit Trail and the customer account information system to
bring enforcement actions?
Mr. Gensler. We have already, and we anticipate doing so in
the future.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Let me make sure I have this right.
Well, let me ask you this. How has the Consolidated Audit Trail
been funded? Is this being appropriated by Congress?
Mr. Gensler. It is by industry funding.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. So, private industry is funding this.
The cost of this has gone up exponentially since it started,
but just to close out, I want to make sure I understand. You
are saying that the Consolidated Audit Trail is a comprehensive
database of transactions used for Federal enforcement purposes,
but it is not subject to congressional oversight or through
appropriations. This is lining up to be another surveillance
program without any control, without any constraint, and
without even the power of the purse. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. We will
now go to the gentleman from New York, Mr. Torres, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Gensler, good
morning. I worry that the term, ``investment contract,'' has
become so infinitely malleable and manipulable that it means
whatever you unilaterally think it ought to mean, right? I
worry that when it comes to crypto, your interpretation of the
term, ``investment contract,'' has no limiting principle and,
therefore, could invite arbitrary and capricious enforcement
actions. So, I want to take a few minutes to explore the
concept of investment contract in greater depth, and I want to
start with an obvious definitional question. We know that an
investment contract requires an investment. Does an investment
contract require a contract?
Mr. Gensler. I will quote Thurgood Marshall, ``Congress
painted with a broad brush,'' and when Marshall said that, he
was writing the law of the land. So, we follow this Howey Test
and how, not just Marshall, but other courts interpreted it,
and it has four components----
Mr. Torres. Again, I did not go to MIT, but in the Bronx,
if I ask whether an investment contract includes a contract,
the answer is typically either yes or no.
Mr. Gensler. Actually, sir, under the Supreme Court law of
the land, they do not write that in. They say it is an
investment of money in a common enterprise, and you are
anticipating profits based on the efforts of others. I took an
oath to follow the law of the land, and that is the Supreme
Court law of the land.
Mr. Torres. In Howey, the Supreme Court refers to an
investment contract as a contract, scheme, or transaction. That
was the terminology that I saw in the case. And as far as I can
tell, there is nothing in the Supreme Court's jurisprudence
that suggests that a scheme or transaction means the absence of
a contract. And by way of illustration, consider the landmark
case of SEC v. Howey. In the Howey case, there was not a single
contract, but there were two contracts: a land sales contract
with the Howey Company; and a service contract with Howey-in-
the-Hills. And the Court found that the combination of those
two contracts, the total scheme, the total transaction, the
total economic reality was constitutive of an investment
contract, and so a scheme or a transaction does not mean the
absence of any contract at all. It means as it did in Howey, a
multiplicity of contracts.
In August, there were six law professors from law schools
as preeminent as Yale who came to the following conclusion:
``No decision of the Supreme Court has ever found that a scheme
that does not involve a contract could qualify as an investment
contract.'' Do you disagree with that statement, and if so,
could you please cite a decision of the Supreme Court that has
found an investment contract in the absence of an actual
contract?
Mr. Gensler. The SEC has been in front of multiple courts,
and investment contract has been----
Mr. Torres. What is the name of the case, Mr. Gensler, the
Supreme Court case that has found an investment contract in the
absence of an actual contract? Can you cite a case?
Mr. Gensler. The SEC over the decades, whether it is----
Mr. Torres. Can you cite a case?
Mr. Gensler. ----whiskey caskets, whether it is crypto, if
the public is investing based upon the efforts of others----
Mr. Torres. I find it telling that you cannot cite a single
case----
Mr. Gensler. ----that is a security.
Mr. Torres. How about a Second Circuit case? Can you cite a
single Second Circuit case that has found an investment
contract in the absence of a contract?
Mr. Gensler. I understand where you are trying to go, and I
am going to leave that to the very fine attorneys at the SEC in
front of courts, but I am saying the core principle is----
Mr. Torres. Mr. Gensler, let me finish.
Mr. Gensler. This is a field that is filling the pocket of
the public.
Mr. Torres. This is a question to which you should know the
answer because the definition of an investment contract is the
central issue. That is what determines the extent of your
authority, that is what determines the applicability of Federal
securities law to crypto transactions, and your inability to
answer that question is baffling to me.
Mr. Gensler. I am answering it consistent with what the
Supreme Court has said, which is the law of the land, is a
four-part----
Mr. Torres. And yet, you cannot cite a single case to
support your argument.
Mr. Gensler. It is called Howey. It is called Reeves. It is
called many cases at the Supreme Court, sir. Eight or nine
times, it has been affirmed by the Supreme Court.
Mr. Torres. Suppose I were to purchase a Pokemon card.
Would doing so constitute a security transaction?
Mr. Gensler. You could purchase a Pokemon card. I don't
know what the context is, but if you are purchasing a Pokemon
card----
Mr. Torres. If I purchase a Pokemon card, is that a
security transaction?
Mr. Gensler. ----at a retail store, that is not a security.
Mr. Torres. Okay. If I were to purchase a tokenized Pokemon
card on a digital exchange via a blockchain, is that a security
transaction?
Mr. Gensler. I would have to know more.
Mr. Torres. Okay. So for you, the process of tokenization
is what transforms a non-security transaction into a security
transaction?
Mr. Gensler. Look, if the investing public----
Mr. Torres. I thought you were technology-neutral.
Mr. Gensler. If the investing public is anticipating
profits based upon the efforts of others and they are
exchanging funds, that is the core----
Mr. Torres. I see my time has expired.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. We will
now go to the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Davidson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davidson. Chairman Gensler, recently a Federal court
called your rejection of a Bitcoin exchange-traded fund (ETF),
``arbitrary and capricious.'' In a subsequent interview, you
dismissed the judge's opinion. Asked a follow-up question, ``If
anything a judge says would change your mind,'' you responded,
``Well, no, not really.'' It seems that you don't really
recognize the authority of the Judicial Branch. You seem to
have a love for the Howey Test selectively applied, as
illustrated by Mr. Torres, but in light of those reactions,
what should people think about the Bitcoin ETF? How will the
SEC revise its approach?
Mr. Gensler. We have great respect for the courts. I
personally have great respect for the courts. We are
considering that. It is still an act of consideration at the
Commission, and we are familiar----
Mr. Davidson. So, you haven't made up your mind.
Mr. Gensler. ----with the case.
Mr. Davidson. Yes. I have to tell you that many market
participants have reached out and are concerned that you will
arbitrarily, perhaps also capriciously, pull recent filings
ahead of others who have been working with the SEC for years to
get an approval for a Bitcoin spot ETF. Will this resemble some
sort of free pass for one favored company while others remain
locked out? And I ask that because it seems that has happened
before at the SEC.
Mr. Gensler. Sir, I am not sure if I am following. We are
still considering that court case and the application, as you
say, to Bitcoin exchange-traded products.
Mr. Davidson. Are you going to preserve people's places in
line, or are you going to pull ahead a favored transaction or
another on the consideration of a Bitcoin spot ETF? Are you
going to preserve the place in the queue? Because timing
matters. People have worked on this for years, and then you get
a recent filing by somebody big in the market, and it seems
like, oh yes, let me take your calls. How can I help?
Meanwhile, you have given the stiff arm, as I have said, Hotel
California-style regulations, where you can check in with the
SEC, but you can never leave with clarity. And how about the
Legislative Branch? Do you recognize the authority of Congress
or the laws that we pass?
Mr. Gensler. Yes. We comply with the laws that Congress
passes every day.
Mr. Davidson. I have heard you say that about the courts
and now Congress, which is encouraging, but I am inclined to
judge your deeds more than your words. And I will pick up where
one of my colleagues, Mr. Huizenga, left off with the Supreme
Court decision in West Virginia v. the EPA. Are you are
familiar with that case?
Mr. Gensler. Yes, sir, I am familiar with it. It is an
important case.
Mr. Davidson. I'm glad to hear you say that, and it would
be binding, correct?
Mr. Gensler. It is the law of the land, sir.
Mr. Davidson. That is right, and it introduces the major
questions doctrine. You told Mr. Barr that you received tons of
feedback on your proposed ESG disclosure rules, feedback that
should make it clear that the proposal for ESG disclosure is a
major question, and it should make clear that you don't have
the legal authority to do that. So, I would ask you to knock it
off, cease and desist, and work with this body to pass a law if
you want to regulate something.
Frankly, your time as Chair has highlighted two problems: a
Gary Gensler problem; and a structural flaw in the SEC. And as
I told you in April, I proposed a solution called the SEC
Stabilization Act. You are making the case for this bill easier
every day. You are acting as the Chair by doing rulemaking
after rulemaking without any regard to the impact of these
rules, or maybe that is the feature for you, I don't know, but
it is having a massive impact on our markets. We have markets
that truly are the envy of the world. Why would you disrupt
them with processes that are driving capital out of our
markets, not to avoid our laws, but to find some place where
they can get clarity, where they can work with a regulator and
get a decision and a path forward?
So instead of selectively applied, you are not providing
clarity with a rule that is evenly applied. You are
intentionally shortening comment periods to limit feedback, and
the courts have even called this arbitrary and capricious. You
are pushing a woke political and social agenda, and, I think,
abusing your role in the authority of the SEC as cover. I
think, fundamentally, the SEC Stabilization Act would remove
the role of Chair. It would preserve the current Commissioners,
and we would add a sixth Commissioner, so there would be no
more than three from any one political party, and that would
provide a path that would make the SEC do what you are
avoiding. Frankly, you are front-running Congress, you are
front-running the courts, you are front-running even the
Administration, and no one has held you to account for that. I
wish the Biden Administration would say, you are fired, but the
list of folks they need to do that for is long. Congress
hopefully will with the SEC Stabilization Act. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. We will
now recognize the gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Horsford, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
ranking member for the hearing, and to Chair Gensler for being
here. While investor protection remains paramount for my
colleagues and myself, it should not be lost on anyone here
that the largest risk our investing public is exposed to at
this moment is the risk of a government shutdown. We hear time
and again in this committee that our capital markets are the
deepest and most efficient in the world, and yet, a large part
of why they were able to reach their presently-enjoyed imminent
status is because investors around the globe have confidence
that the SEC has the power necessary to maintain fair and
orderly markets.
Without proper funding in place, the SEC cannot carry out
that critical investor protection mandate, and I fear that as
funding disruptions become increasingly more common, we risk
losing the world's confidence. And I will continue working
earnestly with my colleagues to avoid a counterproductive MAGA
Republican-inflicted government shutdown, but I ask all of my
colleagues to consider the far-reaching consequences of this
short-sighted path.
Chairman Gensler, when we last spoke, I raised concerns
regarding the open-end fund liquidity rule, and I appreciated
your willingness to consider that the vast majority of my
constituents do the bulk of their investing through their
retirement plans. These hardworking Nevadans should not be at
risk of losing out on today's price simply because they live on
the West Coast.
Chairman Gensler, as the SEC continues to evaluate its
economic analysis for the open-end fund liquidity proposal,
what have you been able to ascertain about the disparate impact
for investors based on geographic location?
Mr. Gensler. It has been raised by you, and it has also
been raised by members of the public.
Mr. Horsford. Have you resolved it in the rule? And I only
have 3 minutes.
Mr. Gensler. No, I appreciate it. I am not trying to
prejudge where we will end up. The overall rule had three key
parts. You are focused on one, which is what was called the
close or hard close, but there are two other really important
parts, liquidity, just what is the liquidity behind----
Mr. Horsford. So, will the geographic location be factored
in your final rule? Yes or no?
Mr. Gensler. It is an aspect of it. All funds today close
at 4:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, so it is already----
Mr. Horsford. Which disproportionally impacts Nevadans and
people on the West Coast. So, I am going to keep pressing the
issue until you understand that it is a disparate impact on
those of us who live on the West Coast, and Nevadans should not
be treated unfairly because of where they live. That needs to
be factored into the final rule.
Mr. Gensler. No, I agree, sir.
Mr. Horsford. Chairman Gensler, as Mr. Meeks pointed out
earlier, minority- and women-owned firms still tend to be
smaller, as they work to overcome their traditional
underinvestment and lack of working capital. As you heard
previously, these smaller, more-diverse firms will have more
difficulty complying with the new disclosures required and will
have less ability to absorb the cost associated with doing so.
Earlier, you had begun discussing the expanded analysis the
SEC made for the disproportionate impact on diverse and women-
owned funds when the Commission considered the private fund
adviser rule. Would you be able to expand upon your earlier
answer that these funds were included in the analysis of small
business, and give us any specifics that your team found on the
potential impacts on these funds?
Mr. Gensler. I would be happy to have staff follow up with
the actual pages and the parts of the economic analysis, but it
was considered as part of the effects on small investment
advisers, including women- and minority-held firms.
Mr. Horsford. The issue of waning diversity in our equity
markets is of great concern and we must be careful about adding
any additional burdens on these small firms. I look forward to
working with the SEC specifically on this issue. As I said, it
is a wider issue, Mr. Chairman, and I worry that at a time when
attacks on diversity, equity, and inclusion initiatives, not,
``woke,'' like my colleague just referred to--the next time
someone uses that word, would you define what you mean by it,
because to me, it means anti-diversity. It means anti-
inclusion, and if that is what you stand for, then you don't
represent me or my constituents.
We are working hard to hold the line. There is nothing in
any court decision by the Supreme Court or anywhere else that
should quell the private sector's commitment to diversity,
equity, and inclusion. We must use every tool available to us
to not only bring new entrants into the financial system, but
to also promote their successes----
Mr. Meuser. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Horsford. ----within our financial institutions as
well. I will yield back at this time.
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
Tennessee, Mr. Rose, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, and thank you, Chair Gensler, for
taking the time to leave your virtual office in Maryland to
attend today's hearing, and I was also glad to see that you
held an in-person, open meeting last week for, I think, the
first time during your chairmanship. I say that because, Chair
Gensler, you are rarely in the office and conduct most of your
meetings from the comfort of your home, and what I wonder is,
how can we be sure of whom you are meeting with on a daily
basis? If perhaps someone from Better Markets comes over for
dinner to discuss, ``Europeanizing,'' our U.S. capital markets,
would that be logged and made publicly available on your
calendar?
Mr. Gensler. I haven't had any of those dinners, but
hypothetically, if I had that dinner, it would be logged.
Mr. Rose. I hope so, and I am glad to hear that. Chair
Gensler, in your written testimony, you state that, ``We also
have finalized 24 rulemakings, nearly all of which have changed
based on public feedback.'' Approximately how many hours per
week do you personally spend reading public comments submitted
to the unprecedented number of proposed rulemakings issued by
the SEC?
Mr. Gensler. I work a lot of hours during the week. My kids
are grown and out of the house, and my girlfriend lives in a
different city, so I don't know how it breaks down. I usually
get summaries of the comments. If they are from a Member of
Congress, I read all of the Members of Congress' comments
personally, but then I get examples in each of the rulemakings,
a handful on each of the issues.
Mr. Rose. I am glad to hear that as well. Chair Gensler, in
May, I co-led a bipartisan letter to you, along with my
colleague, Jennifer Wexton, and 22 of our colleagues, regarding
troubling accusations that the China-backed fast-fashion
retailer, Shein, allegedly engages in human rights violations,
including utilizing materials that may have been made using
Uyghur forced labor. Do you believe that Shein should be
required to certify via independent verification that the
company does not use Uyghur forced labor as a condition of
being registered to issue securities in the United States?
Mr. Gensler. If I might step away from one registrant and
go a little broader, Congress passed a law--the Uyghur Forced
Labor Act, I think was the name--and that is the law of the
land. The staff put out guidance earlier this year to all
public registrants that they have to speak to if they are in
compliance with that Act of Congress. Again, materiality
matters, and we have been very clear with that with individual
registrants in their filings, and our Division of Corporation
Finance makes that abundantly clear in each of those registrant
discussions.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent
to have the text of that letter entered into the record.
Mr. Meuser. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Rose. Chair Gensler, regarding cryptocurrencies and
shifting gears, I am interested in why you have pursued a
litigation-heavy strategy, despite the fact that neither you
nor any of your senior staff are litigators, neither your Chief
of Staff nor your Policy Director or even your General Counsel.
Why have you settled on such a litigation-heavy strategy to
address the cryptocurrency market?
Mr. Gensler. Frankly, it is because the field is so rife
with hucksters and fraudsters and non-compliant parties. But we
have also done rulemakings, one related to broker-dealers that
was completed a number of years ago, and then others related to
the definition of, ``exchange,'' and the custody role that has
been discussed a bit here, and even something called best
execution. But this is a field where the American public is at
risk and being harmed every day on these platforms that are
commingling and often trading against their customers.
Mr. Rose. In my view, it seems that these cases are brought
with an explicit political agenda, not a substantive legal one.
Mr. Gensler. Nothing could be further from the truth. The
only thing political is protecting the American public, which I
think Members of both sides of the aisle will probably agree
with; they don't want to see constituents hurt, and in a place
where a lot of crypto projects are not properly disclosing,
there have been too many bankruptcies, and in the bankruptcies,
investors are just lining up at the bankruptcy court.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. In my opinion, I would like to see you
do more from the regulatory and guidance side----
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Rose. ----because this industry is so important, and we
need to foster it, in my view. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman yields back. The gentlewoman from
Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you. And thank you, Chair Gensler, for
being here. I know that you have been pretty public about or
maybe you made an argument or took a position that it is too
costly for firms if the SEC establishes a robust climate
disclosure rule. Is that correct?
Mr. Gensler. There are many comments in our comment file
that have raised that, and that is what I am talking about
because we, under the Administrative Procedure Act, have to
take all of those comments----
Ms. Tlaib. I understand.
Mr. Gensler. ----and do an economic analysis that takes
into consideration the cost.
Ms. Tlaib. In those comments, I think about 1,000 companies
have already voluntarily reported emissions from their
customers and suppliers. We call it Scope 3 emissions, as you
know, where most of the firms' greenhouse gas emissions can
originate. On top of that, we also are now seeing that
thousands of additional U.S. companies will soon be required to
report Scope 3 emissions to comply with the EU standards. And
California, I think, just passed a bill that would require
roughly 5,000 public and private companies to report Scope 3
emissions, correct?
Mr. Gensler. Yes, I believe both Europe, and if the
governor signs the law in California, that will be the case,
and it will change the economics because, in essence, it
changes the baseline----
Ms. Tlaib. Just looking at those moves by California, of
course, and the EU's Scope 3 emissions disclosures, would it
undermine the argument that such reporting will be overly
burdensome if required by SEC?
Mr. Gensler. While it may change the economics over the
course of the years, California's rule wouldn't be in place
until 2027, I believe. The SEC still has to stay within our
remit and the laws as Congress has passed, and it is about
investor decisions and what is being disclosed.
Ms. Tlaib. Sure. If I may, Mr. Chairman, I would like to
submit for the record a letter signed by 25 of my colleagues
from the House and the Senate, urging you, Chair Gensler, to
finalize a robust climate disclosure rule that includes Scope 3
emissions.
Mr. Meuser. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. Tlaib. It is pretty simple why we need a robust
disclosure rule, Chair Gensler. At least, it is simple for me.
I know this is what you do every day, but I think the impact on
the ground for my family is pretty clear. Currently, U.S.
companies can and do obscure their exposure to climate risks,
as you probably already know, and threaten the investments that
retirees and workers depend on. For example, you look at
Brookfield Renewable, an affiliate of a giant asset manager,
and Brookfield describes itself as, ``one of the world's
largest publicly-traded, pure play, renewable power
platforms.'' That sounds like a choice that would avoid
climate-related financial risks, right? Wrong. A recent report
found that Brookfield Renewable has invested in a fund that
holds fossil fuel infrastructure assets, including Alberta oil
sands' pipelines, which the firm does not disclose in its SEC
filings.
This is just one example among many, Chair Gensler, of
financial greenwashing which regularly involves emission of
Scope 3 emissions. So again, I really think such practices
jeopardize the hard-earned life savings of many of my residents
and of workers across our country, retirees who invest paycheck
after paycheck year after year to secure their financial
future. So just please know, and I want to be on record that I
really would urge you to move forward on having a robust
disclosure rule, but with that, Mr. Chairman, I would like to
yield the rest of my time to Mr. Foster.
[Chart]
Mr. Foster. Thank you. I just have a quick question. I take
it that you are familiar with this graphic from Bloomberg that
shows you lagging significantly behind your three predecessors
in terms of the number of rules you finalized in the first 2
years of your tenure?
Mr. Gensler. I did read that in Bloomberg Law 2 weeks ago.
Mr. Foster. Okay. Now, when your Republican predecessor,
Harvey Pitt, finalized 34 rules in his first 2 years and 4
months, I guess, was that preceded by the sort of detailed
cost-benefit analysis of all the possible interplays between
all of these rules that our Republican colleagues are asking
for?
Mr. Gensler. It included cost-benefit, but we benefit
from----
Mr. Foster. But the interplay between the 34 rules, which
now is apparently the bar.
Mr. Gensler. Oh, thank you. As best I understand it, they
did it rule by rule, individually.
Mr. Foster. Individual, yes. And when Mary Shapiro did 28,
or under Trump, Jay Clayton did 25 rules in the first 2 years,
was there any comprehensive analysis of the interplay that is
now being demanded?
Mr. Gensler. Again, we are following----
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Foster. Thank you.
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
South Carolina, Mr. Timmons, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chair Gensler, thank
you for being here today.
Mr. Gensler. It is good to see you again.
Mr. Timmons. Yes, sir. The SEC's onslaught of rulemaking, I
think, is severely impeding U.S. markets in the name of
protecting investors from themselves. Your regulatory approach
is an insult to the intelligence of Americans and their ability
to make risk-based decisions when investing. Quite frankly, we
have never seen market participation at the levels we see
today. The current ecosystem represents a thriving financial
sector where people, no matter their income levels, have access
to investment opportunities previously unseen in human history.
And this is why I struggle to rationalize why the SEC
continues down this warpath of rushed and quickly-written
proposed rules. I could go down the list and probably name
dozens of proposals that I think are too broad and lack
quantitative analysis or have reduced comment periods, but I am
just going to talk about a couple of them.
On December 14, 2022, the SEC released four proposals that
would overhaul the regulations governing equity markets. These
proposals make sweeping changes to how stock orders are priced,
executed, and reported. This is despite the fact that there is
no indication of a market failure that would warrant such a
sweeping overhaul of the U.S. equity markets. Traditionally,
regulatory agencies introduced new regulations in response to
market failures or when directed by Congress. Regulators
tailored solutions to address the specific problems identified.
There is no clear need for change in the market, nor has
Congress mandated such sweeping reforms.
The SEC cites the October 2021 SEC staff report on meme
stock as a rationale for the proposed rulemaking. However, the
report does not recommend any equity market structure reforms.
To this point, you have repeated this buzz phrase, ``The
playing field isn't level,'' but you haven't explained what
that means or cited how it harms investors. Investors have the
best user experience and the lowest cost in history. The
industry says you are just picking favorites between exchanges
versus wholesalers and that retail investors may not actually
benefit from these proposals.
That was my long intro. How concerned should we be about
the potential for increased costs to investors, especially in
scenarios where retail brokers may need to reinstate
commissions due to changes like the suggested increase in price
improvement?
Mr. Gensler. The proposals were put out to address
individual problems, but they really are about driving greater
competition and efficiency. Right now, our equity market on any
given day depends on the stock. Between 30 and 50 percent is
not in the lit markets, it is being traded in what are called
the dark markets, and so we are trying to bring more
competition in that. One of the rules that actually has a
tremendous amount of support in the comment file for many
market participants is about lowering the minimum increment.
You can trade at a penny down to half a penny, for instance,
and things like that, so we are looking at these comments and
we are looking through to update our rules.
Mr. Timmons. Currently, tens of thousands of Americans can
trade for free and at their fingertips. Do you think that your
proposal will result in the reintroduction of commissions?
Mr. Gensler. Zero commission does not mean it is
necessarily for free. There are a lot of things that are going
on behind the scenes. When you send a market order, that is a
very sweet order, because most investors doing 100 shares are
not going to invest another 100 shares or another 10,000 shares
behind it.
Mr. Timmons. It is going to result in increased fees for
the people who currently have no fees, but----
Mr. Gensler. Actually, what our economic analysis shows is
that in each of these rules, it would benefit. We believe that
the benefits are significant.
Mr. Timmons. Sorry. So, you are saying that if this rule
goes into effect, the people who are currently trading for free
will not have to pay commissions? Because I think they will
have to, because that is how the market is going to inevitably
function. You are not going to be able to continue providing
free trades if this rule goes into effect.
Mr. Gensler. Again, there are separate rules, but the one I
was talking about is in terms of lowering the minimum
increment. There is a lot of support for the other rules as
well to say that brokers have to give their clients best
execution seems pretty straightforward to many of us.
Mr. Timmons. I just think that if we are going to try to
provide inclusion and participation in the markets for all
Americans, we need to do this with a scalpel, not a
sledgehammer, and I think you have been using a sledgehammer
during your time at the SEC. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back. Thank you.
Mr. Meuser. The gentleman yields back. The gentlewoman from
Texas, Ms. Garcia, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Gensler, for joining us here today. I always look forward to
your visits, and I am thankful that you are here and we are
still all here to finish to the end.
I want to bring back the chart that was referenced by Mr.
Foster. This comes from an article written by Bloomberg Law
entitled, ``Gensler Lags Predecessors in SEC Rulemaking as ESG
Plans Linger.'' In fact, they stated that you have the slowest
pace in decades. We see that under Bush, it was 34; under
Obama, 28; and under Trump, 25, but you have only had 22 rules
for the same period of time in the first 2 years. We have had a
lot of talk from the other side of the aisle about all these
rules, there are too many rules too quickly, you are not
listening, you are not doing enough investigations, but
Bloomberg seems to think you are a slacker. Are you a slacker,
Mr. Gensler?
Mr. Gensler. I don't know. I will leave that to others to
comment on, but we do things thoughtfully. We do it by the
book. We take the economic advice that we get, and Bloomberg
Law has these numbers, so they speak for themselves. I think
Chair Clayton, under President Trump, did 64 final rules by the
time he finished his 4 years, so our rule agenda is----
Ms. Garcia. So, you are not even at half of what the Trump
Administration did?
Mr. Gensler. The chart says we have done 22. We are now at
24, and he had done 25, I believe. We just do it thoughtfully.
We do it under the law, under the economics, and I will leave
it to others to comment. But we are doing it on behalf of the
American public and for investors and issuers, and making sure
that they don't work for the markets, that the market should
work for them. And all too often in this country, it is turned
around that somehow investors and issuers are there so that
some market intermediary makes a profit.
Ms. Garcia. So, it is all about transparency.
Mr. Gensler. Sure.
Ms. Garcia. And could you just in a few words explain to
the average viewer who may be watching today why transparency
is so important in this area, particularly in this area?
Mr. Gensler. Transparency helps foster competition in
markets. When you have transparent pricing of products or if
you know that performance of an investment adviser is more
transparent, it tends to lower the cost in the middle, and that
again helps you, the average working or retired American, to
invest, but it also helps the people with good ideas if you
lower the cost in the middle. And that tends to come from
transparency, just like when you are buying an automobile, it
is good to know the transparency of what a few different auto
dealers are charging for that same automobile.
Ms. Garcia. Okay. The other issue that you and I have
discussed many times is how important financial literacy and
education is in this sector, and the last time you were here, I
told you of my concern about financial literacy, not only in my
district, but in all of Texas. The Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas reports that 8 percent of Texans do not have a bank
account and 37 percent of Texans have not planned for
retirement. Financial literacy, of course, is key. Chair
Gensler, could you provide an update on the SEC's educational
efforts to improve financial literacy not only in Texas, but
across the nation, to improve people's understanding of the
work that your agency does?
Mr. Gensler. We have an Office of Investor Education and
Advocacy. It is a very important office. We also put out
investor alerts often on our website, and we try to engage with
the public, the broad investing public, to help them understand
the markets, but also to protect themselves against wrongdoers
in the markets, and if you have something to tell us, to also
tell us through the tips, complaints, and referral.
Ms. Garcia. Right. I also have a follow-up question on the
financial inclusion regarding literacy--not literacy, but the
language barriers. What are we doing to address any language
barriers on behalf of members of our communities and our
constituents in terms of investors?
Mr. Gensler. That's a very important issue. We have
certainly done some things recently with regard to shareholder
reports, but I think I would want to get back to you, because
it is an important issue about language.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, I also would like to offer for the
record the articles that I referenced earlier.
Chairman McHenry. That is available to Members generally,
and without objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. We will now recognize the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Gensler, it's
good to see you.
Mr. Gensler. It's good to see you, Mr. Meuser.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you. The SEC's climate rule's Scope 3
provision mandates reporting on emissions from activities not
directly controlled by a company up and down its supply chain,
as you all know, so supply chains, let's say, from China or
some other offshore source, for example, which are perhaps less
scrutinized and submit data which could be suspect as opposed
to from a U.S. resource, is an example of how Scope 3 data
could be flawed and the system as a whole. What are your
thoughts on that, and is this capital towards certain
industries as opposed to something else? What is the intent?
And the other thing I would like to ask is, now it is
rattling many companies, right? This rule won't go into effect
perhaps until next year. Companies are preparing for it.
Private companies are preparing for it, and there are is a lot
of additional compliance that goes along with it. Could you
comment on that?
Mr. Gensler. Those are two very good questions. First one,
many investors are looking at what is the risk of companies
with potential climate change, and one of the measures of that
risk is the greenhouse gas emissions of the company and
possibly their supply chain or so-called value chain. Although
many companies know their own greenhouse gas emissions, they
don't necessarily know, as you rightly pointed out, their
entire supply chain, and fewer public companies are currently
publishing that. We put out a proposal to bring consistency to
the disclosure, but we heard a lot of comments coming in to say
Scope 3 disclosure is not as well-developed. It is not as many
companies are putting out. It is, frankly, not yet as reliable,
and so we are taking that into consideration.
And I would say another thing is some people have raised
from the farm belt, for instance, agriculture interest. We
don't want to have to do this, we don't need to do this. And
we, the SEC, don't regulate those private companies, those non-
public companies, and so staff is looking very closely to
ensure that we stay within our authorities, and it is about the
public companies.
On your second question about cost, we take that very
thoughtfully into consideration, and we got a lot of comments.
I was chatting with the Member across the aisle about this, and
we need to take that into consideration.
Mr. Meuser. Can you give us the analysis of some of those
costs? That was a follow-up question. Can you give us the
analysis on the costs that you are taking into consideration?
Have you run the numbers and----
Mr. Gensler. We are, in essence, adjusting our economic
analysis because we got so much feedback from the public on
that particularly important point.
Mr. Meuser. On the safeguarding rule as well, you mentioned
you were on and off. Director Birdthistle mentioned that he
talks extensively with banking regulators. There are many
regulators, however, in that field--and this is regarding the
safeguarding rule--that if you talk more often with them, this
rule would be written differently. What is your reaction to
that?
Mr. Gensler. We have good, ongoing discussions with our
colleagues at the bank regulators. We continue to engage on
this rule and on other rules and, of course, on market
oversight. And the safeguarding rule is one where we have heard
a lot from not only the investment advisers that it applies to,
but from the banks that act as qualified custodians.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. Thanks. I am changing gears a little bit
here. There was a recent shareholder vote to extend the
deadline for the DWAC and TMTG merger, which demonstrated that
nearly 400,000 investors want this merger to happen. Can you
give me your assurance or feedback that a revised S-4 handled
in regular order will be expedited, whether for this merger or
any others?
Mr. Gensler. Again, as you are aware, that is a company
that recently settled an enforcement action because it
initially had a material misrepresentation of when it went
public in its S-1. I don't think they have filed an S-4 with us
yet, but when they do, our Division of Corporation Finance
would handle it in regular order.
Mr. Meuser. I appreciate that very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Nickel, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Gensler,
thanks for being here. I want to start by applauding the
important work of the SEC and the public servants who work
under you. You have a lot to be proud of. But a lot of the
decisions you have made, frankly, have me scratching my head to
try to understand your thought process and what goes into the
decisions that you make. And I tried to figure out, how can I
understand Chairman Gensler a little bit more, and I read and
saw that you are a marathoner and an ultra-marathoner? Is that
right?
Mr. Gensler. In my day, yes, I did the John F. Kennedy 50-
miler.
Mr. Nickel. I looked and found that less than a quarter, 1
percent of the world's population, has done a marathon. I did
the New York Marathon, so I have at least accomplished one. And
being here now for over 3 hours testifying before Congress in a
hearing like this probably isn't one of the things on your
schedule that you are super excited about. But how would you
rate testifying in Congress versus a marathon? Which is easier?
Mr. Gensler. I love being in front of this committee. I
have been here probably 20 times in my life. It is a great room
and a great committee. Marathons are a little harder.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks. Okay. I want to get into
securitization.
Chairman McHenry. If the gentleman suspends----
Mr. Nickel. I yield for the question.
Chairman McHenry. We ask the witness to answer the
question.
Mr. Gensler. I think that this is easier than running the
New York City Marathon.
Chairman McHenry. Okay.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you. So, securitization is a cornerstone
of affordable access to credit for families and businesses in
my district. I represent North Carolina's 13th district. For
example, securitization funds around 70 percent of residential
mortgage loans every year and provides funding for auto loans
and credit cards. I am concerned that your rule proposal on
conflicts of interest will impair the ability of securitization
markets to function by outlawing activities that have no
connection with securitization transactions and reducing
participation in those markets. This would increase the cost
and reduce the availability of consumer mortgage and business
credit for my constituents, which is a real problem. And,
frankly, we have an economy that doesn't work for everyone, and
it is so hard for so many of the constituents I represent to
get credit and to get a loan and to do those things.
The SEC said it was, ``unable to reliably quantify many of
the economic effects,'' of the proposed rule, given these
uncertainties and to avoid compounding the credit crunch that
is already, again, hitting my constituents incredibly hard.
Will you commit to re-proposing a rule that is more tailored to
the feedback that SEC has received from the public?
Mr. Gensler. One, the capital markets are really important
for credit cards, auto loans, and mortgages through this
securitization market. Two, Congress mandated that we actually
do a rule to address potential conflicts that sponsors of those
asset securitizations might have if they are on the other side,
taking positions in conflict with the investors. That is what
we are doing. We have a robust, good comment file on that. We
are looking at that closely. I can't prejudge it, but I think
that the comments that we received, we can hopefully sort
through.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks, and I certainly urge you to re-propose
the rule as it threatens to disrupt the housing market in North
Carolina and across the country. I want to move on to our
Grayscale letter. I sent a letter to you yesterday along with
my colleagues, Congressmen Flood, Torres, and Emmer, urging you
to approve the listing of spot Bitcoin ETPs after your recent
loss in court to Grayscale. Now that the SEC has the court's
decision in hand rejecting your rationale for denial, does the
SEC plan to approve the current pending spot Bitcoin ETF
applications?
Mr. Gensler. Thank you for your letter. I did read it last
night. Again, we are still taking this under advisement. It is
a recent court action, and staff and Commissioners will take it
up as appropriate.
Mr. Nickel. The court concluded the SEC's denial of
Grayscale lacked, ``a coherent explanation,'' and then, ``falls
short of the standard for reasoned decision making,'' and was,
``arbitrary and capricious.'' How do you explain the SEC's
actions there?
Mr. Gensler. We do that which we do under the law as best
we can. Sometimes, things go to court. We are still considering
that court decision. I think it was a district court--I'm
sorry--it was an appellate court, but we are still considering
that appellate court decision, and I don't want to get ahead of
the staff or my fellow Commissioners.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much, and I will note that 3 hours is
far below my marathon time. Not even close, but I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. I will now
recognize the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Fitzgerald.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Chairman Gensler, thanks for being here.
Congressmen Lucas and Posey talked about this earlier, but I am
going to bring it up again. It deals with the proposals
regarding predictive data analytics. Could you distill it down
again? Is there a lack of economic analysis, and is that
consistent kind of with the SEC's mission to protect investors?
How do you see those two kind of meshing?
Mr. Gensler. Those are good questions. One, there is a
robust economic analysis, but we are going to benefit from
public feedback on it. But two, the rationale, and the
rationale comes to a really key thing, investment adviser,
whether it is through a robo-adviser or a broker-dealer, that
they continue to put the investing public's interests first
when they are engaging with us, what is called investor
interaction, and they are not putting their interest in front
of ours. So they can use data analytics and use math to put
their interest ahead of ours, and that is not good for the
investing public.
Mr. Nickel. Are you afraid it will be applied to directly
on just about everything? It could go down to the level of
Excel spreadsheets. It somehow it has to be applied, right?
Mr. Gensler. Here is the sort of balancing act. We are
technology-neutral, so whether you use, as you say, an Excel
spreadsheet or you use machine learning, sort of the core
question is, are you engaging with the investors and pushing
them for your profits, not your personal profits, but the
investment adviser's profits or the investor's? But we have a
lot of comments. The comment file is open until, I think,
October 10th, so we are still hearing from the public, and this
hearing today is a very important part of that.
Mr. Nickel. A couple of times, you have said that in the
SEC's rulemakings, you are just kind of simply doing what
Congress has asked for. Do you think that is consistent? There
are 40-some rule proposals, and I don't know that Congress sked
for all of those, so how are you measuring that right now?
Mr. Gensler. You raise a good point. It is not that you
asked for it last week or last month, but our laws embodied by
Congress are on the books. And we need, I think, really, to
stay competitive in the world, to update our roadblocks to make
sure that the markets, the Wall Street broker-dealers, the
exchanges, and the investment advisers are working on behalf of
your constituents, the investors, and the people with good
ideas who want to raise money. And it is trying to drive
greater efficiency in the middle of that market, and sometimes
the middle of the market doesn't love that because greater
efficiency might mean a little less economic rents, a little
less profit in the middle.
Mr. Nickel. Let me switch gears again. I think we are
concerned about the Financial Stability Oversight Council's
(FSOC's) recent proposal regarding the designation of the non-
bank financial institutions as systemically important,
particularly the elimination of a cost-benefit analysis
requirement. Given your position as a FSOC member, why would
the FSOC eliminate the requirement to do a cost-benefit
analysis when determining whether or not a nonbank financial
institution should be designated as systemically important?
Mr. Gensler. Thank you. I am a member of the Financial
Stability Oversight Council, but I am only one voting member,
and what we put out for public comment was really just to
ensure that we get back to the guidance that was out there in
2012. I was a proud FSOC member back then, also. And we have
really gotten public feedback, in essence, could there be
financial institutions that were so important to the system,
systemically relevant, that they would be designated so and
then come under the Federal Reserve for oversight.
Mr. Nickel. Very good. I am going to squeeze in one more
here. I would like to reiterate, Congressman Luetkemeyer talked
about it earlier, about the proposed securitization conflicts
rule. When you were here last--I think it was in April--you
mentioned that the proposed rule was new and you hadn't looked
at the comment file. At home, Wisconsinites rely on private
mortgage insurance for access to affordable and sustainable
homeownership. How can you differentiate between managing risk
and betting on both sides of the transaction without capturing
necessary business activity like this? How is that going to
work?
Mr. Gensler. Congress gave us the challenge to do that, and
that is why we put it out to public comment, but you are
allowed to hedge, you are allowed to do other transactions, but
not bet against the investors. We are still working through the
comments to try to finalize it. It is a mandate from Congress.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Nickel. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. I will now go to the gentlewoman from
Colorado, Ms. Pettersen, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome back,
Chairman Gensler. I can't believe it has already been 6 months.
Time flies when you are having fun, but it doesn't feel very
fun this week. I just want to thank you for your time today and
your expertise.
I know you have discussed this at length today, and it has
been a big focus in all of the areas of the key functions that
our agencies play in helping support and advocate for our
constituents. And Ranking Member Waters touched on the real
harm that a government shutdown would do, specifically to your
agency, and should there be a government shutdown, only around
400 employees will be retained to maintain minimal functions,
with nearly 4,200 employees being furloughed.
The barebones staff that will remain working during a
shutdown cannot perform all the responsibilities adequately.
And you have spent time discussing a number of the functions
that the SEC will not be able to manage, like protecting
Americans from fraud, allowing investors to access our capital
markets, and conducting investor outreach and education, among
other important roles of your agency. And it is deeply
concerning for me with the long-term implications of the chaos
and dysfunction here in Washington, and the perception globally
around what role the United States is going to play, and if we
are a market that people should continue to invest in, and the
real concerns out there. In your opinion, how do you think that
a government shutdown would impact America's capital markets
and the global gold standard that we have always had?
Mr. Gensler. In the short term, there is a risk that we,
the government's important market regulator, wouldn't have the
resources to oversee the markets, whether it is a day, a month,
or whatever it is. In the longer term, it is just the
confidence in our capital markets and our confidence in our
system of deciding the fiscal choices that Congress and the
Administration does, and we see those challenges in terms of
investors around the globe. We are 40 percent of the world's
capital markets, but we are only 23 percent of the world's
economy. That is a good thing. We are punching above our weight
class, so to speak. That is a good thing, but the confidence in
our system can be shaken as well.
Ms. Pettersen. And we saw that recently, with not actually
coming to an agreement and potentially going off a fiscal
cliff. Even though that didn't happen, we know that we were
downgraded with one bureau. There are going to be long-term
economic consequences. But we know that there are billions of
dollars of damage because for the first time, people are
questioning whether or not the United States will pay their
bills, and so these political games have long-term risks. This
is an area that I know you have a background in, and it is
going to be absolutely essential that we are working in
partnership to address the opportunities and challenges that
artificial intelligence (AI) poses for this country, and
specifically for our financial system.
On the morning of May 22nd of this year, an AI-generated
image of an explosion near the Pentagon spread widely
throughout social media. Immediately, the stock market dipped,
and we saw a significant decline. We were able to recover when
we were able to confirm that it was, in fact, fake, but we know
that these are challenges that we are going to have to address
together.
And, Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter the Bloomberg News
article, ``How Fake AI Photo of a Pentagon Blast Went Viral and
Briefly Spooked Stocks,'' into the record.
Chairman McHenry. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. Pettersen. AI has the potential to significantly impact
our financial system and our capital markets and our banking
system, and this needs to be addressed at every level on how we
can mitigate against some of the negative consequences. I am
proud to be joining my colleague and friend in introducing a
bill to examine how artificial intelligence will impact the
financial sector and how we need to regulate this. I want to
hear from you, though, on what we can be doing, what you
recommend that we do to address the challenges that AI poses in
the future?
Mr. Gensler. It is probably going to drive productivity and
so forth, but in the financial sector, I do think that there is
a risk of deep fakes. Look, fraud is fraud. Even if you are
using artificial intelligence, there is usually some human
behind it, but that is a real challenge to focus on.
Ms. Pettersen. Okay. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady yields back. The
gentlelady from California, Mrs. Kim, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Chairman Gensler,
thanks for being with us today. I am concerned that the SEC,
under your leadership, has not carefully considered the
aggregate costs of an overlapping nature of your proposed rules
and regulations, and, as you heard, there is an erratic pace of
your proposals. I want to paraphrase your own words, the
erratic pace of your proposals undermines the finest capital
markets in the world, and each proposed rulemaking, now over 50
since the spring of 2021, will make it more costly for small
businesses to raise capital in the markets and more difficult
for hardworking investors in my district to benefit from gains
in the markets and to save for retirement.
And I remember when you came before our committee early
this year, you said that the SEC's hardcore proposal would
level the playing field for my constituents, but I completely
disagree with that notion, and I urge you to please revisit the
swing pricing and hard close proposals. I know some of my
colleagues across the aisle also raised this issue.
So please tell me, how would the hard close proposal level
the playing field for my constituents in Southern California
when you are proposing a hard close at 4:00 p.m. Eastern Time,
which s 1:00 p.m. Pacific Time? Could you answer that?
Mr. Gensler. Again, what we are trying to address is to
ensure that when somebody redeems from a mutual fund, they
don't leave everybody else in that mutual fund with losses or
what is called dilution. I would say, given the clock, right
now, anybody in your district already has to put the redemption
order in at 1:00 p.m., and we are not changing that.
Mrs. Kim. Let me reclaim, and I want to tell you that I am
specifically talking about my constituents being put at a
competitive disadvantage compared to someone operating in
Eastern Time. So, you don't believe that a fund or an investor
in California would be put at a disadvantage when they have to
stop trading at 1:00 p.m. Pacific Time, whether it is mutual
funds or whatever you are talking about?
Mr. Gensler. I am just observing currently, because the New
York Stock Exchange is closed by 4:00 East Coast Time, and
mutual funds redemptions are by 4:00 p.m., and we are not
changing that. That already exists.
Mrs. Kim. Again, 4:00 Eastern Time is 1:00 p.m. Pacific
Time, so in my home State of California, obviously, we are very
concerned about this because we have to stop trading at 1:00
p.m., but let me move on.
I know in my home State of California, Silicon Valley Bank
(SVB) failed largely because it wasn't hedging its interest
rate risk, and you have proposed a rule on conflicts of
interest for securitization that will make hedging this exact
type of risk much more difficult. Surely, this is not the
intent of the statute or your proposal, but it is what the rule
as written would do. And I heard your response, your engagement
with Congressman Fitzgerald, that hedging is mandated, but that
is not what I am hearing. So, I would like to ask you if you
can commit to working with me to ensure that the final rule
clarifies that risk mitigating hedging is allowed because the
current rule is unclear on that point.
Mr. Gensler. Again, I think it was Congress that has that
risk mitigation hedging but not trading against the investors,
and so we put it out to public comment. But you have raised an
issue of just broad general interest rate hedging.
Mrs. Kim. I am talking about that hedging issue, which is
very important, and with all due respect, I believe the lawyers
outside every office disagree, and I think the last thing we
want is a chilling effect on hedging. And let me remind you,
SVB is a glaring example of how to get things wrong, and I hope
we can work together to ensure that the final rule leaves the
important risk mitigation tools intact.
I want to talk about the 34 items on your proposed rules
list for 2022, which is triple that of the previous year and,
in fact, over the past 2 decades, 2021 was the only time the
Commission proposed more rules, which obviously was mandated by
the Dodd-Frank Act. The October Inspector General report said
that the staff believe that your more aggressive agenda
potentially limits the time available for staff resources and
analysis and increases the litigation risk, so can I just throw
in the question of, what sort of things increase litigation
risk? Would you be able to respond to that?
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman can answer in written form
for the record.
Mrs. Kim. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. Ms. Pressley of Massachusetts is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Chair Gensler, for joining us
today. There are unrelenting people, institutions, forces at
work that seek to dismantle gains that have been made in
diversity and equity and inclusion from corner offices, State
legislatures, the Supreme Court, and my colleagues across the
aisle. In fact, when they got the gavel, the very first thing
that they did, one of their very first actions was to dissolve
the Diversity and Inclusion Subcommittee of this Financial
Services Committee, that was stood up by Ranking Member Waters,
the Committee Chair at the time, and that subcommittee was
headed by Joyce Beatty. The other side isn't taking any days
off, so I am not taking any days off either. And that is why I
want to talk to you about diversity on corporate boards and
understanding the importance of disclosure and transparency
when it comes to gender, racial diversity, and other data,
along with the ways in which that can impact financial
performance.
We all know that corporate boards are powerful. They play a
critical role in determining the mission of a company, its
values, its vision, its strategy, everything from who the
company will hire to which stakeholders it listens to. Now, for
decades, White men have made up the majority of corporate board
members, and they still do. Across the S&P 500 companies,
nearly a third of boards of directors are women, despite women
making up 50 percent of the country. Only 22 percent are people
of color, despite people of color making up 41 percent of the
country. These gender and racial disparities should not be
ignored. The Securities and Exchange Commission plays a
critical role in overseeing corporate governance, and that
includes work related to diversity and transparency.
Chair Gensler, research shows that diverse boards better
reflect our country, and--I want to underscore this--lead to
improved financial results for companies. I could sit here and
debate fairness and morality and the right side of history all
day, but as my good friends, and Black women on boards so often
say, this is not a matter of Black or White; it is a matter of
green, so this is about improved outcomes. What is the SEC
doing to increase disclosures on corporate board diversity and
inclusion?
Mr. Gensler. Early in my time at the SEC, we had in front
of us a filing from the stock exchange called Nasdaq. It is a
self-regulatory organization that actually has a listing
requirement. Nasdaq addressed these issues. Under the Exchange
Act, under the laws we approve, that is still a matter of court
challenge in the Fifth Circuit, if I recall, and I know that is
out there, but I think that----
Ms. Pressley. Let me reclaim my time, because I am running
out of it here. That is right. The Nasdaq proposal that was
approved by the SEC calls for two diverse board members based
on gender, race, and LGBTQ status. So, this information is
important, do you agree? Yes or no?
Mr. Gensler. We approved it under the Exchange Act, under
the guidance there. I have to be very careful about that.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. At the end of the day, disclosure of
this data is necessary because we know that that which gets
measured, gets done, so we need that transparency. And I also
think that the SEC needs to go much further and require greater
disclosure of diversity, such as disability status, and greater
disclosure of the company, including senior management and the
workforce. So, will the SEC commit to looking into expanding
diversity and inclusion disclosures?
Mr. Gensler. Staff has continued to work not only on this,
but, more broadly, also in human capital disclosures.
Ms. Pressley. Yes or no, Chairman Gensler, my time is
running out, so can you make that commitment? This shouldn't be
a hard commitment. Can you make that commitment to look to
expand diversity and inclusion disclosures beyond just the
Nasdaq proposal?
Mr. Gensler. The staff of our Division of Corporation
Finance continues to review alternatives there.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. Thank you. Just a quick history lesson.
The first Black woman on a corporate board was Patricia Roberts
Harris, and she was only appointed in 1971, roughly 50 years
ago. The year is 2023, and it is well past time that we have
corporate boards that reflect the true diversity of our
country, not only from a place of justice and fairness, but for
improved financial outcomes. My colleagues across the aisle
have already made it clear they don't care about diversity.
Their first action when they took back the gavel of this
committee was to scrap the Diversity and Inclusion Subcommittee
established by Ranking Member Waters. They are on the wrong
side of history when it comes to this issue, as are so many
others. Chairman Gensler, it is important that the SEC be on
the right side of history and press forward with the corporate
board diversity.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Flood,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chair Gensler, I would
like to continue our discussion about the SEC's Staff
Accounting Bulletin No. 121 (SAB 121) that would potentially
have significant effects on the ability of banks to custody
digital assets. Let's briefly begin by following up on
something that was raised the last time you were in front of
this committee. You previously said that prior to the issuance
of SAB 121, your staff did not confer with any of the
prudential regulators. Is that correct?
Mr. Gensler. You would have the transcript, but I think
that our staffs do talk to the prudential regulators.
Mr. Flood. Prior to the issuance of SAB 121, did your staff
confer with any of the prudential regulators?
Mr. Gensler. With regard to that particular staff bulletin,
I don't recall that they did. I know that they have----
Mr. Flood. Let's let the record reflect that the SEC staff
did not think to confer with the prudential regulators before
issuing the staff accounting bulletin. In response to my
question for the record from April on this topic, you stated,
``SAB 121 provides nonbinding staff guidance on the application
of existing accounting and disclosure requirements under U.S.
GAAP.'' Prior to the issuance of SAB 121, did the Financial
Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issue anything related to the
custody of digital assets, and if so, what was issued?
Mr. Gensler. I would have to get back to you, but if you
are asking about the Financial Accounting Standards Board, I
don't know that they have done something on custody, but we
could get back to you.
Mr. Flood. Since you cited the generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP) in your response, I decided I
would take a look at this myself. Prior to SAB 121's issuance,
FASB had not published anything related to the custody of
digital assets. In fact, the Board added accounting standards
for digital assets to its agenda in May of 2022, 2 months after
the issuance of SAB 121. Your response to my question for the
record from April also indicated that SAB 121 provides guidance
on the application of existing accounting and disclosure
requirements under the SEC rules, so here is a question: Prior
to the issuance of SAB 121, what rules had the SEC finalized
relating to the safeguarding of digital assets?
Mr. Gensler. We have on the books a rule from 2009 that
applies to the custody of digital assets by investment advisers
because it covers all funds and securities. That rule is on the
books. We also had finalized something around special purpose
broker-dealers, which relates to crypto broker-dealers.
Mr. Flood. I took a look at this topic myself. The answer,
quite frankly, is none. There were no SEC rules on the books
that directly addressed the topic of custody of digital assets.
As you well know, the SEC issued a proposed rulemaking on
custody, including digital asset custody, in February of 2023,
and that rule has not been finalized to this day. So to recap,
the SEC failed to confer with prudential regulators, despite
the fact that anything changing the rules around the custody of
assets for banks, regardless of whether the bank is publicly
traded, would be of obvious consequence to them.
Then, when justifying the bulletin, the SEC cited the GAAP
and SEC rulings. However, at the time the bulletin was issued,
there was no action by FASB, and no rulemaking from the SEC on
this topic. In April, you said you wanted the SEC to, ``stay in
our lane,'' with regard to SAB 121's potential effects on a
bank's balance sheet. It is fair to say that the fact pattern
we have is that the SEC is not just going out of its lane, but
it failed to comprehend the existence of any conflict with
prudential rules.
Additionally, the SEC's justification for issuing the
bulletin is based on accounting guidelines that did not exist
when the bulletin was issued, and rulemaking that was not even
started until nearly a year after the bulletin was issued. It
is pretty obvious that one of two things happened, and both are
bad. On one hand, it is possible that the SEC was well aware
that there was no strong justification for issuing the bulletin
and chose to do it anyway. That would show a pretty
straightforward case of regulating by guidance and
unsubstantiated theory.
On the other hand, the SEC made some obvious basic mistakes
in the issuance of this bulletin. In light of these mistakes,
it is worth mentioning the SEC Inspector General's report on
management and performance challenges. Among other things, the
report indicated that very high attrition has required the SEC
to rely on detailees with little or no experience to contribute
to the core regulatory tasks such as rulemaking. The case of
SAB 121 raises the question of whether the SEC is compromised.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman yields back. I will now
recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Welcome, Chairman Gensler. I don't know if you
need time to respond to that?
Mr. Gensler. I would just say, Mr. Flood, if I can, because
the other Member allowed me to, that the SAB 121 guidance is
based on GAAP. GAAP already exists. It doesn't need a new FASB
statement, and the custody rule at the SEC from 2009 already
covers funds and securities. To the extent it might be crypto
securities, it was already covered. It wouldn't have covered
something like Bitcoin. As the Chair and I have talked about,
that is not a security, but it would have covered crypto
securities. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. Again, welcome, and thank you for your
willingness to enforce the law where it applies. I appreciate
that, especially in the crypto space.
After many, many decisions in favor of the SEC's position,
the SEC saw its first split decision, I would say, in a major
crypto case in court with the July 13th ruling involving
Ripple's XRP. In a partial victory, I guess, for Ripple, the
Southern District of New York held that XRP was not a security
when sold on a public exchange, but it is when sold to
institutional investors, which I found surprising and
counterintuitive, given the vulnerability of individual
investors versus institutional investors and also the asymmetry
that invites into the legal analysis involving crypto.
But the wider picture is that I worry that we are heading
towards a pattern of court battles to determine if each
individual token is either a security or not, and I just wanted
to know what your thoughts were on that decision. I know it is
far from over. This case is far from over, but I just want you
to express to the committee what your views are on that issue
and on that decision, to the degree you can do so.
Mr. Gensler. I appreciate the opportunity, Congressman, but
as we, as a Commission, actually have filings in front of that
court on this matter right now, I think those filings speak for
themselves, and I just don't want to in any way speak to
something, even choosing a word differently than the Commission
voted to make filings in that, following----
Mr. Lynch. Okay.
Mr. Gensler. In essence, we filed to potentially do an
interlocutory appeal.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Fair enough. I suspected as much. One of
the major proposals in the recent digital assets market
structure legislation involves allowing a crypto firm to
provisionally register and to be held harmless for a post-
registration period. By now, we are all well aware of the
damage caused by FTX when its CEO, Sam Bankman-Fried, defrauded
millions of customers. More recently, the SEC took action
against Binance for potentially, I think, similar behavior from
lots of things.
The Binance complaint contains damaging allegations,
including operating an unregistered securities exchange, broker
and clearing agency. Further, Mr. Zhao of Binance's operation,
control of customer assets, permitted them to commingle again,
just like FTX customer assets, and divert customer assets as
they pleased. There are some concerns about this bill that we
did, the digital asset microstructure bill, that it opens up a
vulnerability for consumers to be harmed. And I was wondering
if you had a view on that, and is there any concern that we
should have with the way the bill is currently structured?
Mr. Gensler. If I can speak about the field itself, rather
than speaking about the bill, it is a common practice in the
crypto field right now to comingle that which we don't allow to
be commingled elsewhere, and with commingling, what you might
think of is an exchange like the New York Stock Exchange. With
brokers, you can think of your own individual brokers, and
maybe a hedge fund, or even a high frequency trading shop, and
even a clearinghouse, and maybe even some bank-like functions,
and it is a recipe that has not led to good results in the
crypto field and a lot of investors being harmed. So if
Congress did anything, it would be separating out those
conflicts.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Lynch. My time has expired. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Norman, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Gensler, are you
aware of Prometheum company?
Mr. Gensler. A company? I have heard of that company, yes,
sir.
Mr. Norman. They testified before us back on June 13th. The
CEO and founder of Prometheum testified before us, and he
assured us that only 20 percent of the company is owned by
China. Does that concern you at all? And I assume you know they
are a broker-dealer, a special purpose broker-dealer for
digital asset securities.
Mr. Gensler. Any registrant in our markets has to comply
with our laws, and whether they are partially owned or wholly
owned by China----
Mr. Norman. But I am saying, in your position, does that
concern you, 20 percent owned by China and the information that
could be easily transferred to China, which is an enemy of this
country?
Mr. Gensler. Sorry. What is really important, regardless of
whether it is China or any other country, is that it is a
privilege to be in our capital markets, and that those
companies comply with our laws, whether it is the company you
mentioned or any other company, controlled or partially owned
by Chinese entities.
Mr. Norman. They may comply with the laws, but still the
threat is there that information is being shared on investors.
We sent a letter to you back on September 25th, Senator
Tuberville and I. Do you know how long it took us to get this
reply?
Mr. Gensler. I'm sorry. September 25th, yesterday?
Mr. Norman. Of 2023, yes. Yes, that is right. We sent it 10
weeks earlier. It took 10 weeks, which is my point, to get this
back. And what we asked you to do is look into that, into the
China connection, which is of serious concern, should be of
yours in your role. Basically, and I am not going to read it,
this is just a nonresponse. It is just words, and what is
concerning to me is if somebody in your role is just shuffling
paper, it is a danger to this country.
Mr. Gensler. There are a number of broker-dealers in our
country that have an affiliation with China. You named one. It
is not the only one. I think your letter and some other letters
from the Senator name some of the others, and those broker-
dealers have to comply with our laws. They actually have to,
under our laws, have their books and records here so they can
be inspected and looked at by FINRA, which you mentioned.
Mr. Norman. Does China go by the rules? Does Communist
China go by the rules?
Mr. Gensler. They have a different set of laws there. They
have a different government. But I am saying, if you are here
in the U.S., they have to comply with----
Mr. Norman. And 10 weeks to get this letter that was two
paragraphs long, is really an insult. Are you familiar with
Meta Materials (MMTLP)?
Mr. Gensler. Yes, I am, sir, not very deeply, but it is a
company that I have heard of.
Mr. Norman. Do you know what the aggregate shares are, the
audited shares count of MMTLP is as of close of market on
December 8, 2022?
Mr. Gensler. I don't know. I know that it is a company that
then exchanged into something called Next Bridge, I believe.
Mr. Norman. Okay. Does the SEC have this information on the
audited shares?
Mr. Gensler. It may be a matter of public record. It was a
company that did an exchange and became another company.
Mr. Norman. We will try writing you another letter, and if
you would look into it, we would appreciate that.
Mr. Gensler. Thank you.
Mr. Norman. As has been said earlier, the arbitrary
rulemaking that is occurring under your rule on theoretical
assumptions is really getting our constituents who are involved
in the financial markets very upset. And considering your
weight, you are going way past the boundaries that need to be
going, and I think you have made the SEC a crusader of
rulemaking by enforcement rather than modernizing the
regulatory guidance which isn't something new that you haven't
heard before. You blame it on staff turnover, you blame it on a
lot of things, but my only request is that you prioritize this
rulemaking and actually make the case for reductions, if you
would even consider something. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the ranking
member as well, and, of course, I am grateful to the Secretary
for appearing today. Thank you very much. It has been an honor
to work with you. Mr. Secretary, if----
Mr. Gensler. I am honored to have another title, but it is
just, ``Chair,'' or ``Gary.''
Mr. Green. ``Chair.'' Okay. ``Mr. Chairman,'' excuse me.
The traditional services of an exchange, if you perform those,
a broker clearing agency, these are the kinds of things that
should be registered. Is that a fair statement?
Mr. Gensler. Yes. If you are a broker in America, if you
are a dealer in an exchange, not only registered, but then
comply with the laws so that the public is protected.
Mr. Green. And in your capacity as a chairman, if you have
the opinion that these things are not taking place, are you
duty bound to do what is within your authority to protect the
public?
Mr. Gensler. Yes, and we end up being a cop on the beat,
and it takes a five-member Commission, but sometimes we bring
enforcement actions if people are not properly complying with
the laws and registering.
Mr. Green. Public Citizen has indicated that crypto amounts
to a giant Ponzi scheme, whose victims disproportionately
include low- and moderate-income individuals as well as people
of color. I am concerned about that. I appreciate your being
the cop on the beat. I want to protect people from what may be
a Ponzi scheme. There are different opinions about this, but
what are some of the consequences of having a poorly-regulated
digital currency?
Mr. Gensler. There have been billions of dollars of losses,
and, in fact, there are some studies that suggest that lower-
income communities and communities of color have lost more and
that it has not been to their advantage at all to be investing
in these assets, on average. Really, it is a matter of, the
American public can decide what investment risks they want to
take, but they should have the full and truthful disclosure
about those investments if they are under the securities laws.
And then, the trading platforms themselves should comply with
the laws and not be entering into a bunch of conflicted
services where they sometimes are trading against their
customers on those exchanges.
Mr. Green. Do you consider the American dollar to be an
effective, efficient digital currency?
Mr. Gensler. The American dollar, which is the sort of the
leading currency around the globe, most of it is digital; we
buy a cup of coffee at Starbucks or we get paid or we pay our
rent digitally. Occasionally, we still use paper cash.
Mr. Green. And do you believe that properly regulated, we
can have digital currencies that won't amount to a Ponzi
scheme?
Mr. Gensler. I think the U.S. dollar is quite strong, and I
think the U.S. dollar, because we use it digitally already, is
a form of a digital dollar. Crypto tokens are really quite
something different, sir. They are not a currency. This is
going back into economic history, but they don't fulfill the
three functions of a currency: a store value; a unit of
account; and a medium of exchange. Maybe in another day, but
not in 2023, frankly.
Mr. Green. And our failure to act, or your failure because
you are really the person who is in the hot seat, as it were,
can cause a lot of harm to a lot of people, as we have seen
with one circumstance, and I thank you for what you are doing
to prevent that harm. I really do. Thank you.
Mr. Gensler. Thank you.
Mr. Green. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Steil,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you, Chairman Gensler, for being here with us today.
This past summer, I asked Director Gerding, of your
Division of Corporation Finance, about whether or not the SEC
staff conducted legal analysis of shareholder proposals, and
Director Gerding seemed to have a tough time answering the
question. And I walked away understanding that the SEC does not
conduct much of any legal analysis of a shareholder proposal.
That is troubling to me because I think that should be one of
the roles of the SEC, in particular, following the SEC's review
of the particular Travelers shareholder proposal, the racial
equity audit that I think could have driven that company to be
forced to engage in illegal behavior. So, I'm asking you if you
can give me a clear answer, does the SEC conduct legal analysis
of shareholder proposals?
Mr. Gensler. In preparation for the hearing, I watched the
testimony between Director Gerding and you, and I don't do this
on a day-to-day basis. But I think when staff looks at
sometimes companies come in and ask the staff's opinion on
things, one of the components they look at is the legal----
Mr. Steil. So, not every time. When you say, ``sometimes,''
I think it is just important for us to understand whether or
not we should make that explicit. I think it should be
explicit. So sometimes, the SEC looks at whether or not a
shareholder proposal is legal and sometimes, they do not review
whether or not a shareholder proposal is legal.
Mr. Gensler. As I understand it, I believe it is one of the
components of the review, but I would be glad to have staff
work with your staff and get you the details of the----
Mr. Steil. I would like you to. The fact that you reviewed
it in advance of this committee hearing, which I appreciate the
amount of time and effort you put into preparing for a hearing,
but you don't have an answer specifically to whether or not the
SEC conducts a legal review, not even a legal opinion. But just
a legal review on each shareholder proposal to me would be a
baseline review for the SEC to conduct.
Mr. Gensler. I am here saying I believe that it is part of
the review, but I don't know if it is on every shareholder
proposal because it depends on the nature of the shareholder
proposal, of course.
Mr. Steil. Okay. I would like you to come back with that
information about the process in which you review shareholder
proposals in light of probably two key things. One is, we
brought in the two largest proxy advisers, ISS and Glass Lewis,
and they specifically said on the record that they do not
conduct a review for legality. They instead rely upon the SEC's
analysis for legality. On the record, in this committee room,
Director Gerding, and now you, kind of go back and forth as to
how you conduct that legal review. I think it is really
important for us as policymakers to understand whether or not
anyone, the SEC or proxy advisers, we can get to how they are
registered with the SEC, but who is conducting the legal
review, because it has a significant impact on companies.
And if we build upon that and we look at Staff Legal
Bulletin No. 14L, we have seen a dramatic increase in the
number of shareholder proposals. We are seeing more proposals
focused on social and political concerns, and I go back and
look at the underlying language of that legal staff bulletin
saying that they would consider whether or not proposal concern
is a matter of widespread public debate. Can you define,
``widespread public debate?''
Mr. Gensler. I think, sir, that it is really, and this goes
back all the way back to the 1960s of shareholder proposals,
that investors can make shareholder proposals on the term you
used on widespread------
Mr. Steil. Widespread public debate is your legal staff
bulletin.
Mr. Gensler. And that goes back many decades.
Mr. Steil. But can you define it? I understand there is a
history to it, but the staff legal bulletin came out under your
chairmanship. Can you define the term, ``widespread public
debate?''
Mr. Gensler. The staff does, when asked, give their
informal advice, but, ultimately, it is between the company and
the investors.
Mr. Steil. Understood. But don't you think that it is
concerning that you can't define what, ``widespread public
debate,'' is when your staff bulletin says that is a point of
review for shareholder proposals? I will offer you that it
concerns me, in particular in light of the dramatic increase in
the number of shareholder proposals we have seen that are based
on social and political objectives rather than governance of
the nation's largest companies.
I will see if I can get this in really briefly. We have
discussed your use of email. You have had an aggressive
enforcement campaign on off-channel communications for
financial firms. Have you used anything other than official SEC
resources to conduct your government business?
Mr. Gensler. No, I comply with the laws, but also, if
somebody sends me an email, then I forward it into the SEC.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much for your time. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from New York, Mr.
Garbarino, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Gensler,
thanks for coming today. The financial services sector, in the
Biden Administration, has made harmonization of cyber incident
reporting a top priority. In fact, the Department of Homeland
Security's Cyber Incident Reporting Council (CIRC) recently
recommended that the Federal Government coordinate among
themselves to reduce the burden on the reporting entity. But
instead of reducing the burden, the SEC has finalized rules
that CIRC has called, duplicative cross-sector reporting
requirements that overlap with congressionally-mandated cyber
incident reporting requirements in the Cyber Incident Reporting
for Critical Infrastructure Act (CIRCIA). Given CIRCs
designation, why didn't the SEC harmonize its cybersecurity
disclosure requirements with existing regulations, and, more
importantly, wait until the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) and the Center for Internet Security (CIS) developed the
rulemaking under the recently-signed-into-law CIRCIA?
Mr. Gensler. One, we have had good discussions with the
Department of Homeland Security, but we finalized the corporate
disclosure piece because it was important for the public
investors to know if there had been a material cyber breach.
Mr. Garbarino. Is investor information more important than
Homeland Security? And I ask that question because the reason
we want to harmonize, and the reason we as a Congress have said
to harmonize, and the reason the Biden Administration has said
to harmonize these incident reporting rules is because we have
heard from the private sector that their cyber employees are
spending 40 to 50 percent of their time--and we have spoken
about this before--on complying with cyber regulations, not
just yours, but with all sorts of different cyber regulations.
And we talked about this the last time you were here,
specifically the rule that was just finalized in July, and you
said at the time that you had been having good discussions with
DHS. But, again, this rule came out, and DHS said that, ``This
current rule is duplicative cross-sector reporting.'' It is a
duplicative cross-sector reporting requirement. So even though
you have had good conversations, I guess they didn't lead
anywhere, because you still came out with the rule.
Mr. Gensler. Actually, it did, because it is only reporting
to the public if it is a material cyber event. It is 4 business
days, which actually is longer than CIRCIA's 72 hours, and it
has important considerations in there that if the Department of
Justice thinks for reasons of national security or public
safety, it should be delayed, it will be delayed.
Mr. Garbarino. It is longer. Four days is longer, but
within material breaches, there are different requirements
there. I have to ask, because there is also concern that you
have companies that are reporting a possible material
cybersecurity breach that might not have been able to fix that
breach, and if they are publicly reporting it, it could: one,
put that company at further risk; or two, put other companies
using the same system at risk because the same backdoor can be
found. We just saw over the summer there was an attack on a
company, they announced this attack before the patch was
released, and you saw other companies and three Federal
agencies get hacked under the same vulnerability.
So I am concerned that having this public reporting before
the breach is fixed, before the patch is fixed, is going to
cause more harm than good, and I am not saying, don't regulate
cybersecurity. I think it is very important. I just think when
our goal is harmonization, when the Biden Administration's goal
is harmonization, when everybody is saying harmonization,
having these rules come out that are just going to be
duplicative and cause more harm on the companies that are
supposed to be protecting information, is not a great idea. I
am running out of time, so I do want to move on to something
else.
Between 2019 and 2022, the annual cost of operating a
Consolidated Audit Trail (CAT) increased by 900 percent. In
March, CAT unveiled a 2023 budget exceeding $223 million, which
is 10 percent of the SEC's entire budget. The SEC recently
approved the funding model that would pass nearly all of these
costs onto market participants. What is the SEC doing to
control the cost of CAT? I understand SROs control and operate
them, they are owned-operated, but it is under your umbrella. I
need to know what you are doing to control those costs, and if
you would support moving CAT onto the SEC's budget?
Mr. Gensler. I don't know, Mr. Chairman, what you are going
to tell----
Chairman McHenry. If the gentleman would respond in written
form to the gentleman's question. And I appreciate the
gentleman's leadership in cybersecurity issues, the Wigwam
protocols and the work he has done over the years on those
policies. He has worked in other committees.
Mr. Garbarino. And one that is very important.
Chairman McHenry. We will now recognize the gentleman from
New York, Mr. Lawler, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chair Gensler, you
have embarked on a rapid and extensive campaign to reform every
facet of our markets. It is evident that your rules will
significantly change our markets. For example, your equity
market structure rules will impact all retail investors,
encompassing over 228 million retail accounts. The swing
pricing rule will have implications for every mutual fund,
involving over 100 million American investors. The climate rule
imposes new costs on every public company. The predictive
analytics rule will encompass virtually every type of
technology. The private funds rule fundamentally reshapes the
regulation of private institutions in a potentially unlawful
manner. The pace and scope of your rules is unprecedented. Have
you taken the time to do a comprehensive economic analysis
examining the cumulative impacts of all of these rulemakings on
the markets and the broader economy?
Mr. Gensler. Representative Lawler, actually our pace is
about the same as prior Administrations and----
Mr. Lawler. Respectfully, we can disagree on that, and that
is not what I asked you. I asked you a very specific question.
Have you taken the time to do a comprehensive economic analysis
to examine the cumulative impact of all of these rulemakings on
the markets and the broader economy? Yes or no?
Mr. Gensler. On each of the rules, we do a robust economic
analysis, and then if another rule is finalized, we incorporate
that. We take into consideration that interaction in the
possible further rulemaking and adjust the economic baselines.
Mr. Lawler. So, you are saying for the record that you have
taken the time to do comprehensive economic analysis, examine
the cumulative impact of all of these rulemakings on the market
and the broader economy? Yes or no?
Mr. Gensler. For the record, what we do is we take into
consideration as and if a rule is finalized the interaction
with other rules as it changes what is called the economic
baseline.
Mr. Lawler. Yes. So, have you done the cumulative impact?
Have you studied that? Have you done an economic analysis on
all of it?
Mr. Gensler. We do them rule by rule individually. And
also, the interaction as it relates to other rules. If we were
to finalize a rule, then we take that in consideration and----
Mr. Lawler. Can you explain your engagement with market
participants before putting out significant rule proposals? Are
you holding public roundtables?
Mr. Gensler. We meet with the public extensively before the
equity market rules. We had numerous meetings from when I came
on in the summer of 2021 all the way through December of 2022.
Mr. Lawler. Chair Gensler, California Governor Newsom
recently confirmed his intention to sign two bills mandating
climate disclosure into law. You mentioned to the press last
week that the SEC staff is, ``going to take a look if it were
to become law because it may change some of the economic
baseline for our rule.'' It is evident that the law will indeed
alter the economics of your rule. So, can you make a commitment
to allowing the public an opportunity to provide feedback on
the Commission's updated economic analysis before finalizing
the rule?
Mr. Gensler. We take the comments into consideration. We
have had 16,000 comments, a lot of comments on the economics,
and we often will adapt based on those comments.
Mr. Lawler. No, no, no. What I am asking you is, based on
the reevaluation, based on the potential change in law, will
you commit to allowing the public an opportunity to provide
feedback on the Commission's updated economic analysis before
finalizing the rule?
Mr. Gensler. I would say this. We are compelled. This is an
important thing.
Mr. Lawler. It is a pretty straightforward question. Will
you allow the public to comment on the updated economic
analysis before finalizing the rule? Yes or no?
Mr. Gensler. We would put it----
Mr. Lawler. Sir?
Mr. Gensler. If we finalize a rule, it would be part of
that finalized rule.
Mr. Lawler. Okay. I know you would like to obfuscate, but I
am honestly asking you a very straightforward question.
Mr. Gensler. Sir, I understand where you are heading.
Mr. Lawler. Can you commit?
Mr. Gensler. No. The answer is, no.
Mr. Lawler. So, you won't commit. Thank you. At least, you
answered the question. Thank you. I want to touch on another
factor here. The SEC recently proposed amendments to expand and
update regulation systems' compliance and integrity. The
proposal would expand the scope of Regulation Systems
Compliance and Integrity (Reg SCI) entities to include certain
registered broker-dealers for the first time. Feedback from
market participants on this proposal suggests that the actual
costs for this proposal are in the billions of dollars as a
result of the SEC attempting to micromanage the technology
setup of individual firms, yet these enormous compliance costs
are conveniently absent from the SEC's cost-benefit analysis.
Why did the Commission fail to acknowledge these costs in its
economic analysis?
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. Chair
Gensler, please respond in written form.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry. We will now go to the gentleman from
Iowa, Mr. Nunn, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Gensler, thank
you, and welcome back to the committee. I know each time, we
get to have a lot of questions on this. The last time we spoke,
I addressed swing pricing and hard close proposals with you. I
also want to reemphasize here the devastating impact that has
had on many of my hardworking constituents from their
retirement plans, their 401(k)s, my nurses with 457 plans, my
teachers with 403(b) plans; I think you get the gist of where
we are going with this. As you are well aware after this
morning's rule, I believe it needs to be withdrawn, and I look
forward to your team's response to both Chairwoman Wagner and
Ranking Member Sherman on the letter that we signed on to and
are still waiting to hear back on.
But I want to talk specifically here about the agricultural
and small business communities that I represent. The extra
regulations that the SEC is potentially proposing in this
regulation under the guise of consumer protection are going to
add $6 billion in ncreased annualized cost to the industry, and
an additional 6 million compliance hours, many of these being
small family farms and mid-sized Main Street businesses. I hope
you appreciate this has a tremendous impact on my constituents
back home. Along with four other members of the House
Agriculture Committee, on which I serve, we have signed a
letter here moving forward a conversation, which brings me to
my question on the February 15th proposal rulemaking on
safeguarding client assets aimed at reshaping custody assets.
As you know, we worked hard with you in your former role
with the CFTC on how this can be successful, but dozens of
trade groups have signed up and identified that this rulemaking
would represent trillions of dollars of assets that our
constituents back home face. Both of these letters, Mr.
Chairman, highlight significant errors with the proposed
rulemaking, and I am going to begin this conversation by asking
you to consider withdrawing it until these things get fixed.
Your definitions of, ``custody,'' and, ``asset,'' would expand
so greatly that they would encompass derivatives and future
markets that have been overseen by the CFTC, your former
organization, for decades. So with these bipartisan letters
specifically, I believe that they would upend our markets
overseen by the CFTC, eroding their essential risk management
functions and putting our nation's farmers and producers at
risk.
Now, Chairman Gensler, in your 432-page proposal on
economic analysis, do you know how many times, ``agriculture,''
was mentioned as part of this review?
Mr. Gensler. I don't recall, but I suspect you are going to
let me know.
Mr. Nunn. Would it surprise you to know, not once? In fact,
it was only mentioned as a subcategory within a footnote.
Clearly, this is concerning, particularly for my farming
constituents, but this is something the CFTC has been doing for
decades. So Chair Gensler, earlier you answered Representative
Lucas' question. Has there been any coordination with the SEC
and the CFTC on this issue?
Mr. Gensler. Yes, we have been in dialogue, but prior to
the proposal in subsection, there is a proposal, and I think
that----
Mr. Nunn. Can I get some specifics on that? When did you
send a request over to the CFTC for this coordination: the day
before the proposal; a week before the proposal; or after the
proposal was already out?
Mr. Gensler. Representative, it is usually just a staff-to-
staff dialogue.
Mr. Nunn. Great. I look forward to your staff providing me
the date on which you actually asked for this information from
the CFTC. Did the CFTC provide you with any recommendations on
your rulemaking?
Mr. Gensler. We engaged with multiple Federal regulators on
this rule, and we will continue to do that, because we have
been happy to have feedback.
Mr. Nunn. I am very happy to hear that, Mr. Chairman. I
would like to see that feedback being transparently provided to
this committee then. Did you read these comments, and were they
incorporated into your final proposal?
Mr. Gensler. Sir, we haven't finalized a proposal yet.
Mr. Nunn. Did you incorporate any CFTC recommendations?
Mr. Gensler. We haven't finalized an adoption yet.
Mr. Nunn. Mr. Chairman, did you incorporate any of the CFTC
proposals into your recommendation?
Mr. Gensler. We have put out to public comment to get
feedback, and we get feedback and it is benefiting this, and I
think that we can----
Mr. Nunn. I haven't heard anything about the CFTC on this.
You are putting it out to the public, which brings me to my
next question. It is my understanding that you recently
reopened the comment period without re-proposing the rules.
Specifically, what value does this add to the agricultural
community and my constituents for their grave concerns if you
are reopening it but you are not listening to the CFTC, the
Agriculture Committee, or even what is happening on a
bipartisan basis within this committee?
Mr. Gensler. I think we reopened this because we had
another role that may intersect with this, the discussion we
have had a lot here today. And so, we reopened it formally to
get further comment.
Mr. Nunn. It might suggest to some that you didn't get the
answers you wanted, so you reopened it to others. Let me end
with this: I urge you to withdraw this rule, as my bipartisan,
bicameral colleagues have argued the same. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Gensler. Thank you. It was good to see you.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Donalds,
is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Gensler,
welcome back. Do you remember where we left off, you and I?
Mr. Gensler. I do. You are a very good questioner, sir. I
remember it.
Mr. Donalds. Okay. Let's bring some things up. Where we
left off was, did you facilitate the payment for the Steele
dossier for the Hillary Clinton campaign back in 2016, because
you were the CFO? You acknowledge that. You also said in
response to my question that, ``This payment was not something
that I was aware of.'' Those are your words. Interesting things
have occurred since then.
John Podesta actually testified to a committee of Congress
and John Podesta testified to a question about, was Gary--
meaning you--day to day, hands-on signing every check.
Actually, he was under a deposition with a committee here in
Congress. He says, ``Yes, I don't know if he signed the checks,
but he was there every day,'' meaning you. So, let's circle
back. Were you aware of the fact that the Hillary Clinton
campaign actually paid for the Steele dossier, which unleashed
one of the worst issues of intelligence malfeasance that our
nation has ever seen?
Mr. Gensler. Sir, I answered this 6 months ago, and it is
the same answer today. No.
Mr. Donalds. You weren't aware of what was going on? Mr.
Gensler, I find that very interesting, because if I listen to
some of the people, the staff who have left the SEC, you are
very aware of everything that is going on. It is actually your
MO. You are very hands-on. So, you are going to tell this
committee right now that you had no idea that the Hillary
Clinton campaign, of which you were the CFO, sent money to
Perkins Coie for a dossier that was phony and led to the spying
on of a Presidential campaign in 2016? You were not aware of
any of this?
Mr. Gensler. Sir, as a chief financial officer in a
political campaign, I was not aware of what a law firm was
doing with some of the monies that they got.
Mr. Donalds. I find that interesting because in some of
your other rhetoric about CFOs in the public sector and the
private sector of our economy, you are very tough on CFOs. You
have said on the record on many occasions that CFOs have a
fiduciary responsibility to the organizations that they cover,
that they should be aware of everything that is going on. So,
how is that a standard you hold CFOs to in the private sector
but you don't hold yourself to that same standard?
Mr. Gensler. That is not a standard that the SEC holds CFOs
to. It is about their financials, and that the financials are
put together in accordance with GAAP, and that the numbers are
accurate, and that they are----
Mr. Donalds. Did you accurately pay for the Steele dossier
out of the Hillary Clinton campaign?
Mr. Gensler. Sir, I learned about that way after President
Trump was the President and Hillary Clinton was a private
citizen.
Mr. Donalds. Okay. Let's move on. We will probably circle
back to that another time. I want to reference a story in
Capital Account from June 13th. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous
consent for the story to be entered into the record.
Chairman McHenry. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Donalds. The story notes that you met with Senator
Tammy Baldwin in May about the SEC's proposal related to the
13D beneficial ownership disclosure, at which time you
allegedly and Senator Baldwin staff allegedly--I am going to
say allegedly--contacted an organization called, We The
Investors, to submit comment letters in favor of the 13D
proposal. Subsequently, the SEC was flooded with 350-plus
comment letters from so-called individuals, but mostly form
letters stamped with the moniker, We The Investors, in favor of
their proposal. It appears to me that you have engaged in
astroturfing to advance your own agenda. Is this true? If this
is true, it is a serious breach of impartiality that would
violate the spirit, if not the letter, of the law of the
Administrative Procedure Act.
Mr. Gensler. Sir, again, I don't know what the press is
talking about. I remember the meeting with the Senator was a
good, thoughtful----
Mr. Donalds. Did you meet with Senator Baldwin in May with
respect to 13D?
Mr. Gensler. I think that it is on my public calendar that
I met with Senator Baldwin. I meet with Senators and
Representatives on a regular basis.
Mr. Donalds. Okay. I need to get from your public calendar
if you actually met with Senator Baldwin. I think the committee
would like to know that. In this meeting with Senator Baldwin's
staff, did you speak to an organization called, We The
Investors?
Mr. Gensler. I have no memory of that.
Mr. Donalds. Mr. Gensler, the no-memory routine from a lot
of appointees is really getting old. You all are discussing and
leading some of the various regulations facing our economy, so
to come before a committee of Congress and have no idea what
you talked to with a Senator's staff member about 13D----
Mr. Gensler. The meeting was with the Senator, sir.
Mr. Donalds. Okay. If you don't remember, if you don't
recall what she said, a United States Senator, about key issues
facing our economy from a regulatory basis----
Mr. Gensler. Sir, no. Please, sir.
Mr. Donalds. ----that is a real problem, don't you think?
Mr. Gensler. You are a good questioner, but please, sir,
that story is not one that I would confirm. It is not a story
that I believe is accurate.
Mr. Donalds. Let me ask you a question. Broad-based, do you
think it is appropriate for the Chairman of the SEC or,
frankly, the head of any agency to engage with outside groups
to accomplish the agenda they want to see through rulemaking?
Mr. Gensler. We are responsible under the Administrative
Procedure Act to hear from outside parties, market
participants, constituents in your districts, and Members of
Congress.
Mr. Donalds. No, that is not my question. We want to hear
from outside groups.
Mr. Gensler. We are obligated----
Mr. Donalds. Is it okay to engage with outside groups to
help you accomplish what you want to see?
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McHenry. The gentlelady from Indiana, Mrs.
Houchin, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Waters, and thank you to Chairman Gensler for speaking with us
today.
Chair Gensler, under the last Democrat Chair of the SEC,
Mary Jo White, the Commission adhered closely to the statutory
authority of Congress. During her time as Chair, 59 percent of
the SEC's proposals were mandated by Congress. By contrast,
under your leadership, only 17 percent of the Commission's
proposals are mandated by Congress, according to a report from
Professor Hal Scott of Harvard. Why is there such a rush under
your chairmanship to promulgate so many rules without specific
mandates from Congress?
Mr. Gensler. It is because technology and the markets have
changed so much. She was coming in as Chair right after a
financial crisis, so naturally, there were, I think, 120
mandates that Congress placed, but you are accurate, and we
have picked up about 10 of those from the Dodd-Frank Act, and
one from the Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act.
Mrs. Houchin. Chair Gensler, there is a perception that the
SEC is neglecting public input, particularly bipartisan letters
that Members of Congress have sent to voice valid concerns
regarding individual rules and the rulemaking process. The
concerns encompass the bipartisan concerns about insufficient
comment periods and a general response to bipartisan concerns
regarding proposals on swing pricing, liquidity risk
management, and equity market structure. Are you aware of
similar bipartisan concerns being raised with previous SEC
Chairs? If not, could you elaborate on why the opinions of
Congress don't factor into your consideration?
Mr. Gensler. The opinions of Congress most definitely
factor into my consideration.
Mrs. Houchin. It doesn't seem so, Mr. Chairman. It does not
seem so, when only 17 percent of the proposals that you have
brought forth are the result of mandates from Congress. I find
it incredibly frustrating that anytime we provide comment or
send what we call strongly-worded letters about our opinions on
how the SEC should behave, it seems like these must be
immediately thrown in the trash and disregarded.
I want to turn to Reg SCI. The SEC originally adopted
Regulation Systems Compliance and Integrity, otherwise known as
Reg SCI, in 2014, in response to several market disruptions at
national securities exchanges. Earlier this year, the
Commission proposed to expand Reg SCI to certain broker-
dealers. However, unlike in 2014, the Commission fails to
provide a single instance of a broker-dealer systems disruption
that had a significant market-wide impact in the securities
markets. In fact, the SEC's own proposal acknowledges that
broker-dealer systems performed well during the unprecedented
trading volumes and volatility at the height of the COVID-19
pandemic. Further, the Commission admits that it, ``finds it
impracticable to quantify the many benefits associated with
amended Regulation SCI.'' Once again, this seems like the
Commission is providing a solution in search of a problem.
Chairman Gensler, given that the Commission cannot point to
a single broker-dealer systems disruption or any tangible
benefits to applying Reg SCI to broker-dealers, how can you
justify that proposal?
Mr. Gensler. As we outlined in the proposal itself, which
is still out for public comment, some broker-dealers may have
such size and scale and standing in the markets that if they
were taken down, that could be disruptive to the markets. That
is the important thing, and these so-called systems' compliance
integrity is about those most consequential or central parts of
the market.
Mrs. Houchin. The SEC's Regulatory Flexibility Agenda for
2023 indicates that you intend to finalize a proposed
rulemaking to expand the definition of an exchange in short
order. Although the SEC has reopened this rulemaking, the
proposed rule is still fraught with insufficient economic
analysis and ill-defining scope, among other things. Given
Congress' ongoing and unaddressed concerns with the rulemaking,
as well as concerns of hundreds of stakeholders, it seems
irresponsible for the SEC to finalize this rulemaking. Could
you comment on the expected timeline for finalization of this
rule?
Mr. Gensler. You will be pleased to hear that we don't do
it against a clock. It is really when we get the comments and
the economics right and the legal authorities right and then
discuss it with the Commissioners.
Mrs. Houchin. And finally, I want to raise an alarming
issue that I think needs further attention: The timing of
various actions by the SEC while Congress is seeking to
establish a regulatory framework on digital assets. To name a
few, on January 12, 2023, this committee announced the
formation of the Digital Assets, Financial Technology, and
Inclusion Subcommittee. It was subsequently announced that the
SEC pursued enforcement actions against two firms.
On March 9, 2023, the committee hosted its first hearing on
the Biden Administration's approach to digital assets. An hour
before the hearing, you published an op-ed in The Hill.
On April 27, 2023, the committee hosted another hearing on
digital asset regulation. You tweeted an, ``Office Hours,''
video on your view that most digital assets are securities.
And on May 3, 2023, this committee and the House
Agriculture Committee, led by my colleague Chairman Thompson,
announced our first joint hearing on digital asset legislation,
which was unprecedented. You published another, ``Office
Hours.''
I am not one to connect dots, but it seems like you are
actively trying to undermine the work of Congress. You must not
impede our work to do our job, even though you won't do yours.
I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. Would the gentleman care to respond?
Mr. Gensler. I very much respect the work of this
committee, and particularly the work of this committee around
crypto assets. We have a robust time because this is a field
that is rife with fraud and abuse, so our enforcement agenda
sometimes does roll out while you are doing your good work here
as well.
Chairman McHenry. Mr. Ogles of Tennessee is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Ogles. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Gensler, thank you
for being here. I do want to echo the chairman and support the
chairman that I think we have come to this crossroads where
subpoenas may be necessary. It seems that compliance in
requests for information and documentation has been kind of
shortcoming, and so with that, Mr. Chairman, you have my full
support when and if you decide to move forward.
But, Mr. Gensler, one of the things that concerns me is
sometimes this subjective or perception of subjective and
arbitrary nature of the rules. On May 25, 2022, the SEC
proposed amending the Names Rule to further regulate the names
of investment funds. I think everyone would agree that it is
misleading. The fund called the Mexico Growth Fund made most of
its investments in Japanese value stocks. Many names may be
subject to differences of opinion. The proposal specifically
mentions ESG funds. Mr. Gensler, is the SEC equipped to
determine what, broadly speaking, is good for the environment
as it pertains to ESG?
Mr. Gensler. No, sir, we are not an environmental
regulator.
Mr. Ogles. Again, going back to the subjective nature of
some of the rules and the compliance that is forced, it is kind
of like, what is better for our environment, paper or plastic
bags? And when we should be focusing more on the fiduciary
aspects of a fund versus its environmental compliance, I have
concerns. When you look at the social component of ESG, whom
would you entrust, or how will you determine whether or not a
company is compliant with the social portion of ESG?
Mr. Gensler. In terms of this Names Rule, it was basically
truth in advertising, that if you are going to say you are a
social fund, to use that, you have to actually then describe
what the marketer of that fund means by, ``social,'' and then
ensure that you invest as you are marketing to the public. This
was really a rule, in most regards, the Names Rule adopted in
2020, 3 years ago, to protect the investing public, to ensure
that the advisers they pick are doing what they say and saying
what they mean.
Mr. Ogles. But again, to my point, this creates a very
subjective nature to the rules process, because you just said
that basically, you don't have the capability to judge the
environmental components. You don't have the capability to
judge the social component. So, if there is a clear definition
and disclosure in the prospectus, who is to determine whether
or not they are compliant? And you now have a rule that can be
abused or a rule that is completely useless. So why even have
the rule, when at the end of the day it should be about----
Mr. Gensler. It is sort of like, as one of my fellow
Commissioners said when we voted on this rule, to ensure that
if you say you are selling pepperoni pizza, there is actually
pepperoni on the pizza.
Mr. Ogles. I like pepperoni pizza, don't get me wrong. But
yes, and forgive me, these rules outlive any given
Administration, but under this current Administration, the
Biden Administration doesn't necessarily have the greatest
track record of trust with word definitions. And I don't mean
to be contrarian here, but if the Administration can't figure
out what a woman is, how do I trust them to have any kind of
bearing or judgment on----
Mr. Gensler. I totally understand what you are saying. What
adopted in a Names Rule is that if you are marketing to the
public that you are, let's say, environmental or a green fund,
you describe what that means. You can describe what a pepperoni
pizza is, but if you describe it, you better comply with it.
Mr. Ogles. But again, I just----
Mr. Gensler. It is a fund manager's----
Mr. Ogles. When you look at, for example, the climate
disclosure and the burden that is being put on businesses to
track their supply chains, you are now creating an enforcement
mechanism that the company has to enforce on its supply chain.
Again, these rules that you are pushing on businesses, that you
are pushing on these instruments, only do one thing: drive up
costs. And at the end of the day, the end user, the very people
that you are trying to protect, you are hurting, because of the
arbitrary nature of the rules that you have put in place. It is
very frustrating.
And again, Mr. Chairman, I am about out of time, but I am
just going to say that I would say open up the floodgates, hit
him with subpoenas, and get the information we need. The
obfuscation and not answering questions, I am sick and tired of
it. I have sat back here, and I have listened to this entire
hearing. You wear tap dancing shoes better than Fred Astaire,
and enough is enough. And I don't mean any disrespect, but it
is time the questions are answered so that we have the
information we need. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman Gensler. It is 2:29, so it is not your
longest day in a committee, but thank you for being here.
As I stated at the outset, it is my request of you and your
agency to comply with our requests as a committee. I don't want
to use the compulsory process for the first time in our history
between this House of Representatives, this committee, and your
agency, so I think it would be a purposeful act on your part if
it resulted in us issuing a subpoena.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place his responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
Chair Gensler, I ask you to please respond no later than
October 30th to those written questions.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:30 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

September 27, 2023

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
