- BUREAUCRATIC OVERREACH OR CONSUMER PROTECTION? EXAMINING THE CFPB'S LATEST ACTION TO RESTRICT COMPETITION IN PAYMENTS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUREAUCRATIC OVERREACH OR

CONSUMER PROTECTION? EXAMINING

THE CFPB'S LATEST ACTION TO

RESTRICT COMPETITION IN PAYMENTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL ASSETS,
FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY,
AND INCLUSION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 13, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-81

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-391 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
SUBCOMMITTEE ON DIGITAL ASSETS,
FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY, AND INCLUSION

FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts,
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                     Ranking Member
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio, Vice          BILL FOSTER, Illinois
Chairman                         JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 RITCHIE TORRES, New York
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               BRAD SHERMAN, California
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AL GREEN, Texas
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
March 13, 2024...............................................     1
Appendix:
March 13, 2024...............................................    37

WITNESSES
Wednesday, March 13, 2024

Holshouser, Carl, Executive Vice President and Corporate
Secretary, TechNet.............................................     4
Johnson, Brian, Managing Director, Patomak Global Partners LLC...     5
Kim, James, Partner and Head of the Fintech Industry Group,
Troutman Pepper Hamilton Sanders LLP...........................     7
Odinet, Christopher K., Josephine R. Witte Professor of Law,
University of Iowa.............................................    10
Solowey, Jack W., Policy Analyst, Center for Monetary and
Financial Alternatives, Cato Institute.........................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Holshouser, Carl.............................................    38
Johnson, Brian...............................................    48
Kim, James...................................................    64
Odinet, Christopher K........................................    70
Solowey, Jack W..............................................    85

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Hill, Hon. French:
Letter to CFPB Director Rohit Chopra dated December 18, 2023.    97
Letter to CFPB Director Rohit Chopra dated January 5, 2024...   101
Letter to CFPB Director Rohit Chopra dated January 30, 2024..   103
Letter to CFPB Director Rohit Chopra from the American
Bankers Association (ABA) and the Consumer Bankers
Association (CBA), dated January 8, 2024...................   109
Waters, Hon. Maxine:
Written statement of America's Credit Unions.................   107
Letter to CFPB Director Rohit Chopra from the American
Bankers Association (ABA) and the Consumer Bankers
Association (CBA), dated January 8, 2024...................   109
Letter to CFPB Director Rohit Chopra from various consumer
groups, dated January 8, 2024..............................   112
Holshouser, Carl:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................   134
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   139
Johnson, Brian:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................   140
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   141
Kim, James:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................   143
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   143
Odinet, Christopher K.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   144
Solowey, Jack W.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   145

BUREAUCRATIC OVERREACH OR

CONSUMER PROTECTION? EXAMINING

THE CFPB'S LATEST ACTION TO

RESTRICT COMPETITION IN PAYMENTS

----------

Wednesday, March 13, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Digital Assets,
Financial Technology,
and Inclusion,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:01 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. French Hill
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Hill, Lucas, Davidson,
Rose, Steil, Timmons, Donalds, Flood; Lynch, Foster,
Gottheimer, Sherman, Green, Casten, and Nickel.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Chairman Hill. The Subcommittee on Digital Assets,
Financial Technology, and Inclusion will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Bureaucratic Overreach or
Consumer Protection? Examining the CFPB's Latest Action to
Restrict Competition in Payments.''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement. Today's hearing is critical because it is going to
talk about, ``larger participants,'' in the general-use digital
consumer payment applications market. This is the sixth Larger
Participant Rule (LPR) that the CFPB has initiated.
And putting aside the egregiously short comment period--
which frustrates members of this committee--and the deeply-
flawed cost-benefit analysis, both of which have become
hallmarks of this Administration, I find the substance of the
CFPB's proposal deeply concerning.
The proposal asserts that companies that let you send money
to friends, peer to peer (P2P), or companies that keep your
credit card information on your phone, somehow are in the exact
same market. Why? Well, just because the CFPB says so.
This breadth of the, ``market,'' the CFPB is trying to
define has perplexed many on this committee, from potentially
covered entities to, as I say, Members on both sides of the
aisle here.
Many companies are utterly confused, wondering not only how
the rule will be implemented, but whether they are even covered
by it. I would argue that this confusion is by no means an
accident. The CFPB is trying to cast as wide a net as possible
and become a, ``technology regulator.''
And in more ways than one, this proposal marks a sharp
departure from the CFPB's previous Larger Participant Rules.
Director Chopra has decided, on a whim, and in my view,
without justification, that technology companies pose a threat
to consumers, and this rule should be viewed as a thinly-veiled
workaround to get CFPB's supervision teams into these tech
companies.
And that is because once an entity is designated as a,
``larger participant,'' the CFPB can not only supervise the
activities--which is what I think the intent of the Dodd-Frank
Act was--that originally qualified, but they can actually
supervise the entity's business itself.
Their proposal intends to establish limits by only
capturing those companies with 5 million transactions within a
year--and we would love to hear from the panel on whether that
is a good number or a bad number. But don't be fooled: This
modest threshold is so low that the agency will effectively
have carte blanche to knock down the door of companies, large
and small, with their fleet of examiners.
There is no doubt that this proposal will decrease
incentives to innovate in the payments space and leave
consumers with fewer firms from which to choose a payment
method, and that decreases competition.
This LPR doesn't benefit consumers or provide market
clarity. In fact, the only people this proposal potentially
will benefit, besides witnesses like you, are compliance
lawyers.
To further expand their authority, the CFPB has decided to
capture digital assets under this proposal as well. The CFPB
asserts the definition of, ``funds,'' includes digital assets.
This is a novel position, and the CFPB justifies the
interpretation only in a very small and unassuming footnote.
Concerns around this proposal are not strictly partisan.
Comment letters were submitted by both sides of the aisle to
express concern about the proposal's scope and implications.
The CFPB needs to go back to the drawing board, work to
protect consumers, and not hinder innovation or expand the
CFPB's insatiable reach for more power and scope.
We thank our panel of witnesses for being here today, and
we greatly appreciate your testimony and your willingness to
work with us.
And I now yield to the ranking member of the subcommittee,
Mr. Lynch of Massachusetts, for 5 minutes for his opening
comments.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning. I would
also like to thank all of our witnesses today for your
willingness to help the committee with its work. It is the
fundamental mission of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
to safeguard American consumers against unfair, deceptive, and
abusive financial practices and discrimination. The CFPB also
ensures that our markets are for consumer products and services
to operate fairly and efficiently in the interest of consumer
access and responsible innovation.
In furtherance of its critical mandate, the CFPB recently
proposed a rule, as the chairman noted, that will allow the
agency to exercise supervisory authority over larger non-bank
technology companies that offer digital wallets and payment
services. This includes peer-to-peer payment apps and
electronic funds transfer apps. Importantly, this rule will
place Apple, Google, Meta, and other Big Tech companies that
have moved into the financial services space on par with
financial institutions that are already there, and are already
subject to CFPB supervision.
However, unlike large banks and credit unions, these
companies do not currently undergo CFPB supervisory exams,
periodic monitoring, or compliance checks. They may not even be
required to insure company funds or deposits. CFPB action in
this area is timely, considering the escalation of shadow
banking, that is, the migration of core banking activities to
non-bank entities, which currently fall outside the scope of
traditional bank regulation. The rule is also necessary, given
the growing expansion of Big Tech companies into the financial
services sector and their deployment of opaque artificial
intelligence (AI) technologies.
As reported by the CFPB, consumer usage of digital wallet
tap-to-pay options in the U.S. has already reached $300
billion, and it is estimated to grow by over 150 percent by
2028. Moreover, an estimated two-thirds of all Americans,
including a majority of low- to moderate-income users are now
relying on peer-to-peer (P2P) digital payments such as PayPal
and Venmo. Many of these providers have already launched
cryptocurrency payment and transfer options.
So, it is not surprising that consumer advocates strongly
support the rule. According to the Consumer Federation of
America, ``We would be concerned whenever the line between
commerce and banking is permitted to blur.'' By closing this
loophole, the CFPB is moving forward to hold Big Tech companies
accountable to play by the same rules as everyone else. I agree
with that statement.
The CFPB is not becoming a tech regulator, as much as tech
companies are becoming banks, or are becoming involved in the
conduct of banking. By subjecting large tech companies to the
same consumer privacy standards that apply to financial
institutions under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, the rule will
also protect consumers against massive data breaches and the
release of personal information.
The CFPB estimates that the proposed rule would only apply
to 17 entities. The agency has also made clear that its
supervision of non-bank institutions is based on risk, size,
and financial transaction volume as well as the extent of State
oversight. That is why the rule includes a threshold of 5
million payment transactions annually.
I look forward to hearing from our panelists this morning
and other stakeholders as this rulemaking process develops.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back. We want to thank
our witnesses for being here today.
We now welcome the testimony of Carl Holshouser, executive
vice president and corporate secretary at TechNet; Brian
Johnson, managing director of Patomak Global Partners; James
Kim, partner and head of the Fintech Industry Group at Troutman
Pepper Hamilton Sanders LLP; Jack Solowey, policy analyst at
the Cato Institute; and Christopher Odinet, the Josephine R.
Witte Professor of Law at the University of Iowa.
You will each be recognized for 5 minutes to give an oral
presentation of your testimony. And without objection, your
written statements will be made a part of the record.
Mr. Holshouser, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
give your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF CARL HOLSHOUSER, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AND
CORPORATE SECRETARY, TECHNET

Mr. Holshouser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Hill,
Ranking Member Lynch, and members of the Subcommittee on
Digital Assets, Financial Technology, and Innovation, thank you
for the opportunity to discuss the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau's proposed rule on Defining Larger
Participants of a Market for General-Use Digital Consumer
Payment Applications. I am Carl Holshouser, executive vice
president of TechNet, the national bipartisan network of
technology CEOs and senior executives that promotes the growth
of the innovation economy at the Federal and 50-State level.
Our diverse membership includes dynamic American businesses,
ranging from startups to the most iconic companies on the
planet. We represent over 4.2 million employees and countless
customers in the fields of information technology, artificial
intelligence, e-commerce, the sharing and gig economies,
advanced energy, transportation, cyber, venture capital, and
finance.
As you know, technology plays an important role in removing
barriers to financial access, and empowering Americans of all
backgrounds to better manage their financial lives through
safe, secure, inclusive, and reliable financial tools,
including digital wallets and payment applications.
TechNet and our members support efforts by policymakers to
adapt and update outdated laws and regulations to meet the
growing demand from consumers and businesses for these
innovative fintech products.
In our view, the current consumer payment ecosystem is
highly diversified. Companies across the ecosystem play a wide
array of unique roles, each serving different markets, and
offering different functionalities.
Regulations focused on fintechs must always ensure that
consumers are protected, while continuing to allow for
innovation in this dynamic ecosystem to flourish.
Unfortunately, the CFPB's proposed rule fails to accomplish
both of these goals.
Under the Dodd-Frank Act and the Administrative Procedure
Act (APA), the Bureau must conduct thorough due diligence
before issuing a proposed rule. The CFPB falls well short of
satisfying this requirement in this proposed rule. Frankly, the
CFPB's lack of empirical analysis underlying its proposed rule
is stark and troubling.
Because the CFPB failed to follow rulemaking requirements
required by Congress, the proposed rule creates an arbitrary
market that is not based on data-driven analysis or the
realities of the digital payment ecosystem; fails to identify
specific consumer harms that would necessitate CFPB
supervision; and fails to adequately address the costs to the
diverse array of companies that could be subject to CFPB
supervision. We strongly feel that these deficiencies render
the proposed rule defective.
Before moving forward, it is critical that the CFPB more
precisely and narrowly define the consumer payments market in
which it seeks to supervise, and to conduct the empirical
analysis required in the rulemaking process.
At a very basic level, the Bureau should complete a cost-
benefit analysis that adequately considers companies that may
fall within the purview of the proposed rule; analyze the costs
to the companies rather than using conservative estimates; and
determine the costs that may be passed on to consumers.
Until the CFPB conducts the analysis required of it by law,
TechNet has urged the CFPB to pause the rulemaking process
altogether, and reconsider the proposed rule in its entirety.
Otherwise, this rule will introduce tremendous complexity and
uncertainty into the digital payments markets to the detriment
of consumers and businesses across our country.
We appreciate the subcommittee's attention to this
important rule, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holshouser can be found on
page 38 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. We thank you. Mr. Johnson, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN JOHNSON, MANAGING DIRECTOR, PATOMAK GLOBAL
PARTNERS LLC

Mr. Johnson. Chairman Hill, Ranking Member Lynch, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for holding this
important hearing on the CFPB's proposed Larger Participant
rulemaking. I am Brian Johnson, Managing Director of Patomak
Global Partners. I previously served as Deputy Director of the
CFPB. And prior to that, I served on the Financial Services
Committee's professional staff. I will address my comments
today, first, to the proposed rule, and second, to the broader
context of recent CFPB actions.
As Members are aware, Congress gave the CFPB authority to
subject so-called larger participants of defined markets for
consumer financial products and services to supervisory
examinations. The proposed rule would, if finalized, define a
market for general-use digital consumer payment applications.
Larger participants of this market are defined as providers of
at least 5 million annual consumer payment transactions, that
are not small business concerns, that will become subject to
CFPB exams.
There are several reasons for Members on a bipartisan basis
to encourage the CFPB to withdraw and repropose its rule so
that it may engage in a more thoughtful and deliberative
rulemaking process.
First, Director Chopra's recent public remarks, which are
the impetus for the proposed rule, express concerns about the
potential for Big Tech companies to engage in various
anticompetitive practices. However, the CFPB is not the proper
agency to address such concerns. The CFPB's supervisory duty is
to assess institutions for compliance with Federal consumer
financial law, not antitrust law. The proposed rule lacks
adequate justification because it is not grounded in consumer
financial risks arising from the offering or use of covered
products and services within the defined market.
Second, the Dodd-Frank Act provides the CFPB with no
intelligible principle to guide its definition of markets or
selection of larger participants. Rather, it gives the CFPB
carte blanche to expand its own supervisory reach. This
violates nondelegation principles. Congress should define the
boundaries of the CFPB authority, not the CFPB itself.
Third, the proposed market definition is impermissibly
broad because it aggregates terms in order to cover a number of
disparate functions rather than describing a coherent market
for reasonably interchangeable financial products and services.
Fourth, the CFPB interprets the term, ``funds,'' to cover
digital assets, the effect of which would be to expand its
regulatory authority over a large number of new products and
participants. This would up-end careful efforts by Members of
Congress to craft a balanced legislative framework for digital
asset regulation. This presents a major question of economic
and political significance that must be left to Congress to
decide.
Fifth, the CFPB cost-benefit analysis uses a decade-old
framework to calculate the expected cost to the larger
participant examination. In my view, the Bureau's exam cost
estimate of about $25,000 understates the true cost of an exam
by at least an order of magnitude. The CFPB's failure to update
its assumptions and obtain accurate information is a
significant weakness in the proposal's 1022 analysis.
Finally, without good cause shown, the CFPB departed from
its standard practice in order to limit the amount of time
available for the public to submit comments on the proposed
rule, which is contrary to the spirit of the APA.
Now, I will address the broader context of recent CFPB
actions. Regarding the nonfinancial consequences of CFPB
supervision, I note that CFPB examiners sometimes require
institutions to waive attorney-client privilege, and turn over
protected communications. The Supreme Court has long held that
agencies cannot compel production of this information without
an express authorization from Congress, which the CFPB does not
have. This practice chills a company's consultation with legal
counsel, which is detrimental to consumers.
Also, the CFPB, unlike the OCC or the SEC, does not publish
an annual list of exam priorities. As a result, institutions
have comparatively less insight into the CFPB's prioritization
of compliance risks, and therefore, less opportunity to
proactively address them.
Regarding rulemaking, the CFPB has recently proposed or
finalized several rules on so-called junk fees as part of a
coordinated campaign to scapegoat companies for rising prices
caused by inflation. The CFPB's price controls depart from the
traditional Federal approach to consumer finance regulation.
The politicized allocation of credit and capital through
unwarranted market intervention constitutes a severe danger to
free markets and consumer autonomy. This is not consumer
protection.
I urge Congress to use all available means to prevent
bureaucratic central planning and overreach. Thank you. And I
welcome the opportunity to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson can be found on page
48 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you very much. Mr. Kim, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES KIM, PARTNER AND HEAD OF THE FINTECH
INDUSTRY GROUP, TROUTMAN PEPPER HAMILTON SANDERS LLP

Mr. Kim. Thank you, sir. Chairman Hill, Ranking Member
Lynch, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting
me to testify today. My name is James Kim, and I am a partner
at the law firm Troutman Pepper Hamilton Sanders. Today, I am
presenting my own views and not those of the firm or any client
of the firm. My testimony and the views I express today are
informed by my tenure at the CFPB, and my subsequent practice
focusing on payments and financial technology. My clients at
Troutman Pepper range from banks and other established
institutions, to medium-sized and early-stage companies seeking
to introduce innovative products and expand choices for
consumers in the marketplace.
From 2012 through 2014, I had the privilege of serving at
the CFPB, where I was the lead attorney in the Bureau's first
enforcement action involving mobile devices and payments. I
also worked with colleagues in the office of supervision and
supported examinations, and I was a member of an
interdepartmental working group focusing on emerging payment
products. And since leaving the Bureau, my practice very much
focuses on helping companies navigate examinations,
investigations, and rulemaking involving the agency.
So, why is the proposed rule for defining larger
participants in the payment space important? Before I answer,
it is worth highlighting that there is no question that
consumer payments are currently regulated by a host of Federal
and State laws and rules, that are enforced by a combination of
the CFPB, Federal prudential regulators, the Federal Trade
Commission, FinCEN, and many State agencies.
The proposed rule does not change the substance of these
myriad statutes and regulations. Instead, the proposed rule is
important because it seeks to define the larger participants
who will be subject to the CFPB supervisory authority.
The Bureau's power to examine institutions is the agency's
most powerful and least transparent tool. Companies supervised
by the CFPB must devote personnel and significant resources to
host examiners at their offices, respond to information
requests and follow-up questions, and address findings.
Examinations are nonpublic, and often last months, and
sometimes longer than a year. The CFPB typically extends the
scope of their exams to the company's parent, affiliated
entities, and other business areas beyond the covered activity,
in this case, general-use payment applications.
Examinations lack a third party, such as a court or an
administrative law judge to oversee the process and adjudicate
disputes. Companies also forfeit their attorney-client
privilege during exams.
With these considerations in mind, Congress carefully
defined the CFPB's supervisory authority by generally limiting
supervision to larger banks and larger nonbanks which can bear
the significant costs of complying with exams. And Congress
also mandated requirements before the Bureau can expand the
scope of its own authority through the Larger Participant
rulemaking.
I am going to just highlight two issues in my opening
statement. The first is the rulemaking requirements in Dodd-
Frank and duplication with existing supervision by Federal
prudential regulators and State agencies. Dodd-Frank lays out
the requirements for issuing a Larger Participant rule. And
before issuing such a rule, the Bureau must consult with the
Federal Trade Commission. That requirement is critical because
defining a market is the fundamental prerequisite to
determining who is a larger participant within the market. The
FTC analyzes market concentration and enforces Federal
antitrust laws. And therefore, Dodd-Frank requires the CFPB to
consult with the FTC.
Now, the proposed rule states that the CFPB consulted or
provided an opportunity for consultation and input with not
only the FTC, but other Federal agencies. But it doesn't
discuss any input from the FTC or any factors determining which
products or services should be included within the same market.
It is, therefore, unclear whether the Bureau met its statutory
obligation to consult with the FTC, which plainly provides that
the Bureau shall consult with its sister agency.
Turning to duplicative supervision by State and other
Federal agencies, the proposed rule would create duplicative
and overlapping supervision for many companies in the space.
The proposed rule mentions that States have supervisory
programs that ignore the fact that many companies potentially
subject to the rule already partner with financial institutions
which are already supervised and subject to examinations by the
CFPB or the bank's prudential regulators under the Bank Service
Company Act.
Chairman Hill. Mr. Kim, you have gone over your time. Your
full statement will be in the record.
Mr. Kim. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kim can be found on page 64
of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Mr. Solowey, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JACK W. SOLOWEY, POLICY ANALYST, CENTER FOR
MONETARY AND FINANCIAL ALTERNATIVES, CATO INSTITUTE

Mr. Solowey. Good morning, Chairman Hill, Ranking Member
Lynch, and distinguished members of the House Subcommittee on
Digital Assets, Financial Technology, and Inclusion. Thank you
for the opportunity to take part in today's hearing. My name is
Jack Solowey, and I am a policy analyst at the Cato Institute
Center for Monetary and Financial Alternatives. The views I
express today in my testimony are my own.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau's proposal for
supervising digital consumer payment apps lacks a risk-based
justification. For that reason and others laid out in my
testimony, it should be withdrawn.
Since the launch of the first digital payment app, these
tools have become highly successful at satisfying demand. The
CFPB explains this well. More than nine in 10 U.S. consumers
report having used a digital payment method. And a majority of
lower-income Americans report using digital payment apps.
In recent years, cryptocurrencies and decentralized finance
(DeFi) have helped to further promote competition to keep the
United States at the technological frontier. Diverse payment
tools benefit U.S. entrepreneurs and consumers.
Unfortunately, the CFPB's proposed Larger Participant rule
takes the utility and popularity of digital payment tools as
the reason to subject them to greater scrutiny. It would target
market success, not market failure. The CFPB does not identify
specific risks to consumers from digital payment apps. Rather,
vague references to generic risks leave the proposed rule
without a persuasive justification. They also create
uncertainty, such as when the Bureau indicates that its
supervision priorities will be tied to unpredictable factors.
Unclear rationales and priorities provide little practical
guidance.
Given these shortcomings, the Bureau should withdraw the
proposed rule. Even if the proposed rule were justified, it
would still present multiple problems when attempting to assert
jurisdiction over cryptocurrencies. The problem begins when the
CFPB interprets the term, ``funds,'' to cover crypto.
As the Bureau acknowledges, the word, ``funds,'' is not
specifically defined in the Consumer Financial Protection Act.
And it is not clear that the original public meaning of,
``funds,'' under that Act included cryptocurrency. The Act was
part of legislation designed to address the 2007-2008 global
financial crisis, an event predating the first bitcoin
transfer. That transfer took place in 2009, the year just prior
to the Act's passage. Ethereum, another major cryptocurrency,
would not launch until 2015.
As the CFPB acknowledges, the case law the Bureau cites to
support its interpretation does not address the Consumer
Financial Protection Act, but rather other Federal laws.
Asserting jurisdiction over crypto creates further issues.
The Bureau's lack of clarity regarding key terms in the
proposed rule risks mistakenly treating certain crypto tools
like other fintech tools despite key differences. Specifically,
treating what are known as self-hosted or noncustodial crypto
wallets as if they were the same as digital payment apps would
be inappropriate. Unlike payment apps where users rely on
service providers, self-hosted crypto wallets are simply tools
that let users protect the unique, cryptographic keys for
accessing their own crypto holdings. Importantly, these
holdings are not held or documented by self-hosted crypto
wallet creators. Rather, they are recorded on public blockchain
ledgers that operate independently.
The proposed rule also faces procedural issues when it
comes to these technologies. The Bureau does not analyze the
specific costs, benefits, and impact of extending authority
over cryptocurrencies, or self-hosted crypto wallets. Applying
the proposed rule to them would raise serious concerns under
the Administrative Procedure Act and the Consumer Financial
Protection Act itself.
While there are good reasons that the proposed rule should
not be read to cover self-hosted crypto wallets, if the
proposal were to proceed, the Bureau must expressly clarify
that the proposed rule does not apply to these tools. Notably,
the Bureau's attempt to assert authority over crypto conflicts
with the work of Congress and this subcommittee in particular
to define that jurisdiction.
For the long-term health of both the fintech ecosystem and
the constitutional order, Congress, not administrative agencies
should define the limits of regulatory authority.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this information,
and I welcome any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Solowey can be found on page
85 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. Thank you. Professor Odinet, you are
recognized for 5 minutes for your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER K. ODINET, JOSEPHINE R. WITTE
PROFESSOR OF LAW, UNIVERSITY OF IOWA

Mr. Odinet. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Hill, Ranking
Member Lynch, and members of the subcommittee, and thank you
for inviting me to testify today. My name is Chris Odinet, and
I am a law professor at the University of Iowa where I teach
and write in the areas of commercial law, consumer finance,
digital assets, and financial regulation.
I would like to make three points today regarding the non-
bank payments market, as well as the CFPB's Larger Participant
rule.
First, and as an initial matter, the CFPB supervision of
non-bank payment platforms would help level the regulatory
playing field between those platforms and banks. And the need
for leveling that regulatory playing field has to do with the
fact that both banks and nonbanks are playing similar roles in
the payments ecosystem.
To be sure, we know that banks have long held a central
role in the payment system, and as such they are highly-
regulated institutions. And a critical aspect of their
regulation is supervision. Non-bank payment platforms are
acting as powerful intermediaries in helping consumers transfer
funds, as well as transactions between consumers and merchants.
But when they do, they add additional parties and additional
legs in the payment process. And that has the effect of
increasing the chances for losses related to fraud, data
breaches, and the insolvency of these powerful intermediaries.
Now, to be sure, in order to engage in the transmission of
money, one must obtain a license from various State regulators.
But the requirements relative to obtaining those licenses and
the degree of oversight and supervision can vary significantly
among the States.
Against that backdrop, the CFPB's proposal to establish a
more coherent supervisory framework overseeing both banks and
nonbanks makes a lot of sense. It can prevent the evasion of
consumer finance laws and ensure compliance across entities
that are offering similar services, in this case, payment
services.
Second, another compelling reason favoring the CFPB's
supervision over non-bank payment platforms has to do with
their collection use and maintenance of important and sensitive
consumer financial data. As Big Tech companies increasingly
penetrate the payments market, a major incentive appears to be
gaining access to vast troves of important and valuable
information about how consumers spend money. This notion
aligns, I think very well, with the tech industry's data-
driven, advertising-centered business models that really thrive
on harvesting consumer data.
But, by these firms also operating payment transmission
lines, that allows them to amass personalized financial data,
which they can then integrate with their existing stockpiles of
data to create very granular, multi-dimensional consumer
profiles. And those very multi-dimensional profiles can be
exploited by these platforms as well as sold to third persons.
And I think to that end, and perhaps more alarming, these
in-depth consumer profiles can be used for discriminatory
purposes, such as unlawful differential pricing and targeting
marketing. And, of course, there is already a long history of
discrimination against Black and Latino households and women in
U.S. credit markets.
To put it bluntly, I think a lack of the CFPB's supervisory
authority over nonbanks in the payment system is and has been a
glaring blind spot for that agency. And establishing and
extending the supervisory authority of the Bureau in this area
helps remediate that blind spot and establish more consumer
trust in the payment's ecosystem.
Third, and lastly, I think the inclusion of at least some
forms and some types of crypto companies is much needed when it
comes to CFPB supervision. These firms' business models are
often very intertwined with consumer finance, but very little
is known about their very intricate and largely opaque
operations.
In fact, it is largely through these firms' failures and
unwinding in bankruptcy right now that we are finding out
anything about how they actually operate. Take, for instance,
the high-profile collapse of the crypto exchange giant, FTX,
which has exposed, I think, how little was previously known
about the true nature of these transactions and the handling of
consumer assets.
Lastly, I will note that extending CFPB supervision over at
least some crypto firms is not just good for consumers, it is
also good for other crypto firms. So while robust supervision
can help detect and deter consumer fraud before it happens, it
will also drive bad players from the market.
In conclusion, we jumped generations in the payment system
just over the few years of the pandemic. And the CFPB's
rulemaking in that regard is sorely needed. I think it is well-
aligned with safeguarding American households as well
maintaining a secure and competitive payments landscape.
Indeed, given these platforms' immense growth, this rule is
actually quite long overdue. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Professor Odinet can be found on
page 70 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hill. I thank our panel for your excellent
testimony.
We have the privilege of having the ranking member of the
full Financial Services Committee, Maxine Waters, here, and I
will yield to the ranking member for one minute.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have long
raised concerns about Big Tech's expansion into financial
services. And I am pleased that the CFPB is finally taking
action to oversee these companies. Big Tech already dominates
markets, and possesses massive amounts of consumer data. But it
has not been subject to the CFPB supervision that banks and
other financial institutions already follow.
When I was Chair, this committee held Big Tech to account,
including by convening a hearing with Facebook CEO Mark
Zuckerberg over his plans to develop a cryptocurrency called
Libra. Moreover, when Democrats led the passage of the Dodd-
Frank Act, we empowered the CFPB to supervise any large
nonbank, including Big Tech, when they facilitate payments or
offer financial products to consumers, to ensure that consumers
are always protected no matter whom they are dealing with. I am
pleased they are using these tools as intended. I look forward
to today's discussion, and I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentlewoman yields back. I now yield
myself 5 minutes for questions. In my view, it is an
understatement to say the CFPB has been controversial since it
was created 13 years ago. It has been talked about, as the
ranking member said, for that past 13 years in this committee
about its legal authorities under Dodd-Frank, and its
constitutional funding structure. Because the CFPB often
asserts its authorities broadly, it is important for Congress
to be a check.
For the Larger Participant rulemakings like this one,
defining a market is a prerequisite to determining what
companies are, in fact, larger participants.
It is really important for an LPR to set a narrow and
clearly-defined market because it allows the CFPB to subject
non-bank consumer finance companies to its full supervision, as
I said in my opening statement. It is not just about the
product regulation. It opens those companies designated for
full supervision and examination, even if they are not
statutorily enumerated.
However, I have concerns about how the Bureau has chosen to
set an overly-broad and unclearly-defined market in this rule
over companies in the general-use digital consumer payment
applications space.
Legal precedent in the antitrust laws dictate products that
are in the same market if they are reasonably interchangeable
by consumers for the same purposes. This matters because the
CFPB is supposed to consult with the FTC when defining the
market. And it is unclear from the testimony today if, in fact,
the CFPB met its obligation to do so.
In contrast, this proposal attempts to sweep in practically
the entire payments ecosystem by relying on the definition of,
``general use,'' and thus, it is overly broad and ambiguous.
Mr. Holshouser, does TechNet and its members view these
three types of products as part of the same market, that is,
peer to peer access to digital payments. Are they all part of
the same market?
Mr. Holshouser. No, no, general-use data consumer payment
applications is not a market. That is an arbitrary conflation
of a lot of different products and services.
Chairman Hill. Does the CFPB's overly-broad approach and
unclear definition of a market threaten innovation and
competition in this space?
Mr. Holshouser. Absolutely. We have to protect consumers
and safeguard them. But onerous regulations like this will have
a chilling effect on innovation, particularly for small
businesses and startups, people in a garage who are just trying
to make a dream work--it is really unclear whether or not--
particularly with the 5 million transactions being so low--who
would be covered in this. It is definitely more than 17. But if
we are going to impose this type of onerous compliance on a
really small startup, we are impacting our job growth and our
ability to compete.
Chairman Hill. Very interesting. And Mr. Johnson, on that
point, I think MasterCard might do 160 billion transactions a
year. So in the payment space, the numbers are in the billions
when it comes to consumer payment transactions, would be my
judgment. But you were at the CFPB. Do you have any perspective
on the 5 million number as being way too small? Or is it a
Goldilocks number, or not a right number?
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I would say the onus is on the
Bureau to prove why that is the correct figure.
Chairman Hill. Did they do that?
Mr. Johnson. I think they have failed to----
Chairman Hill. What evidence have they provided that 5
million is a great place to start on this topic?
Mr. Johnson. Putting a finger in the wind and seeing which
direction it blows. My written testimony says, I believe the
justification provided by the Bureau in this instance is
inadequate. And one measure to look at here, to your question
about market definitions, and each of the five prior Larger
Participant rules that the CFPB has proposed, it was very easy
for the Bureau to actually define those markets. It took two to
three pages in the definitions. Here, just as a metric, the
CFPB has struggled for seven pages in the Federal Register to
try and define this market. And I think that speaks volumes
about the struggle the agency has undertaken.
Chairman Hill. Thank you. That is very helpful. But let me
ask you this, again, based on your experience, should the LPR
process be statutorily reformed? Should we direct the CFPB
exactly how to propose an LPR, or provide more definition
instead of this fishing expedition in comparison to the
consumer debt collection rule in 2012, the auto financing rule
back in 2015? To your point that they were very specific, this
seems overly broad.
Mr. Johnson. At a minimum, Congress ought to provide an
intelligible principle for the Bureau to follow in promulgating
its rules. That could include a list of statutory factors the
Bureau must consider for setting a market definition, and for
setting the manner in which it establishes that larger----
Chairman Hill. Thank you. My time has expired. If you have
anything further on that, or anyone else, please submit it for
the record.
Without objection, I would like to propose that some
letters be inserted in the record: December 18th from
Republican Members to Director Chopra; January 30th to Director
Chopra from Chairman McHenry, myself, and Mr. Flood; and a
letter dated January 5th from Democratic Members--Mr. Himes,
Mr. Gottheimer, et al, dated January 5th. Without objection,
they will be included as a part of our record.
And now, we turn to the ranking member of the subcommittee,
the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, for his questions.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, I thank the
witnesses. Professor Odinet, I was here when we created the
CFPB. I was here during that debate. And the goal here and the
statutory direction for the CFPB was we were trying to provide
a single point of accountability for enforcing Federal consumer
financial laws in protecting consumers in the financial
marketplace. Why would this proposed rule be outside of the
regulatory framework that we set up for the CFPB? In my mind,
this is exactly why we created the CFPB. We understood, even
back then, not that long ago, that technology was changing. We
understood that. So, we didn't put limitations on technology
for the CFPB. We said, protect consumers in the financial
marketplace, full stop.
Now, technology companies are getting into the financial
marketplace in a big, big way: $300 billion so far in peer-to-
peer apps and other platforms.
Explain to me why the CFPB would not be--that would not be
in the legitimate purview of their regulatory mission?
Mr. Odinet. Thank you for the question. I think that
regulating this space is absolutely within the CFPB's
jurisdiction. And I view it not so much as the CFPB trying to
regulate tech firms, but as the CFPB exercising its authority,
as directed by Congress, to regulate, in this case, to
supervise nondepository institutions, nonbanks. It just so
happens that these nonbanks often bill themselves as tech
firms--or the term that has become so popular, financial
technology companies or fintech companies.
And this point about digital payment firms having to abide
by the same laws, the Electronic Funds Transfer Act, the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act, but not in the same way that banks do with
respect to supervision, I think really accentuates a divide
between banks and nonbanks, or shadow banks and banks, which
remains an issue, even after the 2008 crisis.
I think we saw this most significantly in the run-up to
that crisis where banks, chartered institutions were subject to
one set of rules, and nonbanks, which were largely the engine
of subprime lending, were not. And I think it is worth saying
what I mean by not subject to the same set of rules. That is
really along two dimensions.
First, they don't have the same sort of safety and
soundness requirements as banks. The result is that their
business models can come in a form that requires very few
reserves, also very thin margins, which makes them vulnerable
to shocks, which, in turn, can trickle down to consumer harm.
And then, supervision being the other side of that, these
firms generally--while they have to abide by the same rules,
they are not subject to the same monitoring----
Mr. Lynch. I have to jump in here. No, I appreciate that. I
have heard from other witnesses that there is no risk-based
foundation for the CFPB to act. But of the 24,000
cryptocurrencies that have been launched, over half, 14,000,
have died. So, people have lost their investment completely.
Those cryptocurrencies have gone dead. Gone to zero. Never mind
that FTX, Mixin, ERON, TERA, PayCoin, and BitConnect have all
gone to zero. There is a huge amount of risk and volatility in
that, and yet, there are some who say there is no risk-based
reason for the CFPB to venture into this.
And let me just ask you this last question. If I set up a
banking system that has all of the bells and whistles, all of
the banking regulations for one group, and then I create
another one that has no regulations, completely unregulated,
where is the money going to migrate, in your estimation? Where
will the money migrate and the financial activity migrate to?
The heavily-regulated one that protects consumers or the
fintech area with no regulation?
Mr. Odinet. I think, quite simply, it will migrate over to
the non-bank area because there are lower regulatory burdens in
that space. But the tradeoff there is that there can be more
consumer harm in that space because there is less watching of
the players in that market.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Lucas of
Oklahoma is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The U.S. banking sector
is among the most highly-regulated sectors in the country. And
in 2010, the passage of Dodd-Frank unleashed more than 2,000
pages of sweeping reforms and new regulations across the
industry. Dodd-Frank also established the CFPB, giving the new
regulator broad authorities over banks and nonbanks. Part of
this authority was supervision over the larger participants in
consumer financial markets.
CFPB's proposed Larger Participant rule from this past
November is the sixth rule in this category, this time aimed at
digital consumer payments applications. This rule would allow
the CFPB to supervise certain nonbanks that provide money
transfer services to consumers.
Mr. Holshouser, let's talk about some fundamentals for a
moment. You discussed in your testimony how the CFPB does not
follow the Administrative Procedure Act. Can you expand on
that? That is one of the fundamental issues, playing by the
rules.
Mr. Holshouser. There is a statutory rulemaking process
that has to be followed, including plenty of time for
respondents. I think that 60 responses were heard in this case,
in what really was 41 days, if you include all the holidays,
that was supposed to be 60 days. They also have to provide a
justification of consumer harm and a reason for why they need
to do this. And they need to explain who is going to be
regulated and how it is going to happen for a response.
Just to quickly answer so you can have it back, that is, in
and of itself, not sufficient.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Kim, this isn't new for CFPB. Could you
highlight the importance of a robust Administrative Procedure
Act process? Why does it matter?
Mr. Kim. It matters because the agency does have a lot of
power. And in order to exercise its power, it should follow its
statutory mandate in Dodd-Frank and other acts, but primarily
in Dodd-Frank. And I think in order to have the right balance
of executing its mission to protect consumers, exercising its
broad regulatory powers, it has to follow the mandate from
Congress.
Mr. Lucas. There has been a significant number of questions
regarding the details of the rule. For example, CFPB does not
clearly define the term, ``funds.'' And there are concerns that
this could rope in entities that transfer assets such as
securities or even commodities that are outside the purpose of
this rulemaking.
Mr. Kim, could you please explain how elements in the
proposal such as this are overly broad?
Mr. Kim. Dodd-Frank has a specific requirement, or really,
I think, ``boundaries,'' is a better word, saying very clearly
that the CFPB's jurisdiction ends where the SEC's and the CFTCs
begins. And I think it is pretty clear that those two sister
agencies have been very active in the digital assets and crypto
space. And so, the Bureau should, I think, respect and
recognize the jurisdiction and the effort and the investment by
those agencies and Congress in the digital asset space.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Johnson, could you offer your perspective on
the far-reaching nature of the proposal? This has long-term
impacts.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, Congressman. It does have long-term
impacts. And I think the impacts will manifest over time due to
the confidential nature of the supervisory process. An
overbroad market definition and an imprecise establishment of
the asset threshold for determining larger participants means
that an unknown number of institutions will be subject to
supervision. As a confidential process, the public won't
understand what the Bureau does behind the scenes afterwards.
And I think that is the primary risk.
Mr. Lucas. Focusing in on the requirements under the
proposal, does the CFPB outline any specific examination
procedures for larger participants offering covered payment
services? And I will direct that again to you, Mr. Johnson.
Please give us a sense of what details the CFPB lays out, in my
remaining time.
Mr. Johnson. The only reference I am aware of is the
general statutory requirement that the supervisory process
itself be risk-based. Notably, the rule is not risk-based. The
Bureau's determination of the market and the institution
subject to the proposed rule is not risk-based.
Mr. Lucas. With that, Mr. Chairman, my time is about to
expire, so I yield back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back. The ranking
member of the Full Committee, Ms. Waters, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. To Professor Odinet, the
misleading title of this hearing suggests that the CFPB's
Larger Participant rule would restrict competition in payments.
But, if anything, this rule should increase competition by
ensuring that the largest companies are not able to leverage
their size and data to unfairly crowd out smaller companies.
This is a concern, because some of these Big Tech companies do
not have the best record when it comes to consumer protection.
Meta, for example, has engaged in illegal data practices
and has been a repeat offender of regulatory order,
highlighting the importance of supervisory authority in this
space. Can you talk about how this rule would help smaller
companies by keeping the biggest companies in check?
Mr. Odinet. Thank you for the question. I agree with you
that market dominance is a real concern in the non-bank payment
space. The dominance and the concentration of the consumer
payments market by a handful of companies poses, I think, some
significant dangers. We know that when a small number of
companies control the majority of the market, that does limit
competition, and leads to higher prices, and, of course, to
reduced innovation. Also, lower-income households facing
financial constraints may be disproportionately affected by
having fewer alternatives and, of course, are more vulnerable
to those price increases.
And market dominance can stifle diversity in the consumer
payment space by limiting access to services that are more
tailored to the needs of specific demographic groups.
I see this rule as being in service to addressing that
market concentration. To give you an example, the CFPB, with
supervision authority in this space, could monitor instances of
unfair and deceptive acts and practices by non-bank payment
firms that make it more difficult for consumers to untangle
themselves from their payment account relationships, and thus
move on to other providers that might be more optimal for their
uses.
Ms. Waters Thank you, Professor. Can you also speak to the
broader concerns about the potential for monopolistic use of
data and misuse of market power by Big Tech companies? How
concentrated is the market for payments currently, and what
risks do you foresee in the absence of enhanced supervision by
the CFPB under its new proposed rule?
Mr. Odinet. Some of the empirical data right now indicates
that a vast majority of U.S. households use just a few of the
major payment platforms--I think I saw that 56 percent of U.S.
adults use Venmo and PayPal. So, that is a great deal of
concentration. And I think that level of concentration and the
way in which it generates very sensitive consumer financial
data raises really significant concerns, particularly relative
to privacy. I think this rule is animated by that concern.
We know that major tech companies build their business
models around the large collection and analysis of user data,
like browsing history, social interactions, and search
inquiries. Having this payment information helps build even
larger stockpiles of data about consumers, which, held by just
a few companies, can be very powerful. And as I mentioned in my
earlier remarks, unlawful price differentials, as well as
targeted marketing.
Ms. Waters. Thank you so much. Mr. Chairman and Members, I
served on one of the conference committees of Dodd-Frank. And I
was so happy that consumers finally had an agency dedicated to
taking care of their concerns.
Mr. Hill has said that it has been controversial.
Controversial because the opposite side of the aisle did not
like the idea that the consumers were now going to have
influence and power. So, I am very thankful for this hearing,
although its title is misleading. But this helps bring out what
the CFPB is responsible for, what they should be doing, and it
does not continue to have to take certain kinds of criticism
from the opposite side of the aisle who never liked the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Thank you, and I yield
back.
Chairman Hill. The gentlewoman yields back.
Mr. Rose of Tennessee is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Hill.
And thank you to our witnesses for being here with us
today.
Recently, I was made aware that on February 23, 2024--my
birthday, incidentally--the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau disclosed that a company had made the decision to
challenge an order that sought to establish supervisory
authority based on, ``risk determination.''
Director Chopra has described the agency's authority as the
ability to decide that a company is risky and subject to
supervision through its statutory authority.
Mr. Johnson, are there any meaningful considerations the
CFPB is required to make before determining a company is risky,
or has the CFPB set this up as an arbitrary process where they
have nearly unlimited discretion?
Mr. Johnson. The standard of evidence that the Bureau has
established through its procedural rule is quite low. And the
real problem here is that the Bureau changed its procedure
rules to make non-public confidential processes associated with
the supervision of institutions public in one instance and one
instance only, and that is where the company challenges the
proposed determination.
So, this creates leverage for the agency to say, we want to
supervise you, and if you fight us on this then we are going to
publicly name you as having challenged that proposed
designation and subject you to, among other things, class
actions and reputational harm.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. One of the factors that the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau's proposal uses to determine if a
nonbank-covered person would be included in the general-use
digital consumer payment application space is whether they
provide at least 5 million covered transactions annually.
Several market participants have indicated that this threshold
is alarmingly low.
Mr. Holshouser, would you describe the potential market
impact if the CFPB categorizes entities with such a small
market share as larger participants?
Mr. Holshouser. The minimum of 5 million transactions is
alarmingly low. If you think about just some of the small to
medium-sized businesses having tens if not hundreds of
thousands a day, that threshold is so low that it is obvious it
is an attempt to increase the purview of oversight of the CFPB,
which will, as I mentioned earlier, have an outsized effect on
startups and small and medium-sized companies which are trying
to innovate and grow, and will disproportionately affect them.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I appreciate the insight.
Mr. Kim, how has the CFPB historically determined
thresholds for identifying entities to be considered larger
participants under the Larger Participant rulemaking?
Mr. Kim. In the past, they have conducted data-based
research that is specific to a very well-defined market. So,
there hasn't been the uncertainty that there is today with this
rule.
For example, with credit reporting, that is a very well-
defined market. I don't think there was a lot of debate or
discussion or uncertainty about what is large in that market,
and it's the same for a lot of the other LPRs. I think today's
hearing highlights the uncertainty with this particular LPR.
Mr. Rose. In your view, Mr. Kim, did the CFPB conduct
significant analysis to arrive at the threshold in the
proposal?
Mr. Kim. I don't see it in the proposed rule. I can't tell
you what their basis was for 5 million. I can say that, very
anecdotally, there are, as Mr. Holshouser said, smaller to mid-
sized payment companies that would easily meet that threshold
within a matter of months.
Mr. Rose. Shifting gears a bit. Mr. Johnson, in addition to
the Larger Participant rulemaking, the CFPB is attempting to
create a nonbank registry. I signed a letter that my colleague,
Mr. Ogles, led in May of last year highlighting our concerns
with these actions by the CFPB.
The CFPB has justified the need for a costly registration
system where non-bank companies, ``self-report public orders
like enforcement actions or consent orders so that consumers
can be on the lookout for repeat offenders.''
Mr. Johnson, isn't this information already public?
Mr. Johnson. It is. And other aspects of that proposed
rulemaking are equally troubling.
Mr. Rose. I see my time has expired, so I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Sherman of California, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sherman. I, too, would like to criticize the CFPB. It
has taken them over a decade to come up with a rule defining
who would be subject to some future rule. While consumers need
the protection now, we may get it in several more years. This
initial pre-rule is long past due.
I have been in this town for a long time, and I have snuck
in at least once to Lobbying 101 secret classes. The rule is
very simple or the teaching is simple. If the facts are on your
side, argue the facts. If you are on the side of good public
policy, argue the public policy. And if the facts are against
you, and the public policy is against you, argue the procedure.
And that is mostly what we have here, people telling us that
the procedure is somehow off.
Now, the most extreme of those arguments is to have the
cryptocurrency industry come in and say how awful and
outrageous it is that somebody would treat crypto as a
currency. If you aspire to be a currency, you should aspire to
be regulated like a currency.
And like our ranking member, and the chairman, and the
ranking member of the subcommittee, I was here for Dodd-Frank.
And I can assure you that when we said, ``funds,'' we certainly
included anything that qualified as a currency.
Banks have long not really enjoyed the Community
Reinvestment Act. And so, the high-tech companies have decided,
well, if we can be a bank but call ourselves a fintech, then we
don't have to live with the Community Reinvestment Act or a
host of others.
Mr. Odinet, PayPal is holding onto, I think it is about $18
billion of customer money. I assume that they invest it as they
will, maybe safe investments, maybe speculation. If they go
bankrupt, does the FDIC reimburse the customers?
Mr. Odinet. Thank you for the question. And the simple
answer is, no. Those customers are holding their funds with a
relationship only to that non-bank intermediary. The FDIC
insurance--
Mr. Sherman. So it is like loaning money to your brother-
in-law, if your brother-in-law is Sam Bankman-Fried?
Mr. Odinet. Yes.
Mr. Sherman. I will ask Mr. Holshouser, representing
TechNet, if one of your members goes bankrupt, will the other
members chip in and make the customers whole, or will those
customers/voters be here demanding that Congress bail them out?
Mr. Holshouser. It depends on what side of the fintech
industry you are speaking of; there is zero liability for
credit and debit and other products, but there is some
exposure----
Mr. Sherman. Right now, they are holding onto $18 billion.
They are investing it in either something safe or maybe pork
bellies. I don't know where they put their money. And wherever
they put it today, they could have put it somewhere else more
risky tomorrow. And your members aren't going to bail them out.
They are going to be here demanding a bailout from Congress.
I will point out that the deal with Venmo is that you pay
1.75 percent to get your money 3 days earlier. I don't think
APR is really the way you should evaluate this, but for those
of you who are fans of annual percentage rate, that is charging
the consumer a 213-percent annual percentage rate. Yes, it is
only 1.75 percent, but that is just for 3 days instead of for
365 days.
So, we have a situation--Mr. Odinet, I can't think of any
other situation where ordinary Americans put their money in a
financial institution that is totally unregulated, and is
allowed to invest their money into pork bellies or Mongoose
Coin or whatever they want and they have no insurance.
Can you think of any other place where millions of
Americans have their money at that kind of risk, where they
deposit their money and they think it is there?
Mr. Odinet. No, nothing comes to mind. But, to your point,
I think a real danger of the way consumers interact with non-
bank payment platforms--and I will say this is also
particularly true for crypto firms--is they do so under the
misperception that when they do, they enjoy the same sort of
regulatory protections they have when they deal with a broker-
dealer and they invest in securities or deposit accounts when
they deal with banks, which is manifestly not the case.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Davidson, who is also the Vice
Chair of the subcommittee, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the chairman.
I think it is great that we are having this hearing, and it
is important that we address just the growth of government. It
seems like the government expands every year. We do have one
party that campaigns on a smaller government. We are not doing
so well. Every year, every Congress, we get more government.
One of the guaranteed-to-grow forms of government is the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. And the mission and cause
are important. I think we have multiple ways to try to address
that. But one of the things that is important is to ensure that
we get the right kind of government wherever we have it is that
participation.
So, Mr. Kim, in the most recent proposal for more
government by the CFPB, they state that they don't have to
demonstrate that any customer harm has even occurred.
Could you explain what the bare minimum is that CFPB has to
show to bring an entity under its supervision?
Mr. Kim. The statute--and talking about Dodd-Frank--
requires a cost-benefit and risk analysis. So in identifying,
number one, a market that is ripe for supervision, it should
identify risk to the consumers in that market. That is what I
see as lacking in the rule.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you. I guess cost-benefit analysis
might not overtly address harm, but it seems like there is
always a case, we just need more government. And one of the
footnotes CFPB tucked into their proposal, many believe would
give the Bureau supervisory authority in the divisions within a
company that are outside the scope of the proposal. What is the
practical impact, Mr. Johnson, of including that wide sweeping
statement in their proposal?
Mr. Johnson. Congressman, I think you are referring to the
statement where the Bureau says that if an institution
qualifies as a larger participant within a defined market, CFPB
not only achieves supervisory authority, can examine for that
product line that drew it in as a larger participant, but can
thereafter and forevermore examine the institution for any
other product line that may be a covered product or service.
And I think that expansive view of the Bureau's authority
is contrary to the specific process that Congress established
for identifying a larger participant within a specific market.
Mr. Davidson. Yes. Thank you for that clarification. It is
the hook that allows kind of more spread. A lot of times,
government is sort of like an invasive plant. Once it gets in a
field, it just keeps growing. And the only way to get it out is
to dig it up by root and branch. And if it is actually doing
something useful, you at least have to prune it to make sure it
doesn't overtake everything else.
And I think companies that find themselves under regulatory
scrutiny are frustrated because there seems to be no
satisfaction of the amount of regulation. There is always more.
That is particularly true in the digital asset space.
We have seen digital asset companies come to the CFPB
saying--or come to the SEC in particular, saying, please
regulate us. We want clarity. We are happy to cooperate with
you. What do you need to know? And they share endless
information and they never get an answer. It is like, ``Hotel
California,'' in a way. You can never check out. You can never
leave.
So, Mr. Solowey, could you highlight the particular
challenge digital asset companies confront when you have CFPB
trying to put hooks into them in a regulatory environment where
in no other part of the economy are they getting real clarity?
Mr. Solowey. I agree, Congressman. I think the lack of
regulatory clarity in the digital asset space presents a real
problem for market participants there.
It is my view that the proposed rule only muddies the
waters here. Not only does the lack of risk-based justification
make the rule unjustified, but it also leaves market
participants in the dark regarding how they are supposed to
prioritize compliance and whether they are even supposed to be
covered by the proposed rule.
Mr. Davidson. Yes. Thank you. I hope that we do what our
committee has set out to do, which is to provide that
regulatory clarity. We passed the Financial Innovation and
Technology Act for the 21st Century (FIT21). We passed a ban on
a central bank digital currency. We passed stablecoin
legislation. And we, importantly, protected the right of self-
custody.
Are there any concerns that the CFPB's approach threatens
self-custody, because, frankly, one of the most important
protections we found as companies maybe haven't flourished,
they have had problems, some have failed, users have been
harmed, notably by FTX.
Isn't self-custody a way to protect yourself?
Mr. Solowey. Self-custody would address the risks that FTX
presented. And the proposed rule's lack of clarity regarding
whether these technologies are covered only makes it harder for
developers and users to deploy that technology, given the
regulatory uncertainty.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you. My time has expired, and I yield
back.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman's time has, in fact, expired.
And we turn to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the ranking
member and the witnesses as well.
Professor Odinet, the Consumer Federation of America
recently submitted a statement on payments fraud for a Senate
Banking Committee hearing, outlining how the scale of payment
fraud is sizable and increasing, including payment apps.
The statement indicated that consumers had reported $100
million in unauthorized transactions on Cash App and $57
million on Venmo in 2022 alone.
How would the CFPB's proposed rule help to alleviate the
amount of payment fraud in the market?
Mr. Odinet. With respect to fraud specifically, when the
CFPB has supervision over a firm, it conducts regular
examinations to ensure compliance with, of course, stringent
guidelines and in this case related to Electronic Fund Transfer
Act obligations for account fraud. And usually the aim is to
make sure that the company is fortifying itself with consumer
protection measures as well as trying to thwart consumer fraud
before it occurs.
The Bureau can closely monitor compliance with these Acts
to ensure that payment companies have, for instance, robust
dispute resolution mechanisms as well as disclosures. And then,
of course, the Bureau can also assess a company's risk
assessment strategies, and the Bureau can in that way delve
into sort of the intricacies of the payment company's
operations, and kind of pinpoint vulnerabilities and fraud hot
spots.
Supervision will not solve all fraud problems, but it can
go a long way toward making sure companies are doing their part
to flag fraud before it happens.
Mr. Green. Is it fair to say that consumers are better
protected with the benefit of the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau as opposed to without the benefits?
Mr. Odinet. Yes. I think that is absolutely true.
Mr. Green. And would the other members of the panel be so
kind as to indicate whether you think that we ought to be
concerned with fraud protection? If you think that fraud
protection is something that we should concern ourselves with,
would you kindly raise your hand?
Let the record reflect that all have raised their hand.
Let me move quickly to another aspect of this about which I
am concerned. There have been some suggestions that the
threshold should be raised to 10 million as opposed to the 5
million where it is currently proposed to be elevated to.
What would be the consequences of raising the threshold?
Professor, I am calling on you again.
Mr. Odinet. My understanding is that the CFPB's setting of
the threshold at 5 million transactions in a calendar year was
designed to enable the Bureau to supervise those firms that
have the most significant share of this general-use digital
consumer payments application market, and that it was based on
available data suggesting that there is a very high
concentration within this market.
So a very small number of firms processing millions,
perhaps billions of dollars' worth of transactions in a year,
while there are many other firms that are not captured by the
rule but they handle fewer transactions. And the focus was
really on trying to supervise the firms that have the most
critical role in this market.
Mr. Green. You indicated a small number. I have
intelligence indicating that the agency has estimated that the
threshold would capture approximately 17 entities. Is that
about what you understand the case to be?
Mr. Odinet. That is what I understand, based on the
information the Bureau has provided.
Mr. Green. Seventeen entities. Okay. Let's move to another
area quickly.
Is it true that Cash App allows users to sell stocks, buy
and sell stocks?
Mr. Odinet. I am not familiar with that particular
functionality of Cash App.
Mr. Green. Is anyone familiar with that function? If so,
you may speak--Cash App allowing users to buy and sell stocks.
I received an indication that it does have this feature, and
they can do so without a commission.
This causes me some concern if this is the case, because
buying and selling stocks is a means by which a good amount of
fraud can occur when we don't have the CFPB protecting the
consumer. I am hopeful that maybe this is incorrect, and if it
is, I will understand, but, if not, I am grateful that the CFPB
is looking into this.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Casten, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. Just a quick question before I
start. And I want to be quick, but I do want to get this on the
record. All of you, before coming here, signed a truth in
testimony form disclosing your government affiliations and
contracts. I know a lot of you are speaking on behalf of things
that would benefit the tech companies. Just a quick raise of
hands, do any of you have clients that are tech companies?
Raise your hands.
Mr. Kim, only you. Can you disclose the amount of money the
tech firms pay you?
Mr. Kim. I don't know, sir. I can't say.
Mr. Casten. Maybe we can follow up for the record. Thank
you for letting us know.
I have a very naive hope here, which I am listening to this
and my completely naive--maybe the most naive thing I have ever
thought in Congress is that I really hope my wife and daughter
are watching this hearing, because we have this ongoing debate
at home. I do all my banking with Schwab. I don't use PayPal. I
don't use Venmo. They are completely addicted to it. And I keep
telling them, there are different rules here. And I am looking
forward to them celebrating me as a returning hero when I get
home today at this point.
First, just a quick question for you, Mr. Kim, and
hopefully, this is going to help. Do you feel it is important
to maintain a wall between commerce and banking?
Mr. Kim. I think that is a policy question, sir, and I am
not qualified to answer that one.
Mr. Casten. Okay. Well, I certainly do. I asked the
question because, Professor Odinet, in your testimony you
mentioned that customers' interactions with PayPal are a lot
like using a bank. Do you want to expand on what you meant by
that?
Mr. Odinet. Yes, I would be happy to. When an individual
uses a non-bank intermediary, the payment still has to happen
along the transmission lines of the banking system. It is just
one step removed. So, all of these non-banking platforms sit
atop the transmission lines of the banking system. But the
consumer is not interacting with the bank. The intermediary is
interacting with the bank. So the benefits related to, for
instance, FDIC insurance, run in favor of the intermediary. And
that leaves the consumer with what is just essentially a
contract claim against the intermediary.
As long as the intermediary has the assets to make good on
withdrawal requests, and payment requests, then everything is
fine. But if the intermediary becomes insolvent, that insurance
through the banking system ultimately does not benefit the
consumer. The consumer just has a claim in the bankruptcy
against the intermediary, not unlike the customers of the now
defunct FTX.
Mr. Casten. I appreciate that, because I am a dyed-in-the-
wool deep free marketer. And free markets mean that everybody
has to play on the same playing field. And the idea that if I
use Schwab, and my daughter uses Venmo, there are these
different rules, there are different incentives, that strikes
me as a fundamentally anti-capitalistic idea.
I also want to just pick on there is this very sort of a
vapid libertarianism that says that we should never give our
information to the government because we can't trust the
government with information, but we should give all of our
information to private companies that have no obligation to the
public interest, and who can sell it to data brokers, who can
then resell that information to other governments whose
interests are antithetical to our own.
Professor Odinet, in your testimony you described this as a
massive blind spot for the Bureau. And I wonder if you could
expand on why we need to be more vigilant in protecting
consumer data and what we need to do to guard against it in
this rule?
Mr. Odinet. Thank you. The reason why I said that is
because we don't exactly know, and it may be in some instances
that the companies that collect and process the data,
particularly as they use sophisticated artificial intelligence
programs, know exactly what they are doing when they use data
to make decisions relative to a variety of products and
services.
Now, we do have some visibility into that when banks are
doing so, but that is because banks are subject to supervision,
both by the Bureau above a certain asset class, but always by
their prudential regulators.
But we know there is way more innovation happening in data
processing and artificial intelligence outside the bank system
in the non-bank system. For that reason, the Bureau needs some
visibility into what is happening on that side of the house, if
you will, because that is likely to be the place where there
can be more consumer harm.
Mr. Casten. I see I have 15 seconds left, so maybe if we
could just follow up for the record afterwards. I do have some
concerns that in some of the carve-outs for crypto,
particularly as we have seen some of the companies like PayPal
developing stablecoins, as we have seen some of the runs on
other currencies, that there are some blind spots.
And so, Professor Odinet, if you have some thoughts about
how we might improve the role to protect consumers, I would
welcome it.
Chairman Hill. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Hill. Feel free to respond to him in writing on
that question.
As you know, we have votes on the House Floor, so we are
going to take a recess for not less than 5 minutes, and we will
come back and finish our questioning.
We thank our panel for your excellent testimony today.
And we are in recess for 5 minutes.
[recess]
Mr. Flood. [presiding]. The committee will come to order.
I now recognize the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Steil,
for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Steil. I thank the Chair.
Let me start with you, if I can, Mr. Johnson. The CFPB can
see that it, ``lacks sufficient information on a substantial
number of known market participants necessary to estimate their
larger participant status.''
In other words, they don't have the data to know how many
companies would be swept under the rule, so they don't know how
much the rule would really cost or what the full market impacts
could be.
You served at the CFPB under a previous Administration.
Would moving forward on a major rule like this without adequate
data be unusual, in your professional opinion?
Mr. Johnson. I think it would be unusual and would
certainly present APA challenge risk. I think in some ways this
is the Bureau's response to an Executive Order and revised
guidance for the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
regarding the relaxing of standards for cost-benefit analysis.
Mr. Steil. I appreciate that. I have continued concern that
the CFPB isn't doing a proper cost-benefit analysis. And the
fact that we don't have data as to who is going to be swept in
under such a rule, I think is incredibly concerning.
Let me continue on with you if I can, Mr. Johnson.
The law authorizing the CFPB says that the Bureau shall
consult with the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and define
covered persons under Larger Participant rules. The Bureau said
that it consulted with or provided an opportunity for
consultation with the FTC, which could obviously mean the FTC
did not actually weigh in.
Can you explain briefly why it is important for the CFPB to
consult with the FTC and why it would be a problem if the CFPB
actually didn't fulfill its regulatory requirement?
Mr. Johnson. The Dodd-Frank Act creates clear distinctions
and boundaries between the FTC and the CFPB. And the CFPB
inherited certain consumer protection authorities but not
antitrust authorities from the FTC.
So, it is vitally important that the CFPB consult on a
regular basis and Congress require them to consult with other
agencies, I think for the reason of establishing that they are
not intruding upon the jurisdiction or boundaries denied them
in the Dodd-Frank Act.
Mr. Steil. I appreciate that.
Let me jump over to you, Mr. Solowey. Did I say that
correctly?
Mr. Solowey. Yes, sir.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much.
There is a lot of uncertainty about how sweeping more
companies under the CFPB's authority would impact the cost of
payment services to consumers. How does the uncertainty about
the regulatory cost impact--the LPR impact competition and
innovation in the payments industry?
Mr. Solowey. I think uncertainty always adds costs. Even
just the initial legal fees dealing with the ambiguity of
whether or not a market participant is or should be covered.
And then, you have further uncertainty when it becomes hard
to budget for those compliance risks. All of those issues take
away precious time, capital, and attention that only make it
harder for folks to innovate. When that is the case, consumers
can miss out on new and important technologies.
Mr. Steil. Thank you.
Let me jump to you, Mr. Holshouser, if I can. Let's take a
broader view of how the CFPB's regulatory expansion impacts our
economy and workers. In a period of time of high inflation,
when people can't afford the things that they need, the Bureau
is targeting a very competitive industry with innovators coming
from across the globe.
And I am concerned that overbearing and poorly-considered
regulations from the CFPB will make the U.S. less competitive
and push jobs overseas. Can you talk about how the LPR and
other CFPB efforts may discourage innovation and investment
here in the United States?
Mr. Holshouser. That is a great question. You just have to
balance the safeguards with the environment for innovation. Red
tape never created innovative companies that are the envy of
the world, like we have here in the United States. It was
innovators and the American spirit and our laws and regulations
that allow innovation to flourish.
Just look at the EU. There has been a 40-percent decrease
in the investment in startups since the GDPR, showing that an
onerous top-down regulation has a huge constriction effect on
innovation and investment.
The jobs that are created in this country are mostly
created by startups and small businesses. They are going to
really see the impact and burden much more than the larger
platforms. And I think that it is misguided to think that this
rule only targets what would be seen as big players.
The little ones are really the ones that need the help, and
this is going to constrict their ability to grow and stifle
innovation.
Mr. Steil. I share your concerns. I am incredibly concerned
the CFPB is going to continue to stifle innovation development
here in the United States.
I appreciate all of our witnesses. And Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Mr. Flood. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from California is recognized.
Mr. Sherman. I have already had my 5 minutes. Do you want
to give me another 5 minutes?
Mr. Flood. The Chair recognizes himself.
I will start with this. I have been concerned about the
CFPB's Larger Participant rulemaking for some time, and I am
glad that we have the opportunity to explore its impacts
further today.
First, let's begin with a refresher on what the Larger
Participant rule refers to. The CFPB has four broad categories
of supervisory jurisdiction pursuant to Dodd-Frank: number one,
financial institutions with over $10 billion in assets; number
two, mortgage companies, payday lenders and student lenders;
number three, companies deemed, ``larger participants,'' in a
consumer financial market; and number four, companies
designated by CFPB as a potential risk to consumers.
If unchecked, that third category, the larger participant
category, is sufficiently broad as to potentially expand the
CFPB's jurisdiction dramatically over time. I fear that we are
seeing that with this rule today.
One example of how this rule expands the CFPB's reach
hasn't gotten much discussion to this point as it relates to
merchants. The CFPB is explicitly barred from supervising
merchants pursuant to Dodd-Frank when they are selling
nonfinancial goods. This is a common-sense guardrail. The CFPB
is a financial regulator. They don't have supervisory authority
over non-financial merchants in the country and they shouldn't.
However, I feel this proposed rule takes that boundary and
pushes it away. One piece of this rule claims that at any time
a merchant uses consumer payment information for something
other than completing the transaction, including for benign
purposes like research, they go from selling a nonfinancial
good to a financial one and are, therefore, within the scope of
the rule.
Let's step back and think about that for just a moment.
When a completely nonfinancial merchant conducts research on
their payments data, even for a good reason like conducting
research to stop future fraud, they could be subject to CFPB
supervision.
For example, if a consumer buys a recliner chair at an
online furniture store, whether or not that transaction is
considered a financial transaction by the CFPB would depend
upon exactly how the merchant treats the information associated
with it.
According to this interpretation, the fact that we are
talking about a merchant selling a piece of furniture is
irrelevant. The CFPB still may have jurisdiction anyway.
Conveniently for the CFPB, this could extend their supervisory
authority to merchants selling any and all kinds of goods. This
interpretation allows them to go from a financial regulator to
a regulator that could have authority over anything sold
online.
Another way the rulemaking expands CFPB's authority is not
just over U.S. dollar transactions, but digital asset
transactions. Again, this would be a broad expansion of their
power.
Mr. Johnson, in your testimony you connected the CFPB's
jurisdictional grab over digital asset transactions to the
major questions doctrine from the landmark, West Virginia v.
EPA case.
Do you believe the CFPB has clear congressional
authorization for its claimed authority over digital assets?
And please explain why or why not?
Mr. Johnson. I don't believe it has that authority because
Congress didn't give it that authority and didn't give it that
authority expressly in Title X of the Dodd-Frank Act.
Mr. Flood. It is a relief to hear you say that, because the
members of this committee have been working on delegating
authority to our regulators over digital assets for over a
year. It would be rather discouraging if the CFPB could simply
claim authority over the space with the stroke of a pen and
very little legal basis.
I would like to close today by bringing up one more issue
with the proposed rule. It completely failed to assess its
potential impact on small businesses pursuant to the Regulatory
Flexibility Act. The rule certifies it will not have a
significant impact on small entities, but does so with no
serious analysis. This is despite the fact that small
businesses and sole proprietors are some of the most common
users of the third-party payment technology that could be
clearly covered under the rule.
Mr. Holshouser, you mentioned the lack of analysis
regarding the rule's potential small business impact in your
testimony. Would you provide some additional thoughts on this
topic?
Mr. Holshouser. I would be happy to.
I think small and medium-sized businesses have no idea
whether or not they are covered under this proposed rule, and
that in and of itself is the problem. We are hearing an
estimate of 17 covered firms, but I think the estimate could be
well in the hundreds.
But if you are a small business and you are making a
decision between spending money on compliance costs to deal
with this new proposed regime versus innovating new products
and then selling them, which is the lifeblood of creating a new
business, you are going to see a real headwind in your ability
to maintain and grow.
And I think if you limit and define the scope of this
proposed rule on a more targeted basis, you will certainly give
more certainty to businesses who are really confused about
whether or not they would be caught in this and what that means
for their ability and need for raising money to grow.
Mr. Flood. Thank you very much for your testimony.
I now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks to our chairman and our ranking member
and our witnesses for being here. I represent North Carolina's
13th District.
And I have said this before, the work of the CFPB is
incredibly important. Their mission of protecting consumers is
supported by the vast majority of Americans, regardless of
political party.
The CFPB recently released their Larger Participant rule
for digital consumer payment apps in November. I understand the
goal of this rulemaking is millions of Americans are now using
digital payment apps. However, I am concerned that this rule is
overly broad and lacks clarity.
Mr. Holshouser, as my colleagues have mentioned, the CFPB
indicated that 17 companies will be covered by this rule.
However, they refuse to say which companies. Is that standard
practice? What purpose is served by keeping secret the list of
companies which would be impacted by this rule?
Mr. Holshouser. This is not standard practice, and I have
no idea what this serves. Certainty is what businesses need in
order to operate their businesses and to know how to plan. And
this lack of specificity is a real concern.
Mr. Nickel. And, Mr. Holshouser, again, given the
uncertainly surrounding this rule, will companies be
discouraged from offering payment services to consumers and how
will this impact competition and innovation?
Mr. Holshouser. Absolutely. I think it will decrease the
players in the market and reduce new entrants. It will cause
those that are in it who might be caught up in this rule to
retract from this market, which will lessen the number of
products and, therefore, hurt competition.
Mr. Nickel. Mr. Kim, next question to you: To justify the
rule, the CFPB only performed a cost-benefit analysis of peer-
to-peer products. However, the rule would cover products like
express checkout that have nothing to do with the peer-to-peer
cost-benefit analysis.
Is it right for the CFPB to propose such an all-
encompassing rule when they don't have adequate data to justify
it?
Mr. Kim. I agree that the proposed rule conflates very
separate and distinct payment products and functionalities. It
doesn't explain why it does so. And in not explaining why it
conflates them, there is no cost-benefit or any sort of
empirical analysis to support that kind of overly-broad
definition.
Mr. Nickel. Mr. Kim, again, how does this Larger
Participant rule compare to previous Larger Participant rules?
Mr. Kim. With prior ones, we weren't asking these
questions. With student loan servicing, everyone knew who the
big players were and I don't think people really debated or had
much concern about whether the threshold would capture the
large ones versus the small ones.
I think today's hearing highlights how there is a lot of
uncertainty about the scope of the rule and its potential
impact.
Mr. Nickel. Mr. Kim, again to you, can you walk us through
what a typical supervisory examination by the CFPB would look
like for firms identified as larger participants, and describe
what powers the CFPB has over an entity once it has been
designated as a larger participant?
Mr. Kim. They send examiners, and it is typically, at a
minimum, several, but easily 20 to 30. And for large tech
companies, I would imagine the CFPB would bring its so-called A
game and bring as many as it can.
It would probably be a combination of hosting them on-site
but also hybrid or virtual. And these exams last months. So, we
are talking about wave after wave of information requests and
follow-up requests. And companies often field those questions
for over a year, and then maybe, they might get an exam report
a year or two later. So, it is significant. People have to kind
of drop their day jobs to respond to the information requests
in exams.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Flood. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
Florida is recognized.
Mr. Donalds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Wow, this has been a very interesting hearing. I often say
in this room that the first hearing I ever watched as a citizen
of this country was the Financial Services hearings when Dodd-
Frank was being created.
I was in the finance world, not a Member commenting on the
finance world. And to be blunt, and with no disrespect to the
staff on Capitol Hill, I was not a staffer writing memos about
the financial world; I was actually doing it.
A lot of the things in Dodd-Frank concerned me, and most
overarching was the CFPB. My concern was that the CFPB would be
this overarching agency with no real oversight, that would just
roam the fruited plain trying to figure out what they can
meddle in. And, obviously, they are doing that today.
Mr. Holshouser, we get very technical in financial
services. For the people watching at home, what actually are
digital payment systems? What are the actual pieces of
technology we are talking about that would apply to the
American consumer?
Mr. Holshouser. That is an incredibly complex and diverse
question with a lot of different aspects to it.
Mr. Donalds. Just give me an example.
Mr. Holshouser. You are running financial transactions
there through a large digital pipe, through a bunch of data
centers back and forth between merchants and banks, with other
regulated entities in the payments ecosystem also involved in
that.
Mr. Donalds. Would a digital wallet be a part of this?
Mr. Holshouser. That is subject to interpretation, but
normally yes.
Mr. Donalds. Okay. So, I am a consumer. I go on my phone. I
download a digital wallet. I could put crypto stablecoin or
potentially even cash in this wallet. Would that all be subject
to the CFPB's rule?
Mr. Holshouser. Under the proposed rule, yes.
Mr. Donalds. Okay. Professor Odinet, a question for you:
Even in its infancy, when Dodd-Frank was being created, did the
Members--I will say the Democrat Members because they are the
ones who voted for it--think that it would make it possible
that the CFPB would regulate consumer transactions between
consumers?
Mr. Odinet. I wasn't involved in that process, like you. I
was much younger. But what I do know is that Congress intended
for the CFPB to have jurisdiction over nondepository
institutions involved in the provision of consumer financial
products and services.
Mr. Donalds. I don't want to interrupt, but we are short on
time. Do you know why they did that? I was a lender at the
time, and in the lending market, the issue was home mortgages,
specifically, no income, no job, and no assets (NINJA) loans,
where you could show up and say, I want to buy this house.
There was no credit report, no income verification, and a
nonbank issued you a mortgage to go buy a house that you
couldn't afford. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Odinet. I think that the subprime mortgage crisis was
at the forefront of Congress at the time. But that doesn't mean
that the Bureau's authority is limited to the mortgage market.
In fact, the text of the Consumer Financial Protection Act goes
far beyond that into multiple different types of consumer
financial products.
Mr. Donalds. Professor Odinet, I would like to opine on
that. That is why Dodd-Frank is trash and is one of the worst
pieces of legislation ever contemplated by this body.
But let me move on. Do you think that digital wallets pose
a systemic threat to the United States of America?
Mr. Odinet. My understanding is that the Bureau is not
making its rulemaking on the basis of systemic threat, but on
the threat of consumer harm in the offering of that product.
Mr. Donalds. Is there a consumer harm in Americans being
able to actually use their resources to buy goods and services
from a business, a merchant, or from another individual?
Mr. Odinet. Under the limited facts of your question, no.
Mr. Donalds. Okay. Is it plausible that an American citizen
needs a license or needs authority or approval from the CFPB in
order to transact business in commerce?
Mr. Odinet. No, but the businesses that facilitate it do.
Mr. Donalds. You said in your statement that, ``businesses
could discriminate based upon information that they take down
in the normal course of business.''
Is there any evidence at all that there has been any
discrimination with the use of digital wallets at all by these
tech companies?
Mr. Odinet. I think proper supervision will reveal whether
or not that is the case.
Mr. Donalds. Mr. Johnson, is there any discrimination that
has been found by any of these tech companies or fintech
companies actually allowing for these products to be used by
consumers?
Mr. Johnson. Not that I am aware of for laws that are
within the CFPB's jurisdiction.
Mr. Donalds. Here is a question for you: Do you think the
CFPB even has evidence to the fact that there might be
discrimination with the use of any of these products by
consumers?
Mr. Johnson. I think the Bureau's articulated concerns in
speeches and other communications speak to speculative concerns
rather than actual observations of marketplace behavior.
Mr. Donalds. So for the people watching at home, the CFPB
is looking for something to do, because they are busybodies.
There is no need for them to regulate in this space. Mr.
Chopra, once again, is way beyond his bounds, which is why this
agency needs to go away permanently.
I yield back.
Mr. Flood. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Illinois is recognized.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses.
Mr. Odinet, in your testimony you note that many of the
firms that we expect to be covered under the Larger
Participants rule are large non-bank tech firms with business
lines that benefit from the mass collection of consumer data.
Typically, we think of this through the lens of marketing,
usually insights gleaned from interactions with your favorite
search engine or social media app to shape targeted
advertisements that are more likely to get you to buy
something.
Others have relationships with third parties, who may also
have access to consumers' information. As you note, large
payment providers have access to a very valuable trove of
financial information about their users that can show how much
they spend, where they spend it, and how they manage their
finances.
Now, I imagine that most consumers would deem that
sensitive information. What are some of the risks of non-bank
financial firms having access to that sort of information and
what safeguards do you believe are missing?
Mr. Odinet. As I mentioned in my written testimony, one of
the most important and profitable kinds of information is how
people spend their money, and that is exactly the kind of data
that these payment processing payment platforms are able to
generate and capture.
The fear, to my mind, is the ability to use that kind of
information, coupled with other types of nonfinancial consumer
data, browsing histories, social interactions, et cetera, and
in combination engage in activity relative to targeted
marketing, price differentials on products and services that is
unlawful, and that is discriminatory.
Mr. Foster. And there have been instances where perhaps
even inadvertently some of the AI algorithms of some of the big
firms have been doing things like digital redlining that have
resulted in real harm to American citizens.
So, how do the risks change when the firm has significant
lines of business that are outside the financial services
sector?
Mr. Odinet. I think this goes toward the question earlier
about the separation between banking and commerce. The way in
which nonbank, which is to say nondepository institutions,
engage in the payment ecosystem places them outside that
division, because they are not depositories. They don't fall
under the Bank Holding Company Act. And that allows for a level
of sharing and interaction and penetration between the payment
side of the house, if I can, and the commercial--we will say
the tech side of the house.
And it is the combination and the interaction of those two
lines of business and the data that they produce that I think
poses the risk of creating these multidimensional, very
granular profiles about people and how that granular
information can be used in ways that we would find problematic.
Mr. Foster. In recent months, I have been happy to see the
CFPB take steps to give consumers greater control over their
personal financial data. While the details of the proposals are
still being hammered out, the Bureau's 1033 rulemaking, I
believe is an important step to ensure that consumers' data is
protected and that they have the freedom to walk away and move
their data to another bank or financial institution when they
determine that they could be better served.
My question is this: How does this Larger Participants
proposal interact with other consumer protection laws, and what
would it mean for something like the 1033 rulemaking?
Mr. Odinet. I think the way that supervision interacts with
this idea which you speak of, which is generally referred to
like a component of open banking, is to ensure that those
nonbank institutions that are covered by the rule that are
required to generate consumer data in an interface that is
standardized and easily sharable, which includes, as you say,
controls on how much of it is shared and the need to get
reauthorizations on an annual basis are being complied with.
That is what supervision is. It is not to impose new rules;
it is to ensure that the rules that already apply are being
abided by.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. How does the lack of supervisory
authority over digital payments applications hinder the
Bureau's ability to protect consumers' financial data right
now?
Mr. Odinet. The problem is that when there are breakdowns
in compliance with the consumer financial laws, like the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act or others, if the Bureau does not have the
ability to monitor on an ongoing basis that level of
compliance, the public generally does not discover misbehavior
and wrongdoing until the consumer harm has already happened.
I think it is also worth saying that there are benefits to
supervision that were not mentioned at all today, one being we
often hear about regulation through enforcement and the fear of
CFPB enforcement.
But supervision happens on an ongoing basis and in a
confidential capacity, so that the business and the Bureau can
engage in an ongoing dialogue, and flag problems and resolve
them before they become public.
Mr. Foster. Thank you. My time is up, and I yield back.
Mr. Flood. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from South Carolina is recognized.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses for being here today.
When examining the Larger Participant proposal, one can't
help but see it as another power grab from Director Chopra at
the CFPB. Since his swearing in, he has consistently applied
liberal academic theories with no common sense or basis in the
real world.
Time and time again, these theories are put into practice
and result in increased cost for services, unintentionally
hurting consumers instead of protecting and promoting their
best interests.
What's worse is that these consequences are foreseeable and
even predicted by the seemingly ever-increasing chorus of those
of us with business experience. Yet, our warnings are
perpetually cast aside.
It seems that the only possible course correction will be
either Tuesday, November 5, 2024, or who knows, perhaps the
Supreme Court. But for now, I guess we will continue to
highlight the adverse consequences of CFPB's proposals.
This time, the Director has become even more emboldened,
stating that the CFPB's supervisory authority is not limited to
the products or services that qualify a covered institution for
supervision, but could essentially capture every aspect of a
given business, subjecting companies that largely provide
services outside of the financial sector to the CFPB's
oversight.
Not only does this proposal appear to be broad, it is
incredibly ambiguous, leaving many market participants
questioning their status.
Mr. Holshouser, the CFPB identifies 17 firms as potential
larger participants under the proposal. However, the CFPB has
collected data on almost 200 companies in consideration of this
rule. To say the least, it appears there is widespread
confusion among market participants, with many companies unsure
of their designation.
Given the ambiguity in the CFPB's definition of the market
in this proposal, are your member firms able to say with
certainty whether they are covered?
Mr. Holshouser. No.
Mr. Timmons. Do you think that is a problem?
Mr. Holshouser. Market uncertainty is the bane of the
existence of any business but particularly small and medium-
sized businesses trying to grow.
And the 17 that are mentioned don't account for the
hundreds more that are in the space, that are sitting
wondering, am I going to be covered under this even though I am
a small company? Maybe I have 20 employees.
Mr. Timmons. Businesses, no matter what size, want to
compete on an even playing field. And they have to know the
rules of the game in order to compete. This is not productive.
Mr. Kim, do you find it appropriate for this rule to
encapsulate both companies that facilitate transactions and
those that provide a native digital wallet? And what is the
CFPB's justification for such a broad scope?
Mr. Kim. I don't see the justification in the proposed rule
for combining what I think are very different functionalities
with different risk profiles. As I read the proposed rule, if
you are merely saving and passing payment credentials and
instructions but not actually touching the money in any way,
you are still covered by the rule. And then, you are treated
the same as a company that actually holds and moves the money.
So, I don't see the explanation in the rule for treating those
two very different things the same way.
Mr. Timmons. Unless you see it for what it is, which is
just a way to expand their authority and have additional scope.
Mr. Solowey, in this proposal, the CFPB includes digital
assets in their definition of funds. This committee has been
crafting legislation to address digital assets, yet it appears
the CFPB is trying to front-run Congress and expand its
authority.
What potential implications could this proposal have on the
digital asset ecosystem?
Mr. Solowey. If the CFPB were to succeed in, as you put it,
front-running Congress, it would not only add additional
regulatory uncertainty to an already-uncertain space, but one
of the specific risks would be the application of this rule to
self-hosted crypto wallets that do not exhibit the same
underlying technological structure nor the same risks as more
traditional digital payment apps.
Mr. Timmons. Mr. Solowey, this seems like a radical
expansion of the CFPB's authorities. Could the CFPB use this
novel interpretation of funds in future proposals?
Mr. Solowey. If unchecked and unchallenged, they could. In
addition, they could take away the lesson that they can
interpret and expand their authority broadly.
Mr. Timmons. Also, Mr. Solowey, given the unique nature of
some digital assets, does the CFPB provide sufficient guidance
on which digital assets they would consider to be funds and
which would be excluded?
Mr. Solowey. No, they do not. They provide little in the
way of guidance, which is to say essentially none at all. There
are very different types of digital assets out there, and the
failure to distinguish between them is one of the shortcomings
of the proposed rule.
Mr. Timmons. I am not sure what this proposed rule helps.
It literally only seeks to expand the Director's authority, and
it further complicates business' ability to compete in the U.S.
and in the global economy.
And I really think it needs to be reconsidered but, again,
as always, I imagine that our warnings will be cast aside and
it will take the Supreme Court or an election to change its
course.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Flood. The gentleman yields back.
I would like to thank our witnesses for their testimony
today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
I ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as you
are able.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:00 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
A P P E N D I X

March 13, 2024
