- HOUSING AFFORDABILITY: GOVERNMENTAL BARRIERS AND MARKET-BASED SOLUTIONS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HOUSING AFFORDABILITY: GOVERNMENTAL
BARRIERS AND MARKET-BASED SOLUTIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HOUSING
AND INSURANCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 6, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-61

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-205 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

Subcommittee on Housing and Insurance

WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio, Chairman

BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri, Ranking
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri             Member
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           RITCHIE TORRES, New York
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
MIKE LAWLER, New York                SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas, Vice       NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
Chairwoman                       STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana                BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
December 6, 2023.............................................     1
Appendix:
December 6, 2023.............................................    45

WITNESSES
Wednesday, December 6, 2023

Appleton, Seth D. President, U.S. Mortgage Insurers (USMI).......     4
Hamilton, Emily, Senior Research Fellow, Urbanity Project, the
Mercatus Center, George Mason University.......................     5
Michel, Norbert J., Vice President and Director, Center for
Monetary and Financial Alternatives, Cato Institute............     7
Royster, Arianna, President, Borger Residential, on behalf of the
National Apartment Association and the National Multifamily
Housing Council................................................     9
Yentel, Diane, President and CEO, National Low Income Housing
Coalition (NLIHC)..............................................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Appleton, Seth D.............................................    46
Hamilton, Emily..............................................    56
Michel, Norbert J............................................    59
Royster, Arianna.............................................    73
Yentel, Diane................................................    88

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Davidson, Hon. Warren:
Written statement of Americans for Prosperity................   110
Written statement of the Credit Union National Association
(CUNA) and the National Association of Federally-Insured
Credit Unions (NAFCU)......................................   112
Written statement of the National Association of Residential
Property Managers (NARPM)..................................   115
Written statement of various undersigned housing
organizations..............................................   118
Written statement of the YIMBY Coalition.....................   120
Horsford, Hon. Steven:
Poster, ``Days in Session: 118th Congress''..................   122
Various housing posters displayed during the hearing.........   123
Appleton, Seth D.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Garcia......................................   127
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   129
Hamilton, Emily:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Garcia......................................   130
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   133
Royster, Arianna:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   135
Yentel, Diane:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Garcia......................................   136
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   137

HOUSING AFFORDABILITY: GOVERNMENTAL
BARRIERS AND MARKET-BASED SOLUTIONS

----------

Wednesday, December 6, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Housing
and Insurance,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Warren Davidson
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Davidson, Posey,
Luetkemeyer, Norman, Fitzgerald, Garbarino, Flood, Lawler, De
La Cruz, Houchin; Velazquez, Tlaib, Torres, Pressley, Williams
of Georgia, Horsford, and Pettersen.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Also present: Representatives Rose and Vargas.
Chairman Davidson. The Subcommittee on Housing and
Insurance will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Housing Affordability:
Governmental Barriers and Market-Based Solutions.''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement. Today, this subcommittee will hold a hearing to
discuss the lack of affordable housing in many communities
across the country. In particular, we will examine governmental
barriers, as well as market-based solutions to bring down the
cost of housing. Americans spend more on housing than any other
household expense, historically representing 33 percent of the
family's budget . Families in many areas of the country would
love to get back to that level. The rise in both home prices
and rents has far exceeded the rate of wage growth.
In Cincinnati, Ohio, a city once considered affordable, the
median home price is now $270,000, which is approaching 4 times
the annual median household income. And such unaffordability is
spreading far beyond parts of the country known for their high
cost of living, like New York, San Francisco, and Washington,
D.C. Nationwide, median home prices are now nearly 6 times the
median household income, where historically, the advice was to
stay within 3 times of it. So, this is maybe one of the most
emblematic markers on the lack of affordable housing.
That is why the committee held multiple affordability
hearings last spring on President Biden's misguided policy of
increasing mortgage costs on creditworthy borrowers. That idea
was an insult to affordability. The House responded by passing
our Middle Class Borrower Protection Act to eliminate harmful
costs, alhough the Senate has so far failed to act.
The rental market is facing similar challenges. Renters are
now more cost-burdened than they have been in over 2 decades.
While rents have gone up in some areas by double-digit growth,
median income for renter households actually went down between
2019 and 2021. For many, housing is becoming unattainable
across the country. One in three young adults, aged 18 to 34,
still live with parents. This impacts their ability to start a
family, build wealth, and contribute more intentionally to the
national economy.
And seniors, with fixed incomes and the burden of
increasing healthcare costs, are even more cost-burdened than
ever when it comes to housing. In rural areas where land is
abundant, price pressures still exist, such as cost increases
to rent and build manufactured or modular homes.
As we confront these affordability challenges, what seems
to get left out of conversation is that all of the expansive
efforts of government have not solved this problem. In fact,
they have added to it. The solutions we need are market-based
solutions where we remove government barriers to the
construction of housing and encourage greater private sector
investment in housing.
Of course, many of my colleagues, on the other side of the
aisle in particular, will likely see things differently and
suggest that we have more government, more rules, and more
spending. Maybe, that is their measure of success. I hope we
focus on affordability. These solutions have been pushed for
years and interestingly, the same affordability they decry
continues to get worse. So not only have those policies failed,
but it seems the Biden Administration wants to avoid
congressional accountability for the failure of their policies
in oversight.
Case in point, for almost a year now, the committee has
requested that Housing and Urban Development Secretary Marcia
Fudge appear to discuss the Biden Administration's housing
affordability plan. In fact, since May, the committee has
offered at least every month that the Secretary make an
appearance here, only to have her repeatedly decline to testify
or outright refuse to respond to numerous requests. Silence is
a poor response to a crisis. The American people deserve
greater transparency in how their government operates,
especially when it has do with their ability to afford housing.
Ensuring accountability is one of the fundamental purposes of
this committee, and I hope that the Secretary will finally
agree to appear before our committee next year.
In the meantime, even without the Administration's input,
the committee will continue to explore how government policies
are contributing to the high cost of housing, and what private
sector efforts can do to address this critical issue for those
most in need.
I yield back the balance of my time. And I now recognize
the acting ranking member of the subcommittee, Ms. Pressley
from Massachusetts, for 4 minutes for an opening statement.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you.
It shouldn't be news to anyone that we are in a housing
crisis. Demand for housing is far outpacing supply. As a
result, millions of Americans in urban, suburban, and rural
neighborhoods are finding shelter to be increasingly
unaffordable.
Prospective homebuyers are facing record-high home prices,
and millions of renter households are cost-burdened, spending
elevated amounts of income on housing. Several factors
influence the supply of affordable housing. Democrats and
Republicans agree about the need to address State and local
barriers to increasing home construction, but that is not
enough.
The Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard University
testified before Congress that even if measures such as zoning
reform and land use policies are adopted, they will not be
sufficient to bring down the cost of housing levels to within
reach of the lowest-income Americans.
Central to the question of how to address the affordable
housing crisis is answering the question: Affordable to whom?
And to close the affordable housing gap for lower-income
households, there needs to be assistance for both development
and rental income over time. To put this clearly, expanded
public subsidies will be needed to increase and preserve access
to affordable housing for millions of Americans.
I believe housing is infrastructure. We must adequately
support and fund Federal programs that have been successful in
expanding affordable housing access. It is vital to continue to
strengthen and improve others. This includes federally-
subsidized housing. I also hear from my constituents in the
Massachusetts Seventh District, and across Massachusetts, that
a quarter of all residents spend half of their income or more
on housing. Boston is now the second-most expensive city in the
country to rent; the median rent for a one-bedroom apartment is
just over $3,000. In East Boston, between 2011 and 2021, Warren
Group data showed that the cost of a single-family home shot up
226 percent, the sharpest hike of any Boston neighborhood.
So, I hope that today we can have an honest conversation
about the affordable housing crisis and the extent to which
public, private, and public/private solutions are adequate to
address these challenges. And I look forward to hearing from
our witnesses today.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you.
Today, we welcome the testimony of: Mr. Seth Appleton, the
president of U.S. Mortgage Insurers; Dr. Emily Hamilton, a
senior research fellow at the Urbanity Project at the Mercatus
Center at George Mason University; Mr. Norbert Michel, the vice
president and director of the Center for Monetary and Financial
Alternatives at the Cato Institute; Ms. Arianna Royster, the
president of Borger Residential, testifying today on behalf of
the National Apartment Association and the National Multifamily
Housing Council; and Ms. Diane Yentel, the president and CEO of
the National Low Income Housing Coalition.
We thank you all for taking the time to be here. You will
each be recognized for 5 minutes for an oral summary of your
testimony. And without objection, your written statements will
be made a part of the record.
Mr. Appleton, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF SETH D. APPLETON, PRESIDENT, U.S. MORTGAGE
INSURERS (USMI)

Mr. Appleton. Thank you. Chairman Davidson, Ranking Member
Pressley, thank you for inviting me to testify today. It is
also always good to see my longtime former boss, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, on the subcommittee. Since leaving his staff, I
have served in a variety of housing policy roles, including as
Assistant Secretary of HUD, and now, as president of U.S.
Mortgage Insurers (USMI).
USMI's member companies are in the market every day
deploying private capital to provide access to low-down-payment
mortgage financing primarily to first-time and low- and
moderate-income buyers, while simultaneously protecting
taxpayers from credit risk. While we cannot solve for the
scarcity of affordable housing supply or high interest rates,
we can solve for what has been the primary impediment for many
borrowers: the need for a large cash down payment.
With private mortgage insurance (MI), homebuyers can put
down as little as 3 percent and begin to build
intergenerational wealth as homeowners. Private mortgage
insurers are critical partners to the Government-Sponsored
Enterprises (GSEs), lenders, State housing finance agencies,
and others, on initiatives to sustainably expand access to
homeownership.
Today, more than $1.5 trillion in mortgages are backed by
private MI, and while private MI provides borrowers access to
affordable credit, it also protects lenders, the GSEs, and
taxpayers from credit risk by deploying private capital in a
first-loss position. One prominent example is the way private
MI has helped de-risk the GSEs. Since they entered
conservatorship, private mortgage insurers have paid nearly $60
billion in claims. And every dollar paid by a private mortgage
insurer is a dollar that neither the GSEs nor the taxpayers who
stand behind them need to pay.
Analysis from the Urban Institute found that the loss
severity of GSE loans without private MI was 11.2 percent
higher than the severity of losses for loans with it. To that
end, if Congress takes up GSE reform, maintaining the
congressional charter provision related to private MI and
establishing standard coverage as a requirement would ensure
private capital can continue to promote safety and soundness in
the system.
Now, I would like to talk briefly about additional steps
policymakers could take to ensure that private MI can play an
even more impactful role to support affordability. While
conventional mortgages backed by private MI have been the most-
utilized option for low-down-payment borrowers since 2018,
several U.S. Government agencies directly insure or guarantee
low-down-payment loans, most notably, the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA).
USMI recognizes the targeted role of the FHA and the
presence and depth of its taxpayer-funded backstop. It is an
important complement to the work of private mortgage insurers,
particularly in serving those who may not have access to the
conventional market. But as a government agency fully backed by
taxpayers, FHA's cost of capital and required capital levels
are significantly different than those of the private sector.
Policymakers should promote a clear, consistent, and
coordinated approach to housing finance that prevents undue
competition between government programs and the private sector.
When private capital is needlessly crowded out of the
marketplace by government-backed programs, it leads to
increased risk for the taxpayer.
In the conventional market, GSE pilot programs can also
shift risks to the taxpayers that would otherwise be borne by
private capital. USMI was pleased when FHA finalized a rule on
prior approval of Enterprise products, in which members of this
committee took an interest. We believe faithful implementation
of this rule will result in proper oversight of GSE pilots in a
more transparent and objective process for approving new
products and activities.
One other area of concern is the recently-proposed Basel
III Endgame regulation. Consumer groups mortgage market
participants, and members of the committee have rightly
observed that the proposal would negatively impact the ability
of certain banks to originate and hold high loan-to-value ratio
mortgages in a portfolio.
U.S. bank capital rules should recognize the risk-
mitigating benefits of private MI, and promote a level playing
field among the GSE's, government programs, and bank portfolio
executions.
One other action Congress could take, although outside of
this committee's jurisdiction, is to restore and make permanent
the individual income tax deduction for MI premiums that was
available for tax years 2007 to 2021. USMI thanks Congressmen
Buchanan and Panetta for introducing legislation to do just
that, the Middle Class Mortgage Insurance Premium Act, of which
several members of this committee are cosponsors.
I would also be remiss if I didn't also thank the members
of the committee for their work to ensure that the SEC's
recently-finalized conflict-of-interest rule did not impair the
reinsurance transactions that USMI's members use to manage risk
in capital. We greatly appreciate your engagement on this
issue, too.
To close, USMI encourages policymakers to continue to
recognize the important role private MI plays for low-down-
payment homebuyers, the protection it affords to lenders, and
the stability it contributes to the overall mortgage finance
system.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Appleton can be found on
page 46 of the appendix.]
Chairman Davidson. Thank you, Mr. Appleton.
Dr. Hamilton, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF EMILY HAMILTON, SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW, URBANITY
PROJECT, THE MERCATUS CENTER AT GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY

Ms. Hamilton. Thank you, Chairman Davidson, Ranking Member
Pressley, and members of the subcommittee.
I am Emily Hamilton, a senior research fellow at the
Mercatus Center at George Mason University, where I am co-
director of the Urbanity Project.
Local governments have imposed numerous limits on what
kinds of housing can be built and where. Zoning rules,
including bans on multifamily housing, restrictions on
manufactured housing, and requirements for minimum lot size
limit how much housing the market can provide, and drive up the
price of housing that does get built. These rules are
contributing to deteriorating affordability, particularly for
households that rent. While the share of households that rent
has held quite steady since the 1960s, the share of income the
median renter spends on housing has increased by more than 25
percent since then.
Private sector homebuilders can play the primary role in
addressing this growing affordability problem, but only with
zoning out of the way. I will provide three examples of places
that have rolled back land use restrictions making it feasible
to build more housing at lower prices: first, minimum lot size
reduction in Houston; second, multifamily construction through
transit-oriented development in the Washington, D.C., region;
and third, legalization of accessory dwelling units (ADUs) in
California.
First, reducing minimum lot size requirements in Houston.
In 1998, Houston policymakers reduced minimum lot size
requirements from 5,000 square feet down to 1,400 square feet
within the City's Inner Loop. Houston's reform set off a boom
in small-lot, single-family construction. Based on success
within the Inner Loop, policymakers expanded this reform to
cover the entire City in 2013, and nearly 80,000 small-lot
houses have been built since then.
The median house price in Houston is lower than the
national median, despite decades of higher population and
economic growth than in the country as a whole. And that is, in
part, due to this small construction.
Second, allowing transit-oriented development in the
Washington, D.C., region. I will be the first to say that the
D.C. region has plenty of opportunities to reduce barriers to
new housing construction. However, relative to most other high-
income coastal regions, here we excel in permitting multifamily
construction, particularly along transit corridors.
Beginning in the 1960s, officials in Arlington County,
Virginia, began planning for multifamily construction in areas
that were originally developed with low-rise commercial
buildings. In part based on Arlington's success, policymakers
in Montgomery County, Maryland, and Fairfax County, Virginia,
have also embraced transit-oriented development in more limited
areas. D.C. has followed suit, allowing new neighborhoods to be
built in formerly industrial areas like NoMa and the Navy Yard.
Among the regions where many of the country's highest-
paying jobs are located, including Boston, Los Angeles, New
York, San Francisco, Seattle and Washington, Washington has the
lowest median house price. And one reason is because it permits
multifamily housing at double or more the rates of Boston, Los
Angeles, New York, and San Francisco.
And third, legalizing accessory dwelling units (ADUs) in
California. Given the growing housing supply and affordability
problems Americans are facing, State policymakers are beginning
to set limits on localities' authority to curb housing
construction. California, where these challenges are the most
dire, has led the way. The State has been particularly
successful in legalizing accessory dwelling units. These are
typically small apartments located at the site of a single-
family house. In some parts of the State, most notably Los
Angeles, ADU construction drastically accelerated following
these reforms in 2017. Today, one in four residential permits
in the City of Los Angeles is an ADU.
To wrap up, local zoning rules are a key contributor to the
U.S. housing affordability challenges. As I have shown, zoning
rules limit housing construction, especially relatively low-
cost housing construction. Examples from across the country
show that where policymakers have lowered these barriers,
housing construction has increased. Places that are more open
to housing construction see improved affordability compared to
their peers with more barriers to new housing. The private
market can improve access to housing and reduce house prices
when and where it is allowed to do so.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hamilton can be found on
page 56 of the appendix.]
Chairman Davidson. Thank you, Dr. Hamilton.
Mr. Michel, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF NORBERT J. MICHEL, VICE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR,
CENTER FOR MONETARY AND FINANCIAL ALTERNATIVES, CATO INSTITUTE

Mr. Michel. Good morning, Chairman Davidson, Ranking Member
Pressley, and members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. My name is Norbert Michel. I am
vice president and director of the Center for Monetary and
Financial Alternatives at the Cato Institute. The views that I
express here today are my own, and should not be construed as
representing any official position of the Cato Institute.
In my testimony, I argue that the best way for the Federal
Government to make housing more affordable is to reverse course
on many longstanding Federal policies. It is true that home
equity frequently represents a large portion of many Americans'
wealth, but it does not follow that Federal policy should
promote homeownership, or, especially, housing debt. In fact,
home equity depends largely on home price appreciation, an
attribute fundamentally at odds with affordable housing.
And Federal policies undoubtedly make housing, as well as
other goods and services less affordable, particularly because
they artificially boost demand in inherently supply-constrained
markets. Over approximately the last decade, home price growth
rate was nearly double the income growth rate, as through much
of the last several decades.
I would like to highlight three particular problems with
recent Federal policies. First, through only three
institutions, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the FHA, the level
of Federal involvement in housing has been escalating for
decades, along with housing costs, a correlation that is no
accident. Combined, just Fannie and Freddie stood behind more
than half of outstanding mortgage debt for decades, in some
years being responsible for a share of close to 70 percent of
the market. From 2009 to 2020, Fannie and Freddie alone had an
annual share of the mortgage-backed securities (MBS) market
averaging 70 percent. If we include Ginnie Mae securities,
backed by FHA mortgages, then, the Federal share of the MBS
market averaged 92 percent per year over that period.
Second, wasteful Federal spending since 2020 has only
worsened the effects of these demand-inducing housing policies.
Congress passed 5 massive spending bills starting in November
of 2021, totaling $7.5 trillion. This spending spree worsened
inflation and exacerbated both labor market problems and
pandemic-related supply chain problems, thus leading to
abnormally-high price increases that Americans continue to
experience today.
Third, the Federal Reserve has contributed to higher
housing costs by continuing to support the MBS market, and
therefore, fueling more leverage to buy homes. The Fed is
guilty of this policy mistake, even in a low-interest-rate
environment, when prices naturally tend to rise reflecting the
lower rates.
Prior to the 2008 crisis, the Fed rarely held any MBS on
its balance sheet, but now acts as though it can't operate
without holding massive quantities of those GSE securities.
Between 2010 and 2022, the lowest amount it held was $827
billion. From March of 2020 to March of 2022, the Fed went from
holding $1.4 trillion to $2.7 trillion. And although the amount
has declined a bit, it still stands at nearly $2.5 trillion. In
the face of rapidly-rising price levels and steadily-rising
home prices, this mortgage-backed security purchase policy made
very little sense.
More broadly, the problem with virtually all the Federal
housing policies that we have is that they were geared toward
increasing demand. And because housing markets are almost
always supply-constrained, these policies constantly put upward
pressure on both prices and rents. These policies include
everything from supporting the GSEs, to providing housing
allowances to military and other government employees, as well
as providing Section 8 vouchers. The economic principles are
exactly the same for both assistance and subsidies that pay for
housing. They place upward pressure on prices because they
increase the number of dollars chasing the same amount of
housing.
And they do nothing to address the broader economic or
social issues that affect people's ability to earn higher
income and build wealth. Nothing, that is, except put people
into a riskier economic situation. Congress should start to
pare back Federal involvement in housing markets.
And I will close with three, what I call sensible changes:
first, define and enforce the excessive use provisions that are
in Fannie and Freddie's charters; second, narrow the GSE's
focus to the financing of only primary homes, in other words,
no more vacation home financing; and third, limit the loan loss
coverage in the FHA mortgage insurance program to 50 percent,
down from 100 percent.
Thank you for your consideration. I am happy to answer any
questions that you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Michel can be found on page
59 of the appendix.]
Chairman Davidson. Thank you, Mr. Michel.
Ms. Royster, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF ARIANNA ROYSTER, PRESIDENT, BORGER RESIDENTIAL, ON
BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL APARTMENT ASSOCIATION AND THE NATIONAL
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING COUNCIL

Ms. Royster. Good morning, Chairman Davidson, Ranking
Member Pressley, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify today. My name is Arianna Royster. I
am the president of Borger Residential, a locally-owned firm
with about 10,000 multifamily units. I am pleased to testify
today on behalf of the nearly 100,000 combined members of the
National Apartment Association and the National Multifamily
Housing Council.
I would like to share with you today the housing provider
perspective on the affordability challenge, some obstacles we
face in meeting this challenge, and several potential
solutions. My written statement contains greater detail in all
of these areas.
The nation's housing affordability challenge boils down to
one simple fact: There are simply not enough rental units to
meet the growing consumer demand. Decades of undersupply have
set us back. The nation needs 4.3 million new apartment homes
by 2035. At the same time, our members report that economic and
regulatory challenges are causing them to cut back
significantly on development activities, in some cases by as
much as 50 percent. Making matters worse is the increasing
challenges in operating apartments.
Industry data shows that on average, expenses increased 9.3
percent, with insurance and labor costs as leading
contributors. Insurance is especially troubling as some
multifamily property insurance premiums soared 26 percent year
over year. Out of every dollar of rent collected, $0.93 is
allocated towards operational expenses. With such a slim
margin, rising operating costs impact the sustainability of
rental housing, while placing additional upward pressures on
rents.
The expanding Federal regulatory environment is a growing
challenge as well. State and local laws already heavily
regulate the relationship between a rental housing provider and
their residents. Adding Federal requirements increases market
uncertainty, confuses residents and housing providers, and
disincentivizes investment in housing.
For example, the White House Blueprint for a Renters Bill
of Rights, issued earlier this year, greatly concerns the
rental housing industry. While well-intentioned, it
contemplates sweeping changes to Federal housing policy,
including significant reach by the Federal Government into the
relationship between residents and housing providers, and even
rent control for property backed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
The most significant regulatory, administrative, and
political barriers to the development of new rental housing are
often imposed at the State and local levels of government.
These must be addressed to expand access to housing. We urge
Congress to consider several strategies to address the housing
affordability challenge.
First, redouble efforts to incentivize States and
localities to remove or mitigate local barriers to development
of rental housing by passing H.R. 3507, the Yes In My Back Yard
(YIMBY) Act. The industry thanks Representatives Flood and
Kilmer for their leadership on this important bill.
Second, improve the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher
Program, which is the primary method for helping 2.1 million
low-income households to pay their rent. Improvements are
needed to encourage more voluntary private sector participation
and to streamline regulation so that Federal dollars are used
effectively and efficiently.
The Choice in Affordable Housing Act, H.R. 4606, addresses
many of these issues. We appreciate the leadership of Ranking
Member Cleaver and Representative Chavez-DeRemer for their
stewardship on the bill, and we urge the committee to consider
this important legislation.
Third, Congress and the Administration must keep the
housing provider/resident relationship where it belongs, at the
State and local level. One proactive step is to support a bill
sponsored by Representative Loudermilk, H.R. 802, the Respect
State Housing Laws Act, which ends the Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security (CARES) Act's 30-day notice-to-vacate
requirement, returning the eviction policy back to State and
local levels where it belongs.
Finally, both Congress and the Administration must reject
rent control as a viable solution to housing affordability.
Decades of research and real-world case study show that rent
regulation devastates rental housing and harms affordability.
Ensuring an adequate supply of quality housing is critical to
continued economic prosperity and household stability for
Americans nationwide. Federal policymakers should focus on
sustainable solutions and avoid any new policies that further
exacerbate existing challenges and inadvertently harm consumers
in the process.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Royster can be found on page
73 of the appendix.]
Chairman Davidson. Thank you, Ms. Royster.
Ms. Yentel, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF DIANE YENTEL, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NATIONAL LOW
INCOME HOUSING COALITION (NLIHC)

Ms. Yentel. Thank you. Chairman Davidson, Ranking Member
Pressley, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
Housing costs are out of reach for too many of the lowest-
income renters in America. In your districts and in your
hometowns, rents are far higher than what the lowest-income and
most-marginalized people, including seniors, people with
disabilities, veterans, and working families can pay. As a
result, 10 million of the lowest-income renter households pay
at least half of their limited income on rent, leaving them
without the resources they need to put food on the table,
purchase needed medications, or otherwise make ends meet.
Paying so much on rent leave the lowest-income families always
one financial emergency or unexpected expense away from facing
eviction, and in worst cases, homelessness.
During the pandemic, policymakers responded to
unprecedented need with historic protections and resources that
cut evictions in half, kept millions of renters housed, and
moved many people experiencing homelessness to safety. Many of
these essential measures were bipartisan, and they
significantly reduced housing instability and unnecessary
suffering. During the pandemic, Congress showed that when it
has the will, it can effectively and meaningfully help low-
income renters and people experiencing homelessness get access
to stable housing. And Congress also showed that this can be
done in a bipartisan way.
Today, renters are struggling more than ever. Just as
pandemic protections expired and emergency resources were
depleted, renters reentered a brutal housing market with
skyrocketing rents and high inflation. As rents have increased,
so, too, has homelessness. The U.S. Government Accountability
Office (GAO) has found that a $100-per-month median increase in
rent is associated with a 9-percent increase in homelessness in
that community. Over the last few years, rents increased by
nearly $200-per-month. Even with the recent stabilization of
rent costs, the rapid inflation during 2021 and the first half
of 2022 has done significant damage to affordability,
especially for the lowest-income renters. While reducing
restrictive local zoning is necessary to ensure the market can
respond adequately to housing demand in many communities, such
improvements on their own won't make housing affordable to
extremely-low-income households.
The market, on its own, can't build and operate apartments
that are affordable for households with the lowest incomes,
because the rent such households can afford to pay doesn't
cover the cost. This is a basic market failure that requires
the Federal Government to fill in the gaps to protect tenants
and prevent homelessness. This can be done through long-term
investments to: one, make rental assistance universally
available to all eligible households in need; two, preserve and
expand the supply of homes affordable to people with the lowest
incomes; three, provide ongoing resources to prevent evictions
and homelessness; and four, strengthen and enforce rent
protections.
There are a number of bipartisan bills before this
subcommittee that would advance these goals and have a
measurable impact on the housing crisis. And I urge the
committee to advance them. Bills such as the Family Stability
and Opportunity Vouchers Act, the Eviction Crisis Act, and
other bipartisan bills to improve and streamline existing
housing programs, build housing for people with the lowest
incomes, improve oversight of Federal disaster housing
resources, and increase access to fair and affordable housing.
I also urge this committee and Congress to advance
comprehensive solutions, such as those in Representative
Waters' two essential bills: the Housing Crisis Response Act;
and the Ending Homelessness Act.
The bottom line is this: Rents have skyrocketed, eviction
filings are rising, and homelessness is increasing. The
country's lowest-income people are struggling to stay housed.
But there is a path forward. Congress can, just as it did
during the pandemic, act in a bipartisan way to save lives,
save money, and provide housing stability for many people.
Thank you, again, for the opportunity to be here today. And
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Yentel can be found on page
88 of the appendix.]
Chairman Davidson. Thank you, Ms. Yentel.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the full
Financial Services Committee, Ms. Waters from California, for 1
minute to give an opening statement.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to request the ability to take a moment of
personal privilege to acknowledge the announcement that our
Full Committee Chair, Chairman McHenry, will be retiring at the
end of this term. Thank you very much.
Again, I would like to take a moment of personal privilege
to acknowledge the announcement that Chairman McHenry will be
retiring at the end of this term. I can say that when
Republicans took control early this year, many Democrats on
this side, including me, were wondering what type of Chairman
that Mr. McHenry would be. And two words that are often used
are, ``fair'' and, ``respectful.'' He has run this committee in
a way that respects the importance of debate. Although our side
sometimes used the rules to extend that debate, he has ensured
that all Members, Democrats and Republicans, have a chance to
share their views.
And while we don't agree on every policy, or many, for that
matter, I have personally worked well with the Chair on many
issues, from passing a national Emergency Rental Assistance
Program and significant resources for Community Development
Financial Institutions (CDFIs) during the pandemic, to
reauthorizing the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act and the Export-
Import Bank. Well, eventually, we got to good on that one--he
and I were up until 3 a.m. on that bill. And many of you may
not know that we also worked closely together passing
legislation before he rose to his leadership position, to
improve crowdfunding rules and to enable angel investors to
support small businesses.
I will also say that I recognize that this decision to
retire was likely not an easy one, but the American public
appreciates the service that he and his family have given over
the past 20 years. And I hope that the chairman knows that we
still have work to do, because I know there are many other
items that are possible for us to continue to prove to the
American people that bipartisanship is still possible.
With that, I will go on to my 1 minute, if I may.
Chairman Davidson. So ordered.
Ms. Waters. Thank you.
From urban to rural America, there simply aren't enough
affordable homes. And the gap between supply and demand
continues to grow. During one of the worst housing and
homelessness crises our nation has seen, House Republicans have
put forward proposals that only exacerbate the problem. Namely,
they want to slash Federal housing programs by 30 percent and
hope the private sector fixes it.
It is also telling that despite mortgage rates nearly
quadrupling to 8 percent, and housing costs going up 47 percent
since the pandemic, this is the first hearing that we have had
that was focused on housing affordability. And so, I am hopeful
this hearing finally means that my friends on the opposite side
of the aisle are ready to join with Democrats and pass
legislation to end the affordable housing and homelessness
crisis.
Thank you. And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the ranking member.
We will now turn to Member questions, and I recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Michel, I thought your testimony highlighted the
consequences for some of our approach. We spend the money as if
tax collection doesn't matter, as if deficits don't matter, and
we rack up massive debt. We spend more money than we can
collect in taxes. We have spent more money than we can even
have people buy up in debt. So the Federal Reserve, as the
lender of last resort, has monetized that debt, not just the
$2.5 trillion of mortgage-backed securities, but they have
loaded up on Treasuries back when they were really low.
And we have shown, I think, that we can print money. That
part of modern monetary theory is true. But we have shown that
you can't necessarily buy the same amount of stuff with the
money that you have printed. This is showing up in big ways in
inflation. And the price distortions of the Federal Reserve's
ongoing buying of mortgage-backed securities kind of
exacerbates the problem of mortgage-backed securities. Also,
the discovery of the right interest rate--frankly, we are not
sure whether the rate is artificially high or artificially low
because you can't get a true discovery of the price signal.
I just wonder if you could tie together a little more the
idea that this does inflate the price? And we are seeing across
the country as much as 6 times the median income. Essentially,
two incomes is the only way you can afford to purchase a house
in this historic metric. Could you talk a little bit more about
the price discovery with the demand side policies, and doesn't
that lead to a problem where we need more supply?
Mr. Michel. You are always going to have supply constraints
in housing markets, whether it is the lack of available land
where people want to live or whether it is the fact that it
takes a little while to build a house or an apartment building.
And then, layering on top of that everything that we do from a
regulatory perspective to make it easier to get a loan.
So, there is constant pressure to lower down payment
requirements, to increase down payment assistance, and to relax
underwriting restrictions, even, to make it easier to get a
loan with a lower income than previously. All of those things
take away any incentive for a seller to lower the price. They
do the opposite. They increase an incentive to increase the
price and that is what we have been seeing for decades and
decades and decades. This has been going on for a long time.
We sort of have short memories, but this happened with FHA
in the late 1960s, we kind of took a break, and it came back
again in the 2000s, and we are doing it again.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you for that.
I will just turn to Mr. Appleton. When you look at a
situation where 82 percent of the market has an interest rate
below 5 percent, and rates are closing on 8 percent, this is a
dynamic that is affecting prices and availability and supply as
well. Historically, people want their homes built, already have
a home, they will go with new construction often and that turns
into more affordable houses. What is that dynamic like right
now in affecting affordability?
Mr. Appleton. I think, to your point, there is a lock-in
effect with those who have homes with historically-low interest
rates, coupled with the fact that we have historically
underbuilt supply since the great financial crisis,
particularly entry-level supply for a lot of the reasons
discussed earlier. That is why the private mortgage insurance
industry is dedicated to deploying private capital to help
creditworthy Americans, home-ready Americans access the
mortgage market with less than a 20-percent down payment.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you for that. And I appreciate the
interest of the private sector there. But one of the things we
are going to highlight extensively this morning is the need to
increase the supply of housing to deal with affordability
challenges. And one way we do that is through zoning reform,
and mandating high-density housing is often something HUD wants
to do; they want to reach past local.
Dr. Hamilton, how do we strike this balance between efforts
in Washington to have central planners say, no, we know right
here you need high-density housing and the ability for local
governments and local communities to make their own decisions
about their planning and zoning?
Ms. Hamilton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I do think this needs to be primarily an issue of State and
local reform. Generally, the proposals that we hear from the
Federal Government are to encourage localities to reform their
land use restrictions through Federal spending programs. But
there is a mismatch between this tool and the places where we
most need to see reform. In general, the most-exclusionary
localities are also the highest-income localities where Federal
grants may mean the least. I do think there is absolutely a
role for Members of Congress and other leaders in D.C. to use
their bully pulpits to draw attention to this matter.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you for that. My time has expired.
And I now recognize the gentlewoman from Massachusetts, Ms.
Pressley, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all
for joining us for this critical hearing.
I have been in Congress now for 5 years. The best advice I
received in freshman orientation was that in the process of
legislating and governing, it is very easy, on long days, to
forget the plot. And the plot is the people. And I do believe
that on the issue of housing, this committee has lost the plot.
It has taken us 11 months to have one hearing on housing, when
this is an issue of great consequence in determining health
outcomes, and social and economic mobility. It is a
transcendent issue. It is urban, it is rural. And when I am in
my community--in fact, I had a town hall last night, a tele
town hall, with thousands of my constituents, and housing
dominated that discussion, how housing is a fundamental human
right. But as home prices have risen and rents have
skyrocketed, it is a right that has become less and less
attainable for working families across our country, especially
in the Massachusetts Seventh District. The cost of a single-
family home is 11 times greater than it was in 1980. For a
family in the greater Boston area to purchase a single-family
home, they would need an annual income of at least $300,000.
We are pricing out an entire generation from homeownership.
This is one of the greatest challenges of our time and we have
to confront it and do so thoughtfully and with urgency.
Inclusionary zoning laws are a major contributor to our housing
shortage. For decades, inclusionary zoning laws have excluded
people of color, immigrants, people with disabilities, and low-
income families from living in certain communities.
Ms. Yentel, how has single-family zoning and the
prohibition on building multifamily housing stifled the supply
of housing and raised housing prices?
Ms. Yentel. One of the challenges in our housing market is
the supply of apartments not keeping up with the demand. So in
many communities, there are literally not enough apartments for
the people who live there or who want to move there. It is
often restrictive local zoning that is to blame. These local
laws often restrict the construction of any kind of apartments,
and especially affordable apartments, which drives up costs for
everyone, squeezing the lowest-income people the most.
And these kind of restrictive local zoning laws often
maintain and worsen segregation and racial inequities. So, the
Federal Government should do all it can to incentivize or
require States and localities to remove these restrictive local
zoning laws, so that the market can build apartments for
middle-income people.
But even when that happens, the housing will not be
affordable for extremely-low-income households. Because even if
those restrictions aren't in place, the private market, on its
own, can't build and operate apartments that are affordable to
people with extremely low incomes, because the rent that they
can pay doesn't cover the cost to operate and maintain it.
For this kind of a market failure, government intervention,
Federal Government intervention in the form of subsidies is
necessary to make those apartments affordable for people with
extremely low incomes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you.
And in that our racial wealth gap continues to grow, I am
also concerned about the reality of modern-day redlining.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to enter a 2022
article by WBUR entitled, ``Black and Hispanic People are More
Likely to be Denied Mortgage Loans in Boston,'' into the
record.
Chairman Davidson. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. Pressley. This report found that in Boston, when White
applicants applied for a mortgage, the denial rate was
approximately 5 percent. But for Black and Latinx applicants,
the denial rates were 15.3 percent, and 12.7 percent,
respectively. This is modern-day redlining, period.
Ms. Yentel, how does lending and housing discrimination
impact the homeownership opportunities for communities of
color? And what reforms do you recommend to curtail these
unfair practices?
Ms. Yentel. Discrimination in lending is against the law,
but it absolutely continues in practice. And I would share some
statistics from our colleagues at the National Fair Housing
Alliance that have shown that fair housing complaints in 2022
have been the highest on record, especially complaints around
source-of-income discrimination, or discrimination for people
experiencing domestic violence has been especially pronounced.
And even with the filing rates being as high as they are, many
more cases of discrimination go unreported, so the problem is
pronounced.
Chairman Davidson. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank the
witnesses here today. This may be one of the best panels that
we have ever had on this subject. Usually, we just hear, send
more money, and you all have brought forth some really good
suggestions for improvements.
Mr. Chairman, I do wish we could have also included the
National Association of REALTORS on this. I think they have an
impact on----
Chairman Davidson. Duly noted.
Mr. Posey. Next time, hopefully we will include them. You
all are really good and I appreciate it. Your suggestions are
very enlightening, much broader than usual.
It was especially good to hear what some of the local and
State Governments are now starting to actually do to take
action to being part of the solution to that problem. But I
wonder, if Congress could do just one thing to address the
homeless problem, what would that one thing be? And I would
like to ask each of you to answer that, starting with Mr.
Appleton.
Mr. Appleton. Yes, I think that if it could do one thing
from a financing perspective, it would be to ensure that there
is a clear, coordinated, and consistent housing financing
policy so that we are not crowding out private capital. And
then on the supply side, make sure that we are doing all we can
to encourage the construction and development of entry-level
housing. I think that is what we have been missing.
Mr. Posey. Thank you.
Ms. Hamilton. Thank you, Congressman.
I think that there is an opportunity for the Federal
Government to take a more active role in encouraging State or
local zoning reform. But we haven't yet seen proposals that are
designed right. Such programs should be designed as a race-to-
the-top program that rewards housing market outcomes, rather
than reforms on paper that may not actually lead to more
housing being built at lower prices.
Mr. Posey. Thank you.
Mr. Michel. I will take a slightly different tack there. I
think perspective is important here, and I think that the
politicians and Members of Congress have an important job in
giving that perspective.
In terms of homelessness, we have, according to HUD,
roughly .1 percent of our population that is homeless. And I
don't really consider that to be a housing crisis. You are
talking about roughly half a million people in a nation of 333
million. So that perspective, I think, is very important.
Ms. Royster. Thank you. I would say if we could pass the
Yes In My Backyard (YIMBY) Act, because, as we stated, supply
is the major issue in terms of housing affordability. I think
most of the panel has recognized that. And we need 4.3 million
new multifamily units by 2035. Just lowering the barriers for
housing development would be helpful.
Mr. Posey. Thank you.
Ms. Yentel. Thank you for the question, Mr. Posey.
Ending homelessness requires that we make homes affordable
to people with extremely low incomes. That requires subsidies
in the forms of rental assistance, expanded section 8 vouchers,
in terms of preserving and expanding our public housing
programs and other affordable housing solutions for the lowest-
income people. And creating an access to this type of
affordable housing with wraparound supportive services has been
shown again and again in the research and the evidence to be
highly effective at ending homelessness. And there are many
communities in your district and your State that have
effectively ended veterans' homelessness using this housing-
first approach.
Mr. Posey. Very good. Again, I thank the witnesses, and I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you, Mr. Posey.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the Full
Committee, Ms. Waters, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman and members, while we sit here calmly talking
about housing, I disagree with Mr. Michel. I don't know what
you call a crisis, but 75,000 people on the ground in the
greater Los Angeles area is a crisis, and 600,000 people in
this country on the ground every night is a crisis. So I don't
know how you define one, but we cannot have a hearing on
affordable housing and not really talk about homelessness.
I am so proud to say that last Congress, under my
leadership, Committee Democrats secured critical new
investments in housing through the American Rescue Plan Act,
which helped re-house people experiencing homelessness and kept
over 11 million struggling renters and homeowners housed. We
have proven time and time again that when we invest Federal
dollars into affordable housing, we can prevent homelessness
and evictions. And we can save taxpayer dollars spent over the
long run.
But despite the progress we made to promote housing
stability during the pandemic, the fact of the matter is that
housing costs are too damn high, which is pushing more and more
people out of their homes. Indeed, the Government
Accountability Office found that with every $100 increase in
median rent, there is a 9-percent increase in homelessness.
Ms. Yentel, can you explain what the research tells us
about the leading causes of homelessness? And what are some of
the examples of cost-effective solutions? And whether or not
you agree with me that there is a housing crisis?
Ms. Yentel. There is absolutely a housing crisis, Ranking
Member Waters. Thank you for the question.
And housing costs are the primary driver of homelessness.
The one thing that all people experiencing homelessness have in
common is lack of access to a safe, stable, accessible,
affordable home. And the research and the data and best
practices show again and again that the best way to address
homelessness and end homelessness is to provide access to an
affordable home with needed, supportive, wraparound services.
And there are many communities, including Los Angeles, that use
this housing-first strategy to address homelessness. In the
City of Los Angeles, every day, they are able to house about
207 people who are experiencing homelessness, and get them into
permanent housing. But on the same day in Los Angeles, about
225 people become newly homeless.
So, we are able to address individual homelessness. What
communities aren't able to do is stem the tide of new people
becoming homeless, because housing costs are so high. The
primary challenge there is housing affordability. And bills
like yours, the Housing Crisis Response Act, and the Ending
Homelessness Act, would effectively end homelessness in the
United States because they provide the level of resources and
the proven solutions needed to end homelessness.
Ms. Waters. Ms. Yentel, I understand that someone here said
that the Federal Government is spending money, but they have
not been able to solve the housing crisis. Can you explain why,
whether it is inflation, or whether it is a loss of a job, or
whether it is a COVID, or what have you, that no matter what
money you have spent, you may have to spend more because there
is a crisis?
Ms. Yentel. It is all of those things combined. And the
housing crisis impacts people differently but across-the-board,
there is a severe shortage of homes affordable and available to
the lowest-income people. Across the country, there is a
shortage of 7.3 million homes, affordable and available to
those low-income people. Another way of saying that number is
for every 10 of the lowest-income households, there are fewer
than 4 apartments that are affordable and available to them.
So, the other 6 households are living doubled- or tripled-up,
or they are paying 60, 70, or 80 percent of their very limited
income to keep a roof over their heads. And when you spend so
much of your limited income on your housing, you are always one
financial shock, whether it is a broken-down car, a sick child,
a missed day's work, or a pandemic, away from missing rent, and
facing eviction and in the worst cases----
Ms. Waters. Are we saying about this is a problem that
could occur with any American family, that this is not just
about urban living, it is not about rural, it is about
everybody?
Ms. Yentel. The shortage of housing for the lowest-income
people is pervasive and it exists in rural, urban, and suburban
communities alike.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the ranking member.
The gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, who is also
the Chair of our Subcommittee on National Security, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One of the problematic features of previous rounds of the
Basel count to requirements, in my mind, has always been the
concept of importing a regulatory framework developed by
international bureaucrats outside of the oversight of Congress
and the American public. The Basel III Endgame proposed in July
by the Federal Reserve, the OCC, and the FDIC is even more
excessive than previous versions. It diverges from Basel, not
by appropriately recognizing unique features of our American
financial system in a particular housing market, but by
ignoring what makes our country unique, and then gold-plating
what was developed by bureaucrats in Switzerland.
Mr. Appleton, would you care to comment on how the excesses
of the Basel III Endgame will impact the housing market?
Mr. Appleton. Sure. Thank you for the question.
You are exactly right that the Basel III Endgame fails to
recognize the uniqueness of our market and then adds excessive
mortgage risk weights on top of it. One of its most significant
failures is the lack of credit for private mortgage insurance,
and the strength and resilience it brings to our housing
finance system. It stands in stark contrast to FHFA's capital
rule, it is recognizing its loss-absorbing benefits.
At the end of the day, the Basel III Endgame as proposed
will limit the ability of low-down-payment consumers to access
credit from commercial banks, depriving them of options and
shifting businesses to loans directly or indirectly backed by
the Federal Government.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you for your answer.
One of the concerns I have is that there seems to be no
cost-benefit analysis that was done on this rule. If you talk
to the regulators who proposed this, they will admit that. I
assume they haven't contacted your entity, your association, to
see what kind of cost you would anticipate with the rule?
Mr. Appleton. No, and in fact, the private mortgage
insurance industry adopted a number of enhancements since the
last round of bank capital regulations were implemented, and
those regulations actually recognized private mortgage
insurance. And we have enhanced the industry with robust
capital and operational standards at the same time this new
proposal provides zero credit for it. So, it is just totally
disconnected from reality.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Yes, the rule itself is actually a bad
deal from--there are so many bad things in it, that they need
to start over with it, if they actually want to go down this
road, in my opinion. Thank you for that.
This morning, in The Wall Street, there is an article
headlined, ``San Francisco developers tackle housing woes.''
And in there, it talks about a new 71-story rental tower that
they want to build. But in here, it makes a comment, it says,
``Elsewhere, 10 office-to-residential conversion plans have
been submitted to the city.'' And later on, it says, ``Property
developers say that the plans for the new projects reflect
government efforts to reduce costs and eliminate red tape for
new construction and conversion of office buildings to
apartments.'' We talked a little bit here just a minute ago
about increased costs.
Dr. Hamilton, with this situation here, it points to the
problem that we have, I think, in building housing at a cost
that people can afford, and we have rules and regulations that
in this situation are either being changed or waived to enable
people to do this. Can you see this as a benefit, and can you
give me an example of the percentage of rules and regulations
as it is of the rent, or the cost, I guess I should say, the
cost of rent or housing projects?
Ms. Hamilton. Thank you, Congressman. That is a fantastic
question. And, unfortunately----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I only ask fantastic questions.
Ms. Hamilton. Access to data on the specifics of local
land-use regulations has been a real barrier to economists
producing solid estimates on the portion of housing costs that
are due to zoning and other permitting process barriers. But
one estimate that is now about 20-years-old finds that in the
most expensive metros in the U.S., about half the cost of
housing is due to land-use regulations.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Fifty percent of the cost. Now, each one
of you this morning, I think, talked about rules and
regulations and zoning as a cost, but you are quantifying it
that about half the cost of a home and/or an apartment is 50
percent due to rules, regulations, and zoning requirements?
Ms. Hamilton. That is what one study from, again, about 20
years ago found for the San Francisco Bay Area, the most
regulated and----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. That is a 20-year-old figure.
Ms. Hamilton. That is right. And we know----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Oh, my gosh.
Ms. Hamilton. ----it has gotten much worse.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Can somebody give me a figure or base of
what percentage of an individual--the average income in this
country, what percentage of that is used for housing? What
percentage of an individual's income, for an average individual
making whatever it is in this country, average rate, would go
to housing?
Ms. Yentel. Experts would say that no more than 30 percent
of income should go towards housing costs.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I am not asking how much should go; I am
asking what the figure is today? Does anybody know what the
figure is today?
Mr. Michel. It is more than half.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. More than half. So today, the average
individual is paying more than half of their income for
housing. Is that what you just said? Okay. And we, in fact,
have a rule here, where the rules and regulations cost almost
half of what the cost is, so there is our problem.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlewoman from New York, Ms. Velazquez, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Royster, affordable housing communities across the
country have faced a volatile insurance market for many years
now. There is growing concern that insurance carriers are
walking away from affordable and middle-income housing because
liability, umbrella, and other lines of coverage have become
out of reach for many property owners. Can you talk about what
Congress can do to address this, and how we can ensure that
affordable housing properties and renters are not being
unfairly treated in the insurance markets?
Ms. Royster. Thank you, Congresswoman Velazquez. We are
looking at recent data that shows property owners faced 15
percent in liability insurance increases, and 17 percent in
umbrella coverage year over year, but it is also not uncommon
to see triple-digit increases, especially in affordable housing
communities. This was information that was reported by our
members.
But I will speak to you on my personal experience in terms
of the rising insurance costs. We manage a number of
properties. The majority of our portfolio is in Washington,
D.C., and first, the costs have gone up for us from 15 to 32
percent. But more important to note is that there are only a
few carriers that will actually write policies in Washington,
D.C., which makes the cost unaffordable. I will give you an
example of the National Church Residences, that have seen their
property insurance liability increase over 400 percent.
Ms. Velazquez. Do you have any advice in terms of what
Congress can do to address this issue?
Ms. Royster. I think Congress should use its regulatory and
oversight authority to monitor activity in the insurance
market, while looking for ways to drive increased capacity in
the insurance and reinsurance markets to bring the cost down.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Ms. Yentel, as you know, the housing affordability crisis
requires Federal action, such as the collection of data.
Unfortunately, there are significant data gaps impacting Puerto
Rico, where the housing affordability crisis persists for over
3.2 million American citizens.
I recently urged HUD to include Puerto Rico in the American
Housing Survey (AHS), which provides critical information about
the nation's housing stock. Can you elaborate on how including
Puerto Rico in this survey will help offset the housing
challenges, including the lack of affordable housing?
Ms. Yentel. The American Housing Survey is the only
national representative survey that gives us information, not
only on housing affordability, but on the quality of our
nation's housing stock. The sample size for the AHS is small,
so we are only able to get specific information on the 15
largest metro areas and some States. It would certainly be
useful if we were able to get information on Puerto Rico's
housing stock quality, and having the AHS increase its sample
size in order to get that information is important, but HUD
would need additional resources in order to do that.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Ms. Yentel, it is no secret that low- and moderate-income
(LMI) communities and communities of color are often the most
impacted by devastating flooding and other climate-related
events. We have seen this community's residence of affordable
housing or more rental properties can be disproportionately
impacted as Federal investment is often directed elsewhere. How
can we leverage Federal resources and tools to drive better
disaster and mitigation efforts toward the most vulnerable?
Ms. Yentel. Lower-income communities and communities of
color are often located in lower-lying areas, and they are also
communities that historically haven't been given the level of
infrastructure dollars needed in order to protect people from
the subsequent flooding. This creates a vicious cycle of not
only keeping people in harm's way, but increased costs then
when it comes to emergency response and rebuilding.
Codifying the Community Development Block Grant Disaster
Recovery (CDBG-DR) program would be an important step in
ensuring that people in these communities get the resources
that they need, and that those precious few Federal resources
for rebuilding and, in some cases, resilience, are targeted to
the communities with the greatest----
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you.
The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Norman, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank all the panelists for being here today.
We talk about affordable, we talk about housing shortage,
apartment shortage; this isn't that complicated. When you have
anywhere from 23 to 28 percent regulatory and government
compliance costs going into the cost of a $400,000 house, that
is $92,000 to $112,000 that the homeowners are having to bear.
When you see what I saw happen to the manufactured
housing--you have bureaucrats trying to tell them how to make a
home more energy-efficient, and mandating the ceiling joist,
mandating the duct blaster test, and mandating carbon emissions
from a manufactured house that is really one of the few
affordable homes that can be built.
When you see credit reports, there is an attempt to take
away medical debt that is unpaid. It is insane. And it is very
simple: You get government out of the way, you get Federal
regulations out of the way, and politicians--I recently used a
football analogy--I had a talk show host who was lecturing Nick
Saban over what he needed to do to improve his team. I thought,
that is how politicians are; a lot of times, we don't know what
we don't know, but you get politicians out of the way, this has
to be settled on the local level. If you want to increase
demand, well, increase housing, make it so the eviction notices
can go out. You have to get paid back. Somebody pays for this.
The other thing--we talk about homelessness, but what about
the 8 million people who are coming across this border? Where
are they going to go? New York City is finding out. What are
they going to do with them? So, get government out, stop this
flow of people into this country who have not paid into the
system, and get the regulators out of the way. You go to your
experts. The person calling into Nick Saban, I think, is not
the best one to tell him what to do. He is in it. So, go to the
experts who actually do it and have their money invested.
Ms. Yentel, let me ask you, since you you mentioned making
housing affordable, two things: first, define what,
``affordable,'' is; and second, you call for more rental
assistance, more Federal subsidies, but does the Federal
Government set the gold standard for financial accountability?
Ms. Yentel. Affordability means a household doesn't pay
more than 30 percent of their income towards rent.
Mr. Norman. No, no, no. Give me, ``affordable.'' What is an
affordable house, or an apartment? Give me what, in your
terms--because I don't know what that is.
Ms. Yentel. Oh, I just did. It depends on what a person's
income is. Different people can afford different amounts
towards their housing costs, but nobody should pay more than 30
percent of their income towards rent or towards their mortgage.
Mr. Norman. And the Federal Government is the answer for
that?
Ms. Yentel. For extremely-low-income households. When I am
talking about households with extremely low incomes, I am
talking about, in your district, for example, a single person
who has a disability or is a senior, and is on an extremely
limited fixed income of about $12,000 to $15,000 a year.
Mr. Norman. I am running out of time. Get to the----
Ms. Yentel. Or I am talking about a working family with a
combined household income of no more than $25,000. For these
households, the private market on its own--and you can ask any
housing developer, whether they are for-profit or nonprofit,
they will agree that they can't, on their own, make housing
affordable----
Mr. Norman. Okay. So, you make it affordable by----
Ms. Yentel. ----for households with such low incomes.
Mr. Norman. ----by having subsidies from the Federal
Government. Is that what you are saying?
Ms. Yentel. Suppliers and intervention from the Federal
Government given the scale----
Mr. Norman. And where is that money coming from?
Ms. Yentel. ----in the form of subsidies.
Mr. Norman. And where is that money coming from?
Ms. Yentel. Outlays for housing assistance are about 1
percent higher than----
Mr. Norman. Yes, but where is the money coming from, on
subsidies that you say the Federal Government--which I think is
in the red to a tune of $36 trillion; where is it coming from?
Ms. Yentel. I would say 1 percent of outlays----
Mr. Norman. Okay, you are using percentages, but you are
not answering my question. You really aren't. Just tell me, it
is coming from the taxpayers.
Ms. Yentel. Sure, we can absolutely increase taxes for
corporations and for high-income earners in order to afford to
have people have their----
Mr. Norman. That is a utopian dream that you are talking
about.
Ms. Yentel. ----most basic need met, to keep a roof over
their head.
Mr. Norman. You are saying to put this country further--
hold on. Reclaiming my time, because I have 10 seconds left,
putting this country further in debt on the number-one
indicator of the economy, housing, is--the more Federal
Government, that is the opposite that you want to do in the
real world. I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Torres, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Torres. I am just curious, Ms. Yentel, do you think
providing every child with an education is a utopian dream?
Ms. Yentel. I don't.
Mr. Torres. Do you believe providing every child with
housing is a utopian dream?
Ms. Yentel. No.
Mr. Torres. And do you believe, like education, no one can
be reasonably expected to succeed in America without access to
safe and affordable housing?
Ms. Yentel. Absolutely, and the research shows it again and
again.
Mr. Torres. And on a personal level, I would not be in
Congress were it not for public housing and the stability and
opportunity it gave me and my family. My own life journey, from
public housing in the Bronx to the House of Representatives in
Washington, D.C., is a product of public investment in
affordable housing.
My Republican colleagues would have you believe that there
is excessive government intervention in housing. Now, I will
concede that when it comes to land use, there is certainly
exclusionary zoning, which has been a barrier to addressing the
affordability crisis. But when it comes to funding, the
Republican talking point could not be farther from the truth.
The problem is not too much government investment in affordable
housing; the problem is too little investment. There is
insufficient housing supply and insufficient housing subsidy.
What is the extent of the gap between the demand for
affordable housing and the supply of affordable housing in the
United States?
Ms. Yentel. For households with the lowest incomes, there
is a shortage of 7.3 million homes affordable and available to
them. Another way of saying that same number is that for every
10 of the lowest-income households throughout the country,
there are fewer than 4 apartments that are affordable to them.
And if I could just say that we talk a lot about the cost
of providing housing to be affordable for extremely-low-income
people, but we don't talk enough about the costs of inaction.
It is not like if we are not providing housing for extremely-
low-income people, we are not paying. We are. We pay, as a
country, to allow homelessness and housing poverty to persist,
and we pay for it through lowered educational attainment,
through health challenges for children and families and
increased health costs as a result, and for families unable to
obtain and retain well-paying jobs.
There is a study from Children's HealthWatch that shows,
over the next 10 years, we will pay $111 billion in avoidable
healthcare costs because we allow homelessness to continue to
persist. So, we are paying one way or another. I think a better
use of funds is to invest in solutions to keep homes affordable
for the lowest-income people.
Mr. Torres. So, homelessness and housing insecurity are not
only bad morals; it is bad economics.
Ms. Yentel. That is right.
Mr. Torres. During COVID, we saw essential workers, many of
them earning minimum wage, put their lives at risk during the
peak of the pandemic so that the white collar workforce could
safely shelter in place and work from home. Is there a single
county in America where an essential worker earning minimum
wage could afford a one bedroom apartment?
Ms. Yentel. There are very, very few communities throughout
the country where that is possible.
Mr. Torres. What about a two-bedroom apartment?
Ms. Yentel. There is no community where that is possible.
Mr. Torres. So out of 3,000 counties, there is not a single
area in which an essential worker earning minimum wage could
afford a two-bedroom apartment?
Ms. Yentel. That is right.
Mr. Torres. And do you believe it is wise for Congress to
stand by idly while America becomes dangerously unaffordable to
its essential workforce?
Ms. Yentel. No. Housing is a basic human need, and as you
said very well, people can't succeed in other areas of their
lives if they don't have a home to go to at the end of the day.
Children need a place to study. People need a place to unwind.
All of us know the value of a home in our lives, and we need to
provide that for our essential workers, and for everyone with
extremely low incomes.
Mr. Torres. I do have a number of colleagues who seem
intent on substituting free market fundamentalism for evidence-
based policy. Is there any evidence at all that the free
market, if left to its own devices, unaided by any government
subsidy, can magically create the affordable housing that we
need at the levels of affordability that we need?
Ms. Yentel. No. In fact, the evidence very clearly says the
opposite.
Mr. Torres. Suppose there was no government intervention in
the form of public housing. Would there be less or more housing
insecurity and homelessness?
Ms. Yentel. More.
Mr. Torres. What if there was no Section 8?
Ms. Yentel. More.
Mr. Torres. What if there was no Low-Income Housing Tax
Credit (LIHTC) or tax-exempt bond financing or Community
Reinvestment Act (CRA) credits?
Ms. Yentel. All of these are essential ways that the
Federal Government provides resources to ensure that some
people with extremely low incomes can stay stably housed. But
the funding is far under the need. The Federal Government only
provides funding for one in every four households who need
housing assistance and is eligible to receive it. So, we have
what is essentially a housing lottery system in our country
where only the lucky 20 percent gets the help that they need.
Mr. Torres. Thank you.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Fitzgerald, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to take the questioning in a different direction.
Last month, I sent a letter with 16 of my colleagues on this
committee to the banking regulators to raise concerns about the
Basel Endgame proposed high-risk rates for residential
mortgages. One of the major issues that the proposal removes is
the ability of banks to use mortgage insurance to reduce the
risk rates for low-down-payment mortgages, a departure from
existing bank capital rules and the Federal Housing Finance
Agency's (FHFA's) capital framework for the GSEs.
Mr. Appleton, you mentioned in your testimony that private
mortgage insurance has been around for 66 years. What the
committee might not know is that this industry actually was
created in, and has deep roots in my home State of Wisconsin.
Why is it important for bank capital rules to recognize private
mortgage insurance?
Mr. Appleton. Thank you for the question, Congressman
Fitzgerald, and thank you for sending that letter.
By failing to recognize private mortgage insurance in the
Endgame proposal, the bank regulators are making it more
difficult for banks to serve low-down-payment borrowers, to
service mortgages, or even to finance warehouse lines of credit
for independent mortgage banks, limiting consumer choice and
access to credit. The current rules, as you mentioned, were
written before the mortgage insurance industry adopted
significant enhancements to its capital and operational
standards, allowing for a prudently-underwritten mortgage with
mortgage insurance to receive a 50-percent risk rate. So, the
new proposal that totally ignores this reality should be
rescinded.
For example, as of the third quarter, the industry already
holds 169 percent of its required capital, and to your point,
FHFA's own capital rule recognizes the risk and capital
benefits of mortgage insurance. So, if anything, regulators
should be recognizing the strength and resiliency of private
mortgage insurance more not less.
Mr. Fitzgerald. We have a situation--and this has come up
in the committee before--where you have a lot of young adults,
those who have attended school, put themselves in a position,
many of them couples who find themselves in a situation of
being unable to raise the money for a down payment on a minimal
house, which is out of control as a result of the inflation
that we have been experiencing across the nation. And they are
just unable to come up with the money to make that down
payment.
The builders aren't incentivized to create enough starter
homes. It doesn't exist. There are not two Americas out there.
I wish my colleague from New York was still here. He would have
everyone think that there's simply this one take on what is
going on across the nation. It is happening everywhere right
now.
Ms. Hamilton, you have specifically discussed the need for
housing with two to four units per building, which is becoming
the norm right now for anyone that is developing anything close
to a subdivision anywhere in America. And looking at the amount
of housing that gets built in total right now, about 4 units
per 100 people is being permitted across the country as a
whole. It is the only option left for municipalities who know
that once they put the infrastructure in the ground, the costs
associated with any subdivision are going to be completely out
of control.
We are talking about modest communities that no longer can
put a subdivision in place with housing that is any less than
$500,000 per unit, which is clearly out of the reach of almost
all Americans who find themselves trying to get their first
mortgage. What is the reason for the drop in these types of
housing, and is there any type of Federal solution that could
help with that?
Ms. Hamilton. Thank you, Congressman. You are absolutely
right that permitting rates are way down from what we have seen
relative to times when housing was more broadly affordable. And
this is due, both to local zoning rules, the rules on the books
that limit how much housing can be built and limit the
availability of relatively low-cost types of housing, such as
duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, or small lot development, and
it is also due to local permitting processes that really
lengthen the time and add costs to the building of any type of
new housing. I do think this needs to be addressed primarily at
the State and local levels, although efforts to encourage this
reform from Congress are more than welcome.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you.
The gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Horsford, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, we are 122
days, nearly a year into the 118th Congress, and we are finally
having our first hearing on housing affordability.
Congratulations.
Chairman Davidson. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Horsford. No, I will not, because during the previous
Chair's leadership, Chair Waters, Committee Democrats held 55
hearings on housing-related issues last Congress. That means I
would have had 275 minutes to talk about the issue that is of
prime importance to my constituents. I only have 5 minutes, so,
no, I will not yield.
We are in the middle of a housing affordability crisis that
is crippling our country. There have been shocking 47-percent
increases in national home prices since May of 2020, and that
has driven many Americans even further away from the dream of
homeownership. Far too many households are forced to continue
to rent, and they face unique challenges of their own as our
limited supply of housing simply cannot meet the ever-growing
demand.
The National Multifamily Housing Council estimates that we
need to add nearly 3.7 million new apartment units a year to
keep up with the demand--that is only to keep up. Even at that
pace, we won't even begin to deal with the estimated 14 million
unit shortfall that renters face today. For the 21.6 million
American households that spend over 30 percent of their monthly
income on rent, they simply can't afford to wait any longer, so
this hearing is long overdue.
My district in Las Vegas has been one of the hottest real
estate markets in the country since the pandemic. And whether a
family is looking to purchase a home or simply rent month-to-
month, they are seeing their costs increase through the roof.
As you can see, since 2015, Zillow data shows that there has
been a drastic 75-percent jump in the typical rent in Las
Vegas, to over $1,800 a month. And with an average renter's
household income at $51,000, the rent affordable at that income
is well short of that, $1,286.
When we look at the most-vulnerable and lowest-income
renters, the statistics from the National Low Income Housing
Coalition become even more alarming, with a staggering 90
percent of these households facing a difficult cost burden.
This should come as no surprise when home sales volume remains
depressed, and the average household spends a burden of 29.6
percent of their income on mortgage or rent.
And we can see that most of these low-income households are
severely cost-burdened, which means that they are spending over
half of their income each month just to remain housed. These
families are trapped, paying an outsized portion of their
income on rent, which limits their ability to build up enough
savings for a down payment, and then further perpetuates the
racial homeownership gap.
And yet, thus far, this subcommittee has been uninterested
in advancing any meaningful housing policy during the first
session of this Congress. I call foul. An all-of-the-government
approach is required to address this crisis, and we need to
look both at how to incentivize increases in our housing stock,
and also how to ensure the homes we do have are sold to real
families, households that will form the backbone of our
economy.
That is why earlier this year, I introduced the Housing
Oversight and Mitigating Exploitation (HOME) Act, to give HUD
the data necessary to understand the severity of our housing
shortage, and to protect everyday Nevadans from being exploited
by out-of-State corporate speculators. These massive
corporations have been able to pay cash during this period of
high interest rates, which has allowed them to purchase almost
a third of the homes sold in certain ZIP Codes, one in three.
And it is unlikely that the homes that they purchase will ever
appear on the housing market again.
So, I am deeply concerned by reports, corroborated by
Redfin data, that these corporate speculators predominantly
target neighborhoods of color and single mothers. The HOME Act
would give HUD the tools necessary to investigate these
allegations. Not only will HUD be able to collect the necessary
data on who these speculators are targeting, but it also gives
HUD the tools necessary to ensure that we have a level playing
field.
I know my time is concluding, and I want the American
people to know that we only get 5 minutes. And this is the
first hearing. Had we had 55 hearings, I would have had 295
minutes to make my case, but because House Republicans don't
want to talk about this issue, we don't have the time to
advance the policies that matter to the American people. I am
mad, I am pissed, the American people are pissed, and my
constituents are pissed that we don't make housing more of a
priority in this Congress. I will yield back now.
Chairman Davidson. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman's time has thoroughly expired.
And the gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There is no sugar-coating the fact that our nation is
facing a housing shortage, with housing affordability at
historic lows for both homeowners and renters. My district in
Long Island is no different. Just a little over a month ago,
the median home price in Suffolk County reached a record
$600,000, an increase of over 9 percent compared to a year ago.
When combined with the fact that the average interest rate
for a 30-year loan is still well above the sub-4 percent rate
that homebuyers were used to seeing just a couple of years ago,
it is no surprise that many first-time homebuyers struggle to
enter the market. Additionally, for many people, saving a down
payment of 20 percent can also be a significant barrier to
buying a home. I couldn't even do it, and now, in Long Island,
it is about $120,000.
Given these roadblocks, there are a number of market-based
solutions that can play an important role in helping first-time
homebuyers. One of those solutions is private mortgage
insurance--which I took advantage of when I bought my house--
which has put homeownership in reach for millions of qualified
borrowers for 60 years.
Mr. Appleton, can you explain how private mortgage
insurance benefits homebuyers, taxpayers, and investors?
Mr. Appleton. Thank you for your question, Congressman.
Private MI benefits homebuyers by eliminating the need to
come to the closing table with tens, or even hundreds of
thousands of dollars in cash for a down payment, it benefits
taxpayers by standing in a first-loss position ahead of the
GSEs and the taxpayers who ultimately stand behind them, and it
benefits investors by promoting safety and soundness in the
overall housing finance system.
Mr. Garbarino. Are there government barriers to private
mortgage insurance serving a broader role in the market?
Mr. Appleton. I think that is a great question. First,
establishing a clear, consistent, and coordinated housing
finance policy would ensure that private capital is not
unnecessarily crowded out of the marketplace by programs fully
backed by taxpayers. Second, we should ensure faithful
implementation of the prior approval of Enterprise products
rule to prevent the GSEs from engaging in inappropriate pilot
programs that would cause the Enterprises to participate in the
primary market, compete with the private sector, and shift
risks to taxpayers.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that, and as I said, if it
wasn't for private mortgage insurance (PMI), I wouldn't be able
to own my home now; I wouldn't have been able to buy it, and I
wouldn't be able to afford the increases that we have seen over
the past couple of years, so I thank PMI for its existence.
Mr. Michel, while we have discussed one longstanding option
for homebuyers to take advantage of in order to make
homeownership more obtainable, there are still a number of
other regulatory barriers that hamper the private market.
Reducing the number and scope of some of these regulations
could do a lot to lower costs of homeownership in the United
States.
However, given how highly regulated the housing mortgage
markets are, I want to focus for 1 minute on the flip side of
the issue: What proactive actions could the FHFA take in order
to pave the way for more private-market innovation and options
for consumers as we seek to reduce the cost of home buying and
homeownership, not just for Long Islanders, but for people all
over the country, whether we are talking about the construction
space or even the mortgage insurance space, do you agree that
additional innovation and competition and more choices would
benefit consumers?
Mr. Michel. Yes, they would, and you are not going to have
that unless or if you keep crowding out--I don't mean you--if
the government keeps crowding out the private sector. Reducing
conforming loan limits is one way. The original charters of
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have an excessive-use provision; it
was never meant to replace the entire market, it was meant to
supplement the market. And it hasn't ever done that. It has
always increased until it has dominated. That provision has
never been defined, and it has never been enforced, so those
would be two ways right off the top.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that. I was in private
practice, and I did a lot of closings, and just the
conventional home mortgage market as well as PMI really helped
people with homeownership. I saw the problems under certain
issues--if you got an FHA loan, it really costs a lot to a
consumer, and PMI and home mortgage really do work with
consumers, and I think help them get the best deal and help
them not just buy a home, but keep it.
I just want to make a quick statement in support of the
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit before I close out today. I would
like to raise one other solution that is outside this
committee's jurisdiction, but would help address our nation's
housing shortage, the affordable housing tax credit.
Since President Reagan, the housing credit has been a
successful public/private partnership that leverages the
capital we need to develop more affordable homes for seniors,
disabled veterans, and working people. And nowhere is this more
evident than in Long Island, where the demand for affordable
housing aggressively outstrips supply. That is why we need to
expand this credit by enacting H.R. 3238, the Affordable
Housing Credit Improvement Act, on a bipartisan basis.
And I would like to yield to the Chair my remaining time.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman
I will point out this is our fourth hearing on housing, and
while that doesn't quite keep pace with 13, I will note that 13
didn't fix the housing crisis
The gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms. Pettersen, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for your time and expertise. I really
appreciate being here and having the opportunity to hear from
all of you
I represent Colorado's Seventh Congressional District. I am
very lucky to have been born in Colorado, and what we have seen
in the time that I have lived there--it is actually my
birthday, so that's 42 years of living in Colorado--we have
seen an exponential increase in the value of homes, and when I
think back to when I bought my first house, housing has tripled
in just a short amount of time
It is really the perfect storm, and I know we have talked
at length about this today, but when we think about the housing
crisis in 2008, that took out many homebuilders, and we still
haven't recovered from that. We also saw our economy expand
with the investments to keep our economy afloat during the
pandemic, but unfortunately, our supply chain was decimated as
well as with the increase with our economy booming, with the
workforce shortage across industries, it has significantly
impacted the housing market.
One of the very easy ways that we could help address that
issue is actually coming together on legal pathways for people
to work here, and it is what I hear from the construction
industry constantly, but this is something that really hits
home for me. I think that far too often, people in Congress
haven't had the personal experiences with which so many people
are struggling.
I grew up in a home where my dad lost his house and faced
homelessness. My mom was one of the very lucky people who
actually qualified for Section 8, which saved her life. I have
also seen family members who were forced to live on the streets
because there was a lack of access to housing and substance use
disorder treatment.
And so, when we talk about, if we don't pay the upfront
costs of actually investing in this, it comes on the back end
tenfold to our local, State, and Federal Government dollars. I
want to thank you for highlighting that, Ms. Yentel, and I want
to just bring it back to specific policy ideas, since we have
limited time.
The YIMBY Act, Ms. Royster, thank you for calling that out
as an important first step forward on actually having our local
and State Governments look at their restrictive land-use
policies, but what in addition to this should we be doing? We
talked about restricting their ability to actually have these
policies at the local level, trying to bring some carrots to
incentivize them to move in the right direction, but for all of
you, what can we do at the Federal level beyond just general
ideas to help support ones that use local investments?
Ms. Yentel. I am glad to give the first response to that.
Happy birthday, by the way. We support the YIMBY Act, it is an
important piece of legislation, and we think it should be
enacted. We also think we can go further on requiring local
communities to do more to remove restrictive local zoning, and
we can do that by tying those requirements, or incentives, to
Federal dollars. And we should look outside of the housing
dollars to big infrastructure dollars, the kind of dollars that
more-exclusive communities want to receive, and would be more
willing to make changes in order to do so.
But also, we need to expand subsidies to make homes
affordable to extremely-low-income people, and we should do
that through expanding rental assistance to make it universally
available to all households in need. We should preserve and
build more housing that is affordable to extremely-low-income
people through programs like the National Housing Trust Fund.
We should continue highly-effective programs, like Emergency
Rental Assistance, to prevent evictions, prevent homelessness,
and we should put forward and then enforce robust tenant
protections to keep people stably housed.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you
I know we don't have a lot of time to get into this, Mr.
Appleton, but I wanted to ask you about what you all are doing
to make sure that people know, and that you are advertising
access to loans without a 20-percent down payment that is
really restrictive while people are actually saving to make
that investment they are once again far out of reach of being
able to qualify for.
Mr. Appleton. Yes, thank you for that. It would take the
average household, earning the national median income, 35 years
to save the down payment for the average, national median-
priced house. So, we were active in local communities with
homebuyer education resources, spreading the word that you do
not need 20 percent to become a homeowner right now
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you, I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Lawler, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Apparently, my colleagues seem to think that the number of
hearings we hold translates to actual legislation passing. In
the last Congress, there were roughly 55 hearings on housing
and housing affordability, and yet, zero bills were enacted
into law under Build Back Better, or the Inflation Reduction
Act that the former Chair of this committee was pushing for;
these bills were so bad that even the Biden Administration
rejected them.
And yet now, we are dealing with a 20-year record high on
mortgage interest rates. New York City has 50,000 vacant units,
in part, because of its draconian rent control laws, and the
laws passed by the State legislature that require these units
to be brought up to code. Taxes go up, energy costs go up, and
yet, they are arbitrarily capped at what they can charge for
rent. So, what happens? They choose to leave it vacant, and
take the tax write-off instead. Bang up job. Good policies.
These are really working out well.
We have 6 million units underbuilt. How do you meet the
supply need when the cost of living is through the roof, the
cost of doing business is through the roof, the cost of goods
and cost of construction, and the cost of energy, all driven by
horrifically bad policies when Democrats had complete control
of Washington, complete control in Albany, complete control in
New York City. And yet, they are shocked that we have a housing
crisis and that we have an affordability crisis.
Maybe, we should consider changing our policies. Maybe, we
should look at how to reduce the cost of living; reduce the
cost of construction; reduce the cost of doing business. I
don't know, maybe actually increase domestic production of
energy. That might help. No, why would we think about this
logically? So, when I hear my colleagues complain about the
number of hearings, my God, stop worrying about the number of
hearings and start worrying about the actual damn laws that we
are passing. That is a better idea.
Housing affordability is a persistent challenge. With
mortgage rates at multi-decade highs, limited supply, and
continued supply-chain and construction issues, for many, it is
the most difficult time to purchase a home in a generation.
The market is further complicated by the extraordinary
circumstances of many homeowners unable to sell their home for
fear of losing their low-fixed-rate mortgages obtained prior to
the rapid increase in interest rates
These among other factors have forced many potential
homebuyers into the rental market, driving up rental demand and
prices with it. In Rockland and Westchester Counties in my
district, according to the National Association of REALTORS,
the monthly cost of a mortgage is $1,000 more today than it was
last year. And in Putnam and Dutchess Counties, it is at least
$800 more per month.
In both instances, these are additional housing costs of
almost $10,000 or more a year. For many families, it is totally
unsustainable.
This topic is critical, which is why last month, I held a
comprehensive roundtable discussion in my district on the
housing issues that have significantly affected the local area,
and which included a diverse group of stakeholders, elected
officials, government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and
key figures from the real estate industry, including developers
and REALTORS.
While there are some existing efforts that should be
improved and expanded upon such as the Affordable Housing Tax
Credit, we need to be working to remove the governmental
barriers that drag approvals out for years, drive up costs, and
disincentivize the investment and participation our
constituents need. It has been mentioned a number of times the
impact of regulation on the cost of housing, and the
disincentivization of building, and the flawed attempts of
government to intervene on this topic.
This has been at the forefront of New York in the last few
years, where we have seen a blend of heavy regulation with ham-
fisted attempts by the Governor to circumvent regulation with
unrealistic arbitrary mandates to build housing in areas that
don't have the requisite situation to do so, including a lack
of infrastructure. We have to look at this holistically, and we
need to change course. These policies are not working.
With that, I yield back
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlewoman from Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you all so much for being here. We already
know the average renter now pays over 30 percent of their
income on rent. I know in the Detroit metro area, in my
communities, there are 3 extremely-low-income renter households
for each unit that is both available and affordable.
So, the housing crisis is real. That is something, I guess,
we can all agree on. But what I find very, very questionable is
the assertions motivating today's hearing. It strikes me as odd
to hear criticism of, ``An outsized government presence
distorting housing markets by supporting low-income families,
when the billions of dollars in benefits provided by mortgage
interest deduction to wealthy households go unquestioned
completely.''
Moreover, before government intervention, many of the
foundational elements of our housing finance system, like the
secondary mortgage market, simply didn't exist.
Ms. Yentel, when did the long-term fixed-rate mortgage
option become widespread? Who created it?
Ms. Yentel. It was under the New Deal that we started to
have longer-term mortgage rates of----
Ms. Tlaib. That is right.
Ms. Yentel. ----15 years, and then it increased steadily.
Ms. Tlaib. That is right. Before the New Deal era reforms,
our typical mortgage had variable rates and came due in 3 to 5
years. Fixed-rate long-term mortgages were virtually
nonexistent. This is just one of many examples demonstrating
the limits of what we call private market solutions.
Ms. Yentel, even if we eliminated all regulatory barriers
today holding back our housing markets, would market-rate
housing be affordable for all families?
Ms. Yentel. No, it wouldn't be affordable for extremely-
low-income households.
Ms. Tlaib. As you stated in your testimony, our Federal
subsidies are, ``necessary to fill the gap between what the
lowest-income people can afford to pay and the cost of
developing operational rental homes.'' Why?
Ms. Yentel. Because private operators can't build and
operate housing on their own without subsidies, and make those
homes affordable for the lowest-income people. We have heard
today several Republicans talk about the importance of the Low-
Income Housing Tax Credit program, which is an important
program that can be further improved to serve the lowest-income
people. But I believe that is a helpful recognition that
Federal subsidies and intervention are necessary to make homes
affordable.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes, I believe government interventions are not
without any shortcomings. I agree on that. But historically,
our housing policies, in particular, have been undermined by
racial exclusion, and bias, really, towards working families in
my community. And some Federal policies, like the Faircloth
Amendment, for instance, are an obstacle to building more
affordable housing; we know this. But when Congress provides
housing assistance to only one out of four eligible households,
while saddling public housing with a $70-billion capital
backlog, we must be honest with ourselves about where the
problem lies.
Another example of the limits of a private market relates
to providing small-dollar mortgages. And I talked to the
Secretary of HUD about this. For a bank, the fixed costs are
the same to originate a small loan versus a big loan, which
makes small loans less profitable.
So, Ms. Yentel, what policy levers are available for the
Federal Government to increase support for small-dollar
mortgages? In my community, in some communities, over 30
percent of mortgages are less than $100,000, but they are not
getting access to these mortgages.
Ms. Yentel. That is a question on which I would be glad to
get back to you with further information.
Ms. Tlaib. Are there Federal subsidies right now that can
be provided for loan origination and servicing?
Ms. Yentel. That is outside my area of expertise.
Ms. Tlaib. I know millions of Americans and families are
struggling right now. But it is access to small-dollar
mortgages. It is the fact that we have some of these amendments
and policies in place that really cause these barriers. But
what I don't like is the fact that we think the private market
is going to fix its own. And I have seen it, again, in my own
community when we see over and over again that banks and other
institutions have policies in place that are geared towards one
community over another.
I see it where Michigan lost more Black homeownership than
any other State in the country, and I really believe it is
because of the weakened CRA. It is because we are not enforcing
the Fair Housing Act like we should be. And this is where we
come in as a committee to talk about those real obstacles;
there is nothing wrong with saying, hey, we have to do better.
You should literally talk about where you function in Wayne
County if over 50 percent of the housing market is less than
$100,000 worth--the home is worth, or being put out for sale.
Then, why aren't we saying to our banks, we will help, let's
get these loans out, let's get homeownership increased?
Thank you so much. I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentlewoman.
The gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Flood, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
And happy birthday to our colleague from Colorado this
morning.
Housing affordability has become the number-one issue in
Nebraska, and I am pleased that we are focusing on the problems
at hand in this committee. When we talk about housing
affordability, we need to have a conversation that is really
focused on, what is driving the cause in my home State, which,
unlike my colleague from New York, is a lack of supply of
housing in the marketplace. We can subsidize all the housing we
want at the Federal level, but regardless of how much money the
Federal Government spends, if housing stock doesn't increase,
the problem persists. If you want to make housing more
affordable, you increase supply. If you want to make it more
expensive, pour money into vouchers and subsidies.
Before jumping into a conversation about zoning
restrictions, I want to briefly mention manufactured housing.
Manufactured housing has the potential to be an affordable
alternative that lowers the cost of housing overall for single-
family units, and I am pleased to see that manufactured housing
is part of the discussion today, and that there is some hope
that there is legislation attached to the hearing on that
topic.
Now, back to zoning. I am the proud Republican lead on the
Yes In My Backyard (YIMBY) Act with Congressman Kilmer. This
bill would require Community Development Block Grant recipients
to report on the policies they use related to zoning
restrictions. Once we have comprehensive and comparable metrics
for zoning restrictions across different jurisdictions, it will
be easier to identify the full impact these policies will have
on housing costs.
Our witnesses come from all different unique perspectives,
and I have enjoyed hearing from some of them on this important
bill.
Ms. Royster, could you please explain how zoning
restrictions can impede the development of rental housing?
Ms. Royster. Thank you, Congressman. I will give you
examples where barriers were lowered and it increased
development in rental housing. In 2023, several States and
localities enacted YIMBY-related legislation to spur housing
development. California has passed reforms to allow faith
groups to build affordable housing on their property. And
legislators in Montana passed a series of bills which would
allow for backyard accessory dwelling units (ADUs), and allow
apartments in commercial areas.
And on the other coast, Vermont bundled zoning reform into
a single sweeping bill which will take effect next year,
dropping lot sizes, legalizing duplexes and fourplexes, and
limiting minimum parking requirements. These are just a few
States which have begun to recognize the important nexus
between the discriminatory land-use practices, and undersupply
of housing. As these and other land use reforms take effect, we
will see an increase in housing supply.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Ms. Royster. I appreciate that.
Ms. Yentel, can you explain the National Low Income Housing
Coalition's support for the Yes In My Backyard Act?
Ms. Yentel. Yes, thank you. We do support the bill. It is
an important way for communities to have more resources and
increased incentives to address restrictive local zoning, which
is a part of the puzzle that needs to be solved. So, we are
supportive of the YIMBY Act.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Ms. Yentel.
Dr. Hamilton, you included some examples of localities that
cut land-use regulations in your testimony. Can you walk
through some of those examples for us? What were the resulting
effects of those policy decisions?
Ms. Hamilton. What we see is that in places that reduce
barriers to housing construction, the market responds by
providing more housing, at more reasonable prices, and
accessible to more households. Thank you for your attention on
manufactured housing as one piece of getting the rules right to
facilitate broadly-accessible housing.
Nebraska is one of the few States that requires its
localities to allow manufactured housing to be sited anywhere
that a site-built house would be allowed, and Congress could go
further by removing the permanent steel chassis requirement on
manufactured housing to make this type of housing more
flexible, and able to serve a wider variety of households.
Mr. Flood. Thank you very much.
Mr. Michel, you also mentioned zoning restrictions in your
testimony. Would you care to add your perspective on how
government restrictions decrease housing supply? And you only
have 30 seconds, so, I'm sorry.
Mr. Michel. I am in agreement with Dr. Hamilton, and I
don't necessarily think that it is a particularly, or mainly a
Federal problem, but but they are real, and they matter.
Mr. Flood. Right. Our witnesses today, to the chairman's
credit, represent a wide range of players in the housing space.
Let the record show that we have extensive support on the Yes
In My Backyard Act from our witnesses today. I appreciate all
of your testimony and your time. And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlewoman from Georgia, Ms. Williams, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you, Chairman Davidson.
And thank you to all our witnesses for joining us today for
this very important conversation.
I represent Georgia's Fifth Congressional District,
centered in my home City of Atlanta. It is no secret that my
district has one of the largest racial wealth gaps in the
country. Affordable housing lays the foundation for financial
stability, economic mobility, and wealth-building. Without it,
the racial wealth gap will continue to grow.
Over 2,000 Atlantans are experiencing homelessness due to
the lack of affordable housing, while nearly half of Atlanta's
renters are cost-burdened. But despite these pressing
challenges, Atlanta is short more than 130,000 affordable
housing units--130,000. And some that we do have, have been
deemed uninhabitable.
Last year, all of the residents of Forest Cove, an
affordable housing complex in my district, were forced to
relocate because of excessive mold, broken windows, burned
buildings, and other issues that made the complex unlivable.
And this is unacceptable. ``Affordable'' is not a synonym for
poor, low quality, or unsanitary. Affordable means inexpensive
and reasonably priced to meet people's budgets, to build their
lives and have the opportunity to build wealth. My constituents
need affordable housing that is also safe and comfortable, and
yes, even desirable.
Ms. Yentel, what can we expect to happen if Congress
continues to kick the can down the road on this housing crisis,
if Republicans are successful in slashing the Federal housing
budget, and if there is continued finger pointing at States and
local governments to do the work alone?
Ms. Yentel. The housing crisis will worsen, and already, by
nearly all measures, the shortage of housing for the lowest-
income people and the lack of affordability is worse than it
has been on record. And the issue that you raised about Forest
Cove is very important, and it points to the fact that we not
only need to be providing new subsidies for more families to
have housing that is affordable to them, but we have to focus
on preservation of existing affordable housing stock.
And in the public housing, the public housing capital needs
are beyond $70 billion just to fix up the existing public
housing infrastructure to make it safe and sanitary and
habitable for the people who live there today, and to preserve
it for future generations. Because we so woefully underfunded,
preservation of public housing and also Project-Based Rental
Assistance and other types of affordable housing, we are losing
10,000 to 15,000 units a year of public housing to obsolescence
or decay. So by not further investing in maintaining our
critical affordable housing infrastructure, we are worsening
the shortage of homes for the lowest-income people.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you, Ms. Yentel. And I am
glad that you, as well as one of my colleagues, brought up
inventory, because the inventory plays a crucial role in
housing affordability. When complexes like Forest Cove are
unlivable, it forces families to find more-expensive places to
live, uprooting lives, and putting even more strain on our
limited supply of affordable housing.
And as if dwindling inventories of affordable housing
weren't enough, too many families in my district and across the
country are facing outside competition from massive investment
firms. When they think they are ready to make the leap to
buying a home, they are cut off at their ankles by investment
firms. Families are being outbid by investment companies which
are buying up single-family homes at astonishing rates. Just in
Atlanta, large institutional investors own nearly 72,000
single-family properties, according to the Urban Institute.
Yesterday, I co-led the introduction of Congressman Adam
Smith's End Hedge Fund Control of American Homes Act, to put an
end to this and make sure that families who have the means and
the ability to purchase a home are able do so. Over a 10-year
period, this important legislation would reduce the number of
single-family homes owned by hedge funds, putting the power to
purchase back in the hands of families, so that they can start
building equity, and more importantly, building their lives and
helping to close the racial wealth gap.
Ms. Yentel, how has the rapid entrance of hedge funds and
other institutional investors into the single-family housing
market impacted the ability of low- and middle-income families
to buy a home?
Ms. Yentel. In many of the ways that you raised. And I
would add that it also creates challenges for the people who
rent those single-family homes that are owned by institutional
investors. In general, institutional investors are among the
worst actors in the housing field when it comes to landlord/
tenant relations. And the research and the data show that those
institutional----
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Ms. Yentel, unfortunately I am out
of time. I have more questions that I will submit for the
record.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentlewoman.
The gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. De La Cruz, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today. And I thank our witnesses for appearing before
us.
This is an issue that is close to me, as I believe that
people in south Texas, Americans, understand the very real
impact of rising housing costs. More and more Americans
continue to see their housing expenses rise as their single-
most expensive monthly cost. Inflationary pressures have pushed
interest rates up, and added premiums which are unaffordable to
some would-be homebuyers. And since the pandemic, Washington
has only made this issue worse by pumping trillion of dollars
of Democrat-sponsored spending into the economy.
Mr. Appleton, as you know, there are several factors in the
mortgage market simultaneously hindering an increase in the
housing supply. Our current high-interest rate environment both
increases costs to borrowers, and also, disincentivizes
existing home sales from homeowners locked into lower rates. We
now also see the potential for the Basel III proposal to
dramatically increase capital requirements, and in turn,
potentially increase the risk weighting of single-family
mortgages. My question is this: Can you elaborate on the
negative impact that this would have on mortgage affordability
and mortgage availability?
Mr. Appleton. Thank you for your question, Congresswoman.
If finalized, the proposed Basel III Endgame would limit the
ability for certain banks to provide access to credit for low-
down-payment borrowers, including many first-time low- and
moderate-income and minority borrowers. The rule should
recognize the loss-absorbing benefits of private mortgage
insurance in determining the loan-to-value ratio-based risk
weights, but it doesn't. So, restoring that recognition would
encourage innovation in portfolio lending and level the playing
field to ensure consumers have access to a broad array of low-
down-payment financing options across bank portfolio products,
GSEs and government agency executions.
Ms. De La Cruz. Absolutely. And I am going to have you
repeat this: You said that the Basel III would have a
significant impact on minorities? Is that correct?
Mr. Appleton. Communities of color and minorities are less
likely to have the intergenerational wealth to bring a large
down payment to the closing table. And by Basel's risk weights
and lack of recognition for private mortgage insurance, it is
going to make it uneconomical and very difficult for banks to
engage in that type of lending.
Ms. De La Cruz. So, where we have my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle who say that Basel III is actually
going to help minorities, what I am hearing from you is that it
is actually going to hinder minorities in their dream of owning
a home. Is that correct?
Mr. Appleton. Yes. I think there has largely been alignment
among consumer groups, mortgage market participants, and
members of this committee on both sides of the aisle that Basel
III is going to be negative for low-down-payment borrowers,
including low- and moderate-income and minority borrowers.
Ms. De La Cruz. So, now that we are all in agreement that
housing affordability is at historic lows, is now the right
time for regulators to further restrict access to capital?
Mr. Appleton. Absolutely not.
Ms. De La Cruz. Mr. Michel, along the same lines of
government intervention impacting the housing market, we also
saw that President Biden and my colleagues on the other side
pumped trillions of dollars into the economy these past few
years. Of course, that led to inflationary pressure, and it
continues to impact and is the reason why we're here right now.
Given this high-interest-rate environment, would you say that--
or I am going to ask what market-based recommendations do you
have to bring down the cost of housing?
Mr. Michel. Again, I think this is largely a crowding-out
sort of problem, so I have several recommendations alluded to
in my testimony that would start down that path. But you have
roughly 90 percent or more of the mortgage-backed securities
market dominated by the Federal Government. That is one way.
You have to start paring that back. The excessive-use provision
is one thing that could be defined and enforced. Reducing FHA
insurance to match VA insurance would be another.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentlelady.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Vargas, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I would like to thank you and the ranking
member for the courtesy of allowing me to sit in on this
subcommittee. I waived on for the day.
Chairman Davidson. Thanks for the interest.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you.
And I would like to also associate myself with what our
ranking member said about Chairman McHenry. I think he is a
very honorable, very fair person, as I think you are, too. And
again, I appreciate the opportunity.
According to the October 2023 Consumer Price Index, housing
costs remain the key driver of inflation in our country. Since
2020, home prices have skyrocketed by 47 percent. As of 2023,
the average renter is now rent-burdened, paying significantly
over 30 percent of their income on rent, as we have heard here
today. All of our constituents are feeling this.
And I have to say that we all have our personal stories.
The situation with me was that my mom and dad worked themselves
to the bone to make sure that they had a house. And that little
house financed nine undergraduate degrees, numerous advanced
degrees, and scores of law books, engineering books, finance
books, and social services books. And ultimately, it really was
the ability to take money out of that house and really the
generosity of my parents that enabled all of my brothers and
sisters and I to get a decent education. I went to Harvard, so
it is not real grit, but it is okay.
But, again, it was that house that gave that opportunity.
It really was. And they worked hard for that. So, I was a
little intrigued with the provocative statements that you were
making, Mr. Michel, saying that Federal policy should not
encourage homeownership. I don't want to put words in your
mouth, but I believe that is what you said. Would others agree
to that? It seems to me that that is somewhat wrong-headed. I
see someone is anxious to go--would you like to comment? I saw
you going towards the microphone.
Mr. Appleton. Sure. Look, I think that the Federal Reserve
survey of consumer finances has found that the average net
worth of a homeowner is 40 times the average net worth of a
renter. I think that we need to make sure we have consistent,
coordinated, and clear housing finance policy to make sure that
private capital is not crowded out of the market unnecessarily
by government programs. But I think that homeownership, when
done sustainably and responsibly, is an excellent mechanism for
wealth-building.
Mr. Vargas. I don't agree with everything you said, but I
agree with a lot of what you have said. I do think that the
government should be involved for those who can't afford it.
The down payment is really what kills a lot of people. They
can't afford it. And I am not against private mortgage
insurance. I used it when I bought my first home.
As for manufactured housing, people are going to favor it.
I am not against it. But I do think the Federal Government has
to be involved because there are some people who make very
little money. And by the way, for a lot of people, they won't
be able to own a home because they don't make much money, and
that is why I think the Federal Government has a
responsibility. And having all of these people on the streets,
whether it is .001 percent or whatever it is, there seems to be
a huge amount of people on the street, living in a way that is
disgraceful. It is awful.
I travel significantly around the world and you don't even
see this in developing countries. It really is awful and we
have to do something about it. But I do think that the
restrictive laws that we have on zoning are problematic, but I
also understand a lot of people don't want to change the
character of their neighborhood. I think that is why we have to
encourage homeownership, but also in a way that the
neighborhood will accept, and that means you have to tell
people that stacking homes is okay, and making the lot smaller
is okay. All of these things are important.
And then, subsidizing--for those who need subsidies, we
should do that. Who can disagree? I know, Mr. Michel, you
disagree with that. And I should actually give you some time to
react to that. Go ahead, sir. I don't have much time.
Mr. Michel. Sure. Renting is often economical. I have
rented all my adult life; I still do. I advised the colleague
sitting behind me that she should rent and not buy a house, but
I don't think she is going to listen to me.
Mr. Vargas. Reclaiming my time, I think that is a bad idea.
In 1976, I bought my first home. And in 1993, I paid
$176,000. I just put it in the U.S. inflation calculator, and
that home, if it followed inflation today, would be $373,000. A
home just down the street from mine, exactly the same size,
sold for $1.85 million. So, I would say that was a very good
investment.
Mr. Michel. Yes. But that is not an affordable home at that
point.
Mr. Vargas. That is right. It is not an affordable home,
but it is a house that certainly benefited me and my family, as
the house that my parents bought didn't increase significantly
like this one did. That is why I think to argue against
homeownership, the American Dream, is provocative to say the
least, but----
Mr. Michel. That is the equivalent of saying that we should
encourage high-leverage investment.
Mr. Vargas. No, no.
Mr. Michel. It is.
Mr. Vargas. But we should encourage homeownership. It is
the American Dream to come home to a house that you own.
Mr. Michel. That is the way we have been doing it.
Mr. Vargas. My time is up. But again, I thank you for the
courtesy, sir.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman.
And the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Rose, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Davidson, and Ranking Member
Cleaver, for holding this hearing. And thank you to our
witnesses for being here. I would also like to thank this
subcommittee for the opportunity to waive on to today's
hearing.
The growing scarcity of affordable housing in this country
for both homeowners and renters is a serious crisis. Helping to
alleviate this crisis will require, as our hearing title
suggests, knocking down government barriers that are standing
in the way of helping to supply more affordable housing. One
such government barrier--and Ms. Hamilton has already made
reference to this--to more affordable housing is HUD's outdated
requirement that manufactured housing be built on a permanent
chassis. A permanent chassis allows manufactured housing to be
more easily transported. This is helpful if a manufactured home
will be moved multiple times during its lifetime.
However, as I think most people are aware, many
manufactured homes are now built with the intention of being
permanently placed in one location, and thus do not need to be
built with a permanent chassis. Eliminating the permanent
chassis requirement for manufactured housing from the Federal
construction code, administered by HUD, will help to
potentially save thousands of dollars on new manufactured homes
made without a permanent chassis.
I am proud to have introduced a bipartisan bill, H.R. 5198,
the Expansion of Attainable Homeownership Through Manufactured
Housing Act of 2023, along with my colleague, Congressman
Correa of California, that will eliminate this outdated
requirement. I thank the subcommittee for attaching the bill to
today's hearing, and I look forward to working with my
colleagues to advance this important piece of legislation.
Ms. Hamilton, I know you have already spoken about this
today to some extent, but the latest figures show America is
short 3.9 million homes. This shortage is especially severe
among starter homes for first-time homebuyers. Meanwhile, a
manufactured home could be built for 20 to 50 percent less than
an equivalent site-built home. Can you expand on how the
current statutorily-required permanent steel chassis for every
HUD code manufactured home prevents broader adoption of this
cost-efficient building choice?
Ms. Hamilton. Thank you, Congressman.
Yes, manufactured housing is the most cost-effective way to
deliver a new unit of housing in the U.S. today. And that is,
in large part, due to the HUD code's focus on affordability
over other types of policy priorities. The permanent steel
chassis requirement, as you said, is intended for manufactured
housing that will be moved from site to site, when that is
often not the case, particularly in rural communities where
manufactured housing is a very important source of relatively
low-cost housing.
Eliminating the steel chassis requirement could also open
up new opportunities for manufactured housing to serve as
accessory dwelling units. We are seeing many States and
localities pursuing accessory dwelling unit reform as a
relatively low-cost way to provide new housing. And eliminating
that requirement means that different types and different sizes
of units can be produced under the HUD code, creating a policy
that can work hand in hand with State and local accessory
dwelling unit reform.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I appreciate that.
As I see time winding down, I think anyone who has had the
opportunity to tour or be present at one of the manufacturing
facilities where manufactured housing is produced will
understand what I am trying to get at here. And that is, we all
know there is a shortage today of skilled tradesmen in our
country necessary for building a home. My wife and I are
renovating a home on our farm that we hope to move into; it is
supposed to be ready in August. I apparently forgot to tell the
builder which year we wanted to be in, in August. But there is
a shortage of trades. So, I am wondering if you might just
expand in the few seconds we have left here on how the adoption
of manufactured and modular homes helps to fix this problem in
rural America.
Ms. Hamilton. Thank you. That is right. Manufactured
housing allows a unit of housing to be built in a different
location than where it will be sited. And opening up
opportunities for housing in California, for example, to be
built in a lower-cost place is a very positive outcome.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the gentleman.
I would like to thank our witnesses for their testimony
today. We greatly appreciate it and it was very helpful.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
I ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as you
are able.
And this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:17 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

December 6, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
