- INTERNATIONAL FINANCING OF NUCLEAR ENERGY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

______

INTERNATIONAL FINANCING OF NUCLEAR ENERGY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL SECURITY,
ILLICIT FINANCE, AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 17, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-69

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-190 PDF          WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
Subcommittee on National Security, Illicit Finance,
and International Financial Institutions

BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri, Chairman

ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio, Ranking Member
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
YOUNG KIM, California, Vice          BILL FOSTER, Illinois
Chairwoman                       JUAN VARGAS, California
ZACH NUNN, Iowa                      JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
January 17, 2024.............................................     1
Appendix:
January 17, 2024.............................................    35

WITNESSES
Wednesday, January 17, 2024

Judson, Timothy L., Executive Director, Nuclear Information and
Resource Service...............................................     9
Korsnick, Maria, President and Chief Executive Officer, Nuclear
Energy Institute...............................................     4
McMurray, Nicholas, Managing Director, International and Nuclear
Policy, ClearPath, Inc.........................................     6
Reinke, Benjamin T. Vice President, Global Business Development,
X-energy, LLC..................................................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Judson, Timothy L............................................    36
Korsnick, Maria..............................................    52
McMurray, Nicholas...........................................    62
Reinke, Benjamin T...........................................    72

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Waters, Hon. Maxine:
Written statment of Ayumi Fukakusa, Friends of the Earth
Japan......................................................    92
Written statement of Mark Z. Jacobson, Department of Civil
and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University.........    95
Written responses to questions for the record submitted to
Timothy L. Judson..........................................   103
Written responses to questions for the record submitted to
Nicholas McMurray..........................................   119

INTERNATIONAL FINANCING

OF NUCLEAR ENERGY

----------

Wednesday, January 17, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on National Security,
Illicit Finance, and
International Financial Institutions,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:16 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Blaine
Luetkemeyer [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Luetkemeyer, Williams of
Texas, Meuser, Kim, Nunn, De La Cruz; Beatty, Gonzalez, Nickel,
Pettersen, Foster, Vargas, and Gottheimer.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Also present: Representative Hill.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The Subcommittee on National
Security, Illicit Finance, and International Financial
Institutions will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``International Financing of
Nuclear Energy.''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
First, I would like to welcome my colleagues and our
witnesses to this hearing on international financing of nuclear
energy. Clean nuclear power, such as that produced back in my
district in the Ameren Callaway Plant, accounts for over a
quarter of the world's low-carbon electricity and nearly 20
percent of all electricity in our country. In the words of the
Department of Energy, ``Nuclear power is the most reliable
energy source, and it is not even close.'' Nuclear is also one
of the safest sources of power, with one analysis estimating
that it has been less risky to human health than even wind or
hydropower.
Of course, some have tried to demonize nuclear energy in
the past, arguing that the world will eliminate carbon
emissions through renewable energy alone. The results have been
catastrophic. Germany, for example, has abandoned nuclear
power, while just next door, France uses it to produce two-
thirds of its electricity, and what is the result? Germany's
per capita emissions are nearly double that of France, and
while German households saw gas prices soar by over 50 percent
last year due to the country's reliance on Russia, the French
are now lowering regional costs by exporting clean energy to
the rest of Europe. Clearly, nuclear is essential to energy
security.
At the same time, we cannot limit its reach to advanced
economies. For instance, half of Sub-Saharan Africa lacks
access to electricity, and the renewables-only crowd wants to
keep it that way. This has opened up the door for China and
Russia to explore nuclear cooperation, not just on the
continent, but elsewhere in the developing world. It is past
due for the United States to get back in the game and compete.
Nuclear power provides us with a unique opportunity to push for
a positive national security agenda.
In 2019, Republicans worked to create the China and
Transformational Exports Program (CTEP) at the Export-Import
Bank (EXIM), which allows the Bank to compete more effectively
against Chinese nuclear projects abroad. This will allow the
U.S. to provide foreign countries with real options to power
their development with abundant clean energy rather than
constantly browbeat them about climate change. I have been
pleased to see EXIM engaging in several discussions on future
nuclear deals around the world, from Asia to Europe to Latin
America.
Republicans on this committee have also pushed the World
Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD) to finally end their bans on nuclear financing, which
fly in the face of those organizations' rhetoric on climate.
These lenders should be active in emerging markets and
developing nations, not sit idly by while China and Russia try
to export inferior nuclear technologies.
I have been pleased to see progress in our efforts to
enlist the international financial institutions for this cause.
Just last month, the U.S. and 19 other countries committed to
tripling nuclear energy capacity globally. This pledge
explicitly encourages the World Bank and regional development
banks (RDBs) to include nuclear in their lending policies. EBRD
has already signaled that it may consider opportunities to
support nuclear power projects.
While Republicans certainly have policy differences with
this Administration, our shared support for nuclear financing
has been a welcome source of cooperation. I am hopeful it will
continue this year. For today's hearing, we took great care to
ensure our panel reflects scientific expertise, and I am
pleased to see that many of our witnesses have engineering
backgrounds. If we want to find genuine solutions to promote
national security through nuclear energy policy, it needs to be
fact-based and free of outdated ideologies. I want to thank our
witnesses again for appearing before us today. I look forward
to their testimony.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentlewoman from Ohio, Mrs. Beatty, for 4
minutes for an opening statement.
Mrs. Beatty. Good morning, and thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
holding this hearing, and thank you to our witnesses for
appearing here today to discuss international financing of
nuclear energy projects. And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for also
sharing their expertise when you talk about science and
research, and I would be remiss if I didn't say I have two who
were at the Ohio State University. So thank you to our witness,
Mr. McMurray, and thank you to our witness, Mr. Reinke, for all
the work that you have done.
As we know, international financial institutions (IFIs)
such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF),--I am a stickler
for not throwing out all the things without telling you what
they are--the World Bank, and the multilateral development
banks (MDBs) are central pillars of the global economic
cooperation that promotes international financial stability and
development. In recent years, the IMF and the World Bank have
expanded their focus, helping to develop countries' responses
to economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, as
well as addressing climate change and its economic
implications.
The United States has led the charge in calling on the
global community to meet the challenges of today. Treasury
Secretary Janet Yellen has urged the World Bank to develop an
evolution roadmap to respond to the global crises on climate
change. The United States has also led efforts within the G7
and the G20 to support a $100-billion Resilience and
Sustainability Trust (RST) at the IMF, that would advance
climate resilience and financing for low- and middle-income
countries. Notably, while the Congress has appropriated funds
for the RST, these funds have not been authorized by this
committee due to Republican Members' opposition.
To confront global climate crises, we must dramatically
reduce the use of fossil fuels and transition to clean energy.
As we also assess which alternative energy options to pursue,
we must carefully and accurately consider every factor to
ensure that we transition to energy sources that are best for
the environment and for our global communities. Nuclear energy
is certainly a better alternative to more fossil fuel
development, and has a role to play in clean energy and
transition. Of course, this energy source is also not without
its own unique hazards, which must be taken into consideration.
It, furthermore, must be done to ensure that countries powered
by nuclear energy are properly managed in disposing of their
toxic radioactive waste, including the United States.
Thank you again to our witnesses, and I look forward to
your testimony. I am struggling a little bit--I have an eye
allergy--so thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Ranking Member Beatty. It
looks like the chairman and the ranking member of the full
Financial Services Committee are not here, so we will move on
and welcome our guests today to testify before us.
Again, I want to thank each of you for waiting until this
afternoon. Mother Nature showed that she is more powerful than
Congress. We sometimes think that all power emanates from us,
and, once again, we are taught another lesson that Mother
Nature can wield a stick once in a while and make us bend to
her will as well, and so we did. I know Mrs. Beatty and I both
wound up having to come in this morning instead of yesterday
because of the weather, but we do thank all of you for waiting
around this afternoon or coming this afternoon to testify
before us.
With that, we have Ms. Maria Korsnick, the president and
chief executive officer of the Nuclear Energy Institute; Mr.
Nicholas McMurray, the managing director of international and
nuclear policy at ClearPath; Dr. Ben Reinke, the vice president
of global business development at X-energy; and Mr. Timothy
Judson, the executive director of the Nuclear Information and
Resource Service.
Each of you will have 5 minutes to give an oral
presentation on your testimony. And without objection, each of
your written statements will be made a part of the record.
And just as a side note, those microphones in front of you
move forward, so if you want to pull it close to you--sort of
take a bite out of it. The gentleman on the end down there is
taking down our discussion today, and sometimes, if those
microphones are not close enough, it is hard for him to record
what you say, so we will take a thumbs up from him whenever we
have a problem or need to stop, but anyway, please speak into
the microphone and draw it as close to you as you can.
And with that, Ms. Korsnick, you are recognized for 5
minutes for your oral remarks. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF MARIA KORSNICK, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, NUCLEAR ENERGY INSTITUTE

Ms. Korsnick. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning. I am Maria Korsnick, president and CEO of the Nuclear
Energy Institute, representing more than 350 organizations in
an industry that directly employs nearly 100,000 people
throughout the United States. I appreciate the invitation to
testify, and I thank Chairman Luetkemeyer, Ranking Member
Beatty, and the entire subcommittee, as well as Full Committee
Chairman McHenry and Ranking Member Waters, for continuing to
recognize that clean nuclear energy is crucial to meeting our
nation's national security, energy independence, climate, and
environmental goals.
Let me be blunt. Commercial nuclear technology was invented
in the United States, and U.S. companies lead the world in
innovating the next generation of nuclear. We operate the
largest and highest-performing fleet of reactors in the world.
However, we are behind Russia and China when it comes to
exports. Therefore, it is Russia and China that are building
strategic 100-year partnerships and setting the standards for
global nuclear safety.
You see, when we export U.S. technology, we export world-
leading U.S. standards on nuclear safety, security, and
nonproliferation. The best way for us to raise global standards
is for us to be the ones on the ground safely building,
operating, and maintaining U.S.-designed, Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (NRC)-reviewed nuclear power plants.
Beyond the national security implications, when the U.S.
builds nuclear plants around the world, we are reducing global
carbon emissions and creating thousands of American jobs.
Nuclear power exports are a win for American and global
security, a win for American workers, and a win for the
environment.
My written testimony outlines several policy proposals that
will help the United States compete and win in the global
energy marketplace, but I want to highlight three crucial
points. First, Russia is beating us in the global market, and
China is not far behind. Russia is the world's dominant global
nuclear supplier. Rosatom, Russia's state-owned nuclear energy
conglomerate, currently has 70 percent of the global export
market for new nuclear construction. A Russian-built reactor
recently began operation in Belarus, and Russia is building
reactors in Egypt, Turkey, Bangladesh, and other countries.
Like Russia, China has designated nuclear energy exports as
a strategic foreign policy priority. Nuclear energy has been
included in China's Belt and Road Initiative since its launch
in 2017. China now operates 55 reactors and, last year, was
second only to the U.S. in total nuclear generation. With 22
more units under construction and 42 units planned, China's
state-owned nuclear enterprise has an unmatched scale, and it
is becoming increasingly aggressive in the global marketplace,
including two recently-completed reactors in Pakistan.
Second, global demand for nuclear energy is unprecedented.
Governments around the world recognize that by making clean,
always-on nuclear energy a linchpin in their energy systems,
they can decarbonize their electric grid and strengthen their
energy independence, because energy security is national
security. Before Russia's invasion of Ukraine, we were already
seeing robust growth in nuclear energy demand. Following the
invasion, nations that had grown reliant on Russian gas
realized just how vulnerable they had become.
Evidence of increased demand is everywhere. At the recent
COP28, which one headline declared the Nuclear COP, 2 dozen
nations signed a pledge to triple global nuclear energy
capacity by 2050. In the European Union (EU), where nuclear
energy had once fallen out of favor, a majority of governments
recently voted to include nuclear in the EU's net zero list of
strategic technologies, and approximately 30 countries, one-
third of which are in Africa, are now considering planning or
starting nuclear power programs for the very first time. I meet
with leaders from these countries regularly, and most of them
want nothing to do with Russia or China. They want to work with
the United States and our partners, but we must be able to at
least come close to matching the deals that our competitors
offer.
And finally, we need to give U.S. companies the tools they
need to compete and win against state-owned enterprises from
Russia and China. The U.S. must place the same significant
strategic value on nuclear energy exports as Russia and China
do. We must support our companies with the necessary financing
tools to compete and win. Russia offers terms and conditions
that, at present, the U.S. cannot match. By enacting the
International Nuclear Energy Financing Act, and the other
proposals offered in my written testimony, Congress can
strengthen America's hand and help ensure the U.S. remains an
influential participant in the global nuclear energy market,
thereby safeguarding our national security interests.
The industry I represent looks forward to working with you
to ensure our nation can take full advantage of all that
nuclear energy has to offer. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Korsnick can be found on
page 52 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Very good. Mr. McMurray, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NICHOLAS MCMURRAY, MANAGING DIRECTOR,
INTERNATIONAL AND NUCLEAR POLICY, CLEARPATH, INC.

Mr. McMurray. Thank you. Good morning. Chairman
Luetkemeyer, Ranking Member Beatty, and members of the
committee. My name is Nicholas McMurray, and I am the managing
director of international and nuclear policy at ClearPath.
This committee is vital in financing the global deployment
of American clean energy. Today, the U.S. aims to renew its
global energy leadership. Recently, the U.S. and over 20 allies
pledged to triple global nuclear energy capacity by 2050. This
commitment recognizes that reliable energy, like nuclear, is
necessary to reduce global emissions, while meeting economic
development goals. However, the International Energy Agency's
(IEA's) 2023 World Energy Outlook shows that existing policies
make this goal incredibly challenging. In particular, the IEA
projects that existing policies would only allow for a roughly
48-percent increase. Tripling global nuclear capacity means
deploying nuclear power plants domestically and building
American reactors abroad. Thus, we need policy changes.
I will cover several topics today: first, the U.S. must
remain competitive against China and Russia; second, we must
overcome financing obstacles for U.S. projects; and third, we
must reform burdensome regulatory requirements.
While the U.S. still has the world's largest domestic
operating nuclear fleet of 93 reactors, the pace at which China
is building reactors should be worrisome to anyone who wants
the U.S. to remain a leader. Currently, China has 55 operating
reactors and is actively building more, while the U.S. only has
one commercial reactor under construction. It is obvious,
through China's Belt and Road Initiative, and Russia's invasion
of Ukraine, that they want to exert their influence globally.
They are both developing export markets and providing
significant financial support for their nuclear deals. For
example, Russia gave $25 billion in financing to Egypt, which
was around 85 percent of the full project cost, and China
recently announced it would provide the full cost of a new
reactor, $4 billion to $8 billion, to Pakistan.
This focus has led to China and Russia constructing 64 new
reactors abroad since 2000, and since reactors operate for 60
years or more, those host nations will become dependent on
China and Russia for decades. Fortunately, the U.S. private
sector is up to this competitive challenge. The shale gas boom
in America is a perfect example of successful public-private
partnerships, and the advanced nuclear market could see similar
success.
Congress can provide further direction to various
government agencies by developing a U.S. nuclear export
strategy, supercharging U.S. export finance tools, and removing
red tape that prevents the scaling of nuclear technology.
Unfortunately, the current U.S. approach to exporting
nuclear energy is fragmented. The process of exporting a
reactor involves coordination among multiple entities,
including the Departments of State, Energy, and Commerce, the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the EXIM Bank, the U.S.
International Development Finance Corporation, the U.S. Trade
Representative, the National Security Council, and others.
Aligning these agencies is important, but innovative U.S.
nuclear companies are not operating in a fair and open market,
as they must compete against generous state-sponsored
financing. In fact, between 2016 and 2021, China's financing of
all global energy initiatives outpaced the combined
contributions of all significant Western-backed development
banks.
Leveling the playing field for clean energy exports will
require thoughtful policy reforms. To that end, legislation,
such as the bipartisan International Nuclear Energy Act, would
develop a civil nuclear export strategy, and the International
Nuclear Energy Financing Act would require the U.S. Executive
Director at the World Bank to advocate for funding nuclear
energy. The World Bank and other multilateral development banks
(MDBs) play a significant role in infrastructure planning
worldwide, and they can be instrumental in increasing global
nuclear deployment.
Beyond financing, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission will
almost certainly need to license a reactor designed in the U.S.
before another country would be willing to build it. However,
even after the NRC licenses a reactor, it still must receive
export approvals and be licensed by the other country.
Therefore, an efficient and agile U.S. regulator is fundamental
not only for domestic deployment but also for ensuring U.S.
competitiveness abroad.
In conclusion, the U.S. needs to be the global leader in
nuclear exports, and there are solutions to accomplish that
goal. An all-of-the-above clean energy strategy is the only
viable path for achieving global emissions reduction targets.
The world must quickly deploy clean, reliable, and affordable
energy, like nuclear power, and if the world and other
international financing institutions reassess their nuclear
energy policies rather than simply saying no, we will be on a
clear path. Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McMurray can be found on
page 62 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. McMurray. Next, we
have Dr. Reinke, who is recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BENJAMIN T. REINKE, VICE PRESIDENT, GLOBAL
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT, X-ENERGY, LLC

Mr. Reinke. Thank you, Chairman Luetkemeyer and Ranking
Member Beatty, for the opportunity to testify today. My name is
Benjamin Reinke, and I serve as X-energy's vice president of
global business development. X-energy is a nuclear reactor and
fuel design engineering company headquartered up the road in
Rockville, Maryland, with over 400 employees and hundreds more
contractors that are a part of our design team. At X-energy, we
manufacture TRISO-X Fuel, which is our proprietary version of
Tri-structural ISOtropic-coated particle fuel.
The safety and economic case for our reactors starts with
TRISO-X. This fuel was originally developed by the Department
of Energy (DOE) and qualified through a series of experiments
that validated TRISO's safety case. Under that program,
irradiated TRISO particles survived tests at nearly 3,300
degrees Fahrenheit for over 12\1/2\ days. This is why DOE calls
TRISO the most robust nuclear fuel on earth. Each pebble
contains over 18,000 of these chia-seed-sized TRISO particles
in a graphite matrix.
Our advanced, high-temperature, gas-cooled small modular
reactor is called the Xe-100. It produces 200 megawatts or 80
megawatts electric and has advantages in sustainability,
economics, reliability, and safety over conventional reactors.
The Xe-100 core, consisting of these TRISO-X pebbles, can never
melt down, even in the worst-case accident scenario. We flow
helium through the core instead of water and achieve much
higher temperatures for operations than today's reactors. Our
modular design allows the number of reactors to be matched to
the needs of each customer, with up to 12 operating from a
single control room. Importantly, the Xe-100 can load flow,
making it ideally suited for pairing with renewables, with the
ability to ramp between 40 percent and 100 percent power in
only 12 minutes.
I want to recognize the critical topic of this hearing and
the importance of its timing. There is a global race underway
for the development and, more importantly, the deployment of
clean energy technologies. Decades have passed since the U.S.
held its proper role as the global nuclear energy leader, and
in that vacuum, Russian and Chinese state-owned enterprises
have firmly established their positions. Today, China and
Russia account for 70 percent of planned or under-construction
reactors worldwide.
The good news is that the U.S. is positioned to jump back
into the lead because of technologies like our Xe-100. Our
first project will be deployed under DOE's Advanced Reactor
Demonstration Program, or ARDP, a program that matches private
sector investment dollar for dollar to enable X-energy to
complete the design of the Xe-100, construct our first
commercial scale TRISO-X manufacturing facility, and license,
construct, and commission our first plant for Dow, a four-unit,
320-megawatt electric plant that will provide all of the steam
and electricity required for Dow's Seadrift operations, a
polyethylene manufacturing complex located in Seadrift, Texas.
Our ARDP fast follower project is with Energy Northwest in
Richland, Washington for a project to develop a minimum of 4
reactors and up to 12 Xe-100 units on their project site.
While there are many use cases for SMRs for utility
deployments, two are the most dominant in driving demand today.
The first is coal-to-nuclear conversion, and the second is data
center demand growth.
At X-energy, we have seen growing evidence of customer
interest from around the world. We have been paid to conduct
studies across market segments and geographies, including
integrated steel manufacturing, end-of-life coal plants, and
hydrogen production, just to name a few, but don't just take my
word for it. There is ample evidence that nuclear energy is
back in vogue globally and that the fundamentals are better now
than ever. DOE estimates that the U.S. will require an
incremental 200 gigawatts of new nuclear by 2050. This ambition
was carried forward by the Administration to COP28, where it
received support from an additional 21 nations, all pledging to
triple nuclear capacity by 2050.
The opportunity is enormous, yet major challenges remain.
Number one, we must deploy domestically before we can sell
internationally. My team and I hear this in the global nuclear
marketplace every single day. In order to do this, we must
remain committed to a fully-implemented ARDP. We also must
remain committed to a technology-neutral tax credit system like
what is found in the IRA that provides incentives for nuclear
that are equal for the first time to renewables, and we must
redevelop the U.S. nuclear fuel supply chain by ensuring there
is sufficient funding for DOE's High-Assay Low-Enriched Uranium
Availability Program.
Number two, we must remove barriers to entry for new
advanced reactor technologies, first in the U.S. and then
abroad, especially focusing on rightsizing regulatory
requirements for these inherently safe advanced reactors.
Number three, we must have all possible financing tools in
the toolkit to support U.S. nuclear exports, which means adding
nuclear to the list of technologies for which the U.S. Export-
Import Bank can match Chinese loan terms, opening up the
program to match Russian terms, and advocating aggressively for
the World Bank to reverse its ban on providing nuclear loans.
And number four, the U.S. must remember how to lead from
the front again on nuclear energy.
Thank you again for holding this hearing and for continuing
bipartisan support for the U.S. trajectory back to the front of
the global nuclear energy leadership pack. We are not there
yet, but we are gaining speed. I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Reinke can be found on page
72 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Dr. Reinke. Mr. Judson,
you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TIMOTHY L. JUDSON, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NUCLEAR
INFORMATION AND RESOURCE SERVICE

Mr. Judson. Chairman Luetkemeyer, Ranking Member Beatty,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to testify today. My name is Timothy Judson, and I am the
executive director of the Nuclear Information and Resource
Service, which is a nonprofit environmental organization
founded in 1978 to help grassroots organizations and
individuals understand nuclear energy issues better and to
advocate for a renewable energy future.
The topic of today's hearing is part of an especially
important conversation that is happening around the world, and
it is really important that we are having this conversation.
The world is eager for the U.S. to play a larger role in
financing energy infrastructure for countries that are less
developed than ours. In fact, the world needs that right now
because of the global climate crisis. Unfortunately, the issue
is, what do countries actually need financing for, and,
unfortunately, for H.R. 806, the answer is that it is not for
nuclear energy infrastructure.
If we go forward with prioritizing financing for nuclear
energy infrastructure at IFIs, we are actually going to miss
the target. We would be putting our eggs in the wrong basket
because what countries actually need for energy finance is
different. The reasons for that--well, there are a lot of
reasons to oppose nuclear energy, and I list some of those in
my written testimony, but, unfortunately, for my side in this
debate, that is not the reason why IFIs haven't been financing
nuclear power projects. The reality is that nuclear power
projects, nuclear power plants, nuclear reactors are too
expensive, they take too long, and they are too fraught with
uncertainty for cost overruns, delays, and even cancellations,
than they can justify making loans for; there is too great a
risk of default.
And, in fact, we have acknowledged this in our own country
because we have had to use extraordinary means to finance
nuclear energy projects in this country. The 2005 Energy Policy
Act tried to kickstart a whole renaissance of nuclear energy in
this country by providing $18.5 billion in loan guarantees to
basically insure the industry against defaults, and States have
offered construction-work-in-progress financing to basically
have ratepayers pay the cost of financing for nuclear projects
before they ever generate any electricity.
And still, the Energy Policy Act of 2005, while it led to
28 proposals for new reactors around the country, 24 of those
never started construction, 2 of them were canceled after $9
billion was spent, and the other two, that are now finally
being completed, cost over $30 billion, and are over 7 years
behind schedule. The Georgia Public Service Commission staff
had to testify last summer that there is no net benefit to the
project at this point for Georgia ratepayers. And we are asking
other countries that have less wealth than us to take on this
financial risk.
We have heard a lot of claims today about the fact that
this is all going to change, that nuclear power is going to
become more affordable, that they are going to be able to build
reactors faster. The trouble is that there is no evidence for
this. There has been no SMRs or other advanced reactors built
in this country. None of them have even had their designs
approved yet, and as we have heard, other countries aren't
going to go forward with that until they are, until they have
been demonstrated. And so, we are talking about asking the
international financial institutions to prioritize funding
these projects rather than other things. And that is going to
miss the mark because other countries need infrastructure now.
They don't need infrastructure in 20 years.
And, in fact, what we just saw happen at the Global Climate
Conference in Dubai was, yes, there were 22 nations that
stepped up and said that we need to triple nuclear energy by
2050, but there were 130 nations that stepped forward to say,
we need to triple renewable energy and double energy efficiency
by 2030. Now, if we triple nuclear energy by 2050, that is not
even going to be as much electricity as renewable energy
generates worldwide today.
To be clear about why this is the case, you can look at
some of the reports that have been published claiming that we
are about to enter into a global nuclear renaissance. A report
by Third Way published in 2022 claimed that there was a
tripling of the global market for nuclear energy, but it was
based on an electricity price of $90 a megawatt hour. That is
less than half the actual cost of nuclear power plants that are
being developed now at $180 a megawatt hour, but it is also
significantly greater than the cost of wind and solar, at $50
and $60 a megawatt hour.
The International Energy Agency issued a report last week
that confirmed that we are on pace to be able to reach a
tripling of renewable energy by 2030. The barriers are actually
that countries need more access to financing, so that is really
where the U.S. can play a critical role for the rest of the
world and show real leadership, but if we get into a debate
about whether we should be competing with Russia and China on
nuclear power, we are going to be talking about striking a
fight over the smallest piece of the pie. I conclude my
remarks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Judson can be found on page
36 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired. I
will now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions. And I
thank each of you for your testimony today.
Mr. McMurray, you talked in broad terms about some of the
concerns that we have with China and Russia filling the void
that we left when we basically decided not to participate at
our previous level with regards to helping other countries find
nuclear answers to some of their questions. You all have talked
about the greatness of nuclear from the standpoint of solving a
lot of problems on a worldwide basis. Can you elaborate a
little bit on that? From the standpoint that Mr. Judson said,
it doesn't work, he doesn't believe it is cost-effective. Would
you like to give some information and some testimony to offset
that?
Mr. McMurray. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for your leadership on this committee. We need a wide variety
of clean energy technologies, nuclear being one of them. We
have seen China and Russia control the global marketplace on
nuclear exports recently, so these projects are being built.
The question is now, can the U.S. regain its global leadership
on nuclear energy? And we are going to need all of the above
for this because countries are going to be interested in
building whatever clean energy resources they have available.
So, if U.S. institutions, such as EXIM, are not proactively
going out to support these projects, and if the World Bank and
other multilateral development banks are not supporting these
projects, countries that are expected to increase their demand
for energy will search for financing elsewhere, and we have
seen that happening right now with China and Russia.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Okay. Dr. Reinke, you represent a
company that is producing a new kind of nuclear facility. Mr.
Judson said it is not tested and not able to be implemented
yet. Would you like to discuss that a little bit?
Mr. Reinke. Yes. Thank you for the question. There are a
couple of important things to note. One is that pretty much all
of the nuclear technologies under development today have a
pedigree of having been tested at a pilot scale in a test
reactor or, in some cases, commercially in the past. Now, many
of these technologies were extremely promising, and we
developed them first here in the United States, typically
tested in the Idaho desert, although also in many other places.
At Department of Energy National Laboratories, we also tested
reactors. All of those proved very useful in understanding the
basic physics and understanding also what some of the major
economic challenges would be to bringing those reactors to
market.
Today, we have a large fleet of large, light-water reactors
in the United States and abroad, and that technology has proven
to be very useful and a very successful program across the
world to build those reactors. Our technology is one of many
that has been tested and then demonstrated at a commercial
scale multiple times around the world. Today, the Chinese
Government operates the only commercial high-temperature gas-
cooled reactor after a long development program to try to get
into first place with that technology. Ours is simply picking
up where those left off and taking the modern tools that we
have available today to have a better, more economic fuel and a
better, more economic reactor.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Okay. Each of you mentioned the fact
that we are losing the competitive race with Russia and China
with regards to nuclear, which gives them an edge when it comes
to international relationships on a geopolitical basis around
the world. And part of this comes from the fact that the IMF
and the World Bank and, even to a certain extent, the EXIM
Bank, are not necessarily or haven't necessarily in the past
been very active with regards to financing nuclear. It seems to
be turning. There seems to be an awareness now that they need
to be financing this. Ms. Korsnick, would you like to comment
on that just a little bit----
Ms. Korsnick. Yes, thank you.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. ----on how we can improve that part
of the puzzle.
Ms. Korsnick. Sure. Yes, and I would like to give a shout
out to Chair Lewis of the EXIM Bank. I think she is absolutely
open to nuclear conversations and financing, but to your point,
I think to level the playing field between the U.S. and these
state-owned enterprises, we really need to enhance EXIM Bank's
offerings. I give some examples in my written testimony, but we
have to enhance the Bank. We also have to catalyze private
financing. And then, I would say more a coordinated sort of
whole-of-government approach. It is going to take the Commerce
and State Departments, and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Some of this financing that would be helpful, is that front-end
financing, the part where you are doing feasibility studies. It
doesn't cost a lot, but it gets your foot in the door. And we
really have to look at, how do you start that relationship with
that country that is hungry to build this technology, and we
need to get the U.S. established in a leadership role.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Okay. Is there a prohibition right
now against the World Bank or the IMF financing those kind of
preliminary studies?
Ms. Korsnick. Yes. Feasibility studies are difficult to get
financed.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Okay. So what you are suggesting is,
it would be nice if they went along and started to do that, and
we, by backstopping this with some support, would be able then
to hopefully allow them to purchase down the road our own
nuclear plants. Is that what you are saying?
Ms. Korsnick. Absolutely, and it could be a combination of
TDA, DFC, EXIM. We have to just look at that front end so that,
as I said, we are getting the U.S. established.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Very good. My time has expired. Thank
you very much. With that, I will recognize the ranking member
of the subcommittee, Mrs. Beatty from Ohio, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, again, thank you
to all of the witnesses for being here. Let's shift and talk
about implications of changing the IFI policy. Let's go to you,
Mr. Judson. The international financial institutions do not
currently finance new nuclear power generation projects. Can
you discuss the ramifications of the IFIs changing their
internal policies to allow for it? For example, safety and
security measures, oversight, et cetera, how feasible is all of
this?
Mr. Judson. Sure. I think it really depends on whether the
nuclear industry can actually produce a product that they would
be able to finance and that other countries would be able to
justify buying. The reality is that what we are seeing in terms
of the trends with new reactors in the U.S. isn't encouraging
for that. For instance, the first and sort of the furthest
along of these new designs was the new scale VOYGR SMR that has
been worked on for 20 years. They proposed their first project
in 2015, the Carbon Free Power Project in Idaho. And
originally, in 2016, they were projecting a price for that
reactor, which would have been a 12 reactor, 600-megawatt power
plant, for $3 billion, and that would have been a pretty
impressive accomplishment. But as the years went on, NuScale
had to keep on adjusting its estimated price, so by the time
the project was canceled in November of last year, the cost had
tripled to $9.3 billion for a 460-megawatt power plant, and
they were already 4 years behind their original proposed
schedule, and they hadn't even broken ground on the project,
much less gotten it approved.
And I think the industry is reckoning with, is small
actually better than the large reactors that have already
proven too unaffordable even in the United States? At $9.3
billion, NuScale's price would have been the equivalent of $20
million a megawatt. That is more expensive than the Vogtle
reactors that are being completed now in Georgia, and that is
before ever breaking ground. And what we know from experience
is that nuclear projects get more expensive as you start to
build them.
And that is, I think, the real struggle with answering this
question about what IFIs would do, is whether the industry can
produce a product that they could actually finance or that
countries would actually buy. I think what we are seeing is
that there were 507 gigawatts of renewable energy brought
online last year. That is 25 percent more capacity than the
entire nuclear industry worldwide, and the International Energy
Agency projections, that is going to increase potentially to
over 900 gigawatts a year by the end of this decade.
And while we are talking about exporting a few nuclear
reactors around the world, the energy market is much bigger
than that. So, if we are going to stake our international
energy financing policy around this narrow share of the market,
then we are going to miss the boat with the huge market for
renewable energy and related products and services that are
already developed. And by the way, there are U.S. companies
that are in those businesses. What they have to offer just
wouldn't be prioritized for international finance under this
legislation.
Mrs. Beatty. Can you tell me about that?
Mr. Reinke. Yes, ma'am. That is a TRISO pebble, so it is
made of graphite. Now, this one is not bearing any uranium, in
case you are wondering.
[laughter]
Mr. Reinke. But in general, those would be bearing uranium,
so they are very small chia-seed-like-sized particles, and
those particles are made of uranium oxycarbide. It is a
chemistry that was invented here in the U.S. by the Department
of Energy and its national labs, and then we wrap that in four
layers of alternating high-temperature tolerant ceramics. Why
does that matter? Ceramics don't melt.
So when you take a ceramic material like what that is made
of, and on the inside you have silicon carbide, you get a very
robust layer, and that layer allows the fuel to run up to very
high temperatures without failing, and it maintains the
integrity of those teeny, tiny pressure vessels, basically
obviating the need for the sort of large concrete steel vessel
that you see on reactors today. So, we pack 18,000 of the
little chia seeds into that graphite matrix that is in your
hand, and 220,000 of those pebbles go into our reactor. It is a
small modular reactor, but it is not that small, and,
ultimately, that is how we make 80 megawatts of electric power,
and that is what we will do for Dow with our first project
before the end of the decade.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, and thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
am going to pass this to Mr. Foster, our scientist.
Mr. Foster. Please----
Mrs. Beatty. Nope. I am not doing any of that. Here you go.
[laughter]
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mrs. Beatty. With that, we
go to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams, who is also the
Chair of the House Small Business Committee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would
like to get that and throw it and see what happens with it.
[laughter]
Mr. Williams of Texas. Nuclear power is a viable, clean
energy source of many of my constituents, and I understand
firsthand, as Comanche Peak Nuclear Power Plant is located in
the rural part of my district, in Glen Rose, Texas. For years,
this 2-unit nuclear fuel plant has been supplying energy to
Texans by powering over a million homes and around 500,000
homes during peak usage times. Nuclear power in the United
States is one of the safest of all energy sources, even
compared to other low-carbon options. I have always supported
utilizing an all-of-the-above energy approach for the U.S. to
compete on the world stage, which includes expanding the United
States' nuclear energy profile. As a global leader in the
energy industry, we must ensure bad actors like Russia and
China do not dominate nuclear construction because energy
security is part of our national security.
So, Mr. McMurray, could you elaborate on the importance of
strengthening our nuclear portfolio at home and abroad, and how
does a strong nuclear profile improve domestic energy security?
Mr. McMurray. Yes. Thank you for your question. Having a
wide variety of nuclear technologies helps us on the
international market. The large reactors that operate in your
district, the other reactors coming online in Georgia, and the
advanced reactors that the Banner Corporation (BANR) is
developing, as well as the variety of other technologies, give
us more options for exporting for different countries that may
not want a large reactor; they might only require a smaller
reactor. So, supporting the domestic industry to demonstrate
these helps the U.S. be more competitively internationally.
As for doing that, that is where we have things like
ensuring we can build them the Advanced Reactor Demonstration
Program, other policies to bring those reactors online,
improving the regulatory environment to also support some of
these new technologies that have different fuels or coolants or
safety cases, and then, on the international side, opening up
those financing opportunities from DFC or EXIM or the World
Bank to build that market and build the expertise so these
companies have that line of sight to be able to export their
technologies.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Okay. The People's Republic of China
and the Russian Federation have been looking to bolster their
nuclear footprint in other countries across Europe and South
America, Africa, and South Asia. These bad actors are using the
global nuclear energy market to increase their profile and
influence in countries that are in need of sound energy
infrastructure, and the problem is that the reactors being
built in these countries by the Russians and the Chinese are
incredibly more dangerous than the technology and reactors used
by the United States and Japan. So, we cannot allow our enemies
to grow their influence in vulnerable nations and allow these
countries to become reliant on hostile actors and unsafe
technology.
Ms. Korsnick, can you expand on how the Chinese and
Russian's nuclear expansion projects are a risk to certain
regions and how this will impact U.S. national security? And
then lastly, how can we mitigate the risk imposed by Chinese
and Russian nuclear energy?
Ms. Korsnick. Yes, sir. Thank you for your question.
Actually, I think we just watched this play out when you saw
Europe very dependent on Russian gas, and Russia decided to
close that pipeline, and everybody realized that they were in
dire need of an asset that Russia controlled. So when we talk
about Russia building in other countries, it is not because,
out of the goodness of their heart, they feel like helping you
build a nuclear plant. It is because they will build it, they
will operate it, and they will be in charge of it, so they
really are doing this strategically so that they, in fact,
control the energy supply. And I think we don't have to look
any further to what we just saw play out after the invasion of
Ukraine to understand their intentions.
In terms of what we can do about it, to finish that
thought, we need to be relevant, and the way we get relevant is
you play the game. You get out there. You have a technology
that people want, and they want to do business with you. They
already want to do business with us. What we need is to bring
our technology to the fore and have people like EXIM Bank and
some of these other financing institutions help us get this
technology to our allies.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you. The business of nuclear
financing abroad is a key tool in providing our allies with
safe, reliable energy. We have talked a little bit about that.
This is also a critical step in countering Chinese and Russian
influence. In 2019, Republican members of this committee worked
to create the China and Transformational Exports Program (CTEP)
at the Export-Import Bank, which allows the bank to offer
competitive financing terms to counteract Chinese financing of
nuclear technology abroad. So, we must ensure that EXIM Bank
can continue nuclear assistance programs and projects abroad to
ensure that countries can thrive on safe, reliable energy
without malign influence.
Quickly, Dr. Reinke, how do you think the Export-Import
Bank can be most effective in supporting the growth of the
nuclear power and technologies here in the United States?
Mr. Reinke. Thank you for the leadership that this
committee has shown on trying to help EXIM get more aggressive
in the marketplace vis-a-vis China. One of the most important
things to do would be to explicitly add nuclear to the list of
technologies that is available for the Chinese exemption, to
try to be able to match terms in the marketplace for offerings
against what the Chinese may be putting together. And the
second thing that could be done is to basically extend that
authority to a Russian offering as well.
Mr. Williams of Texas. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, we go to the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Foster,
who is one of our few, if not only, scientists here, who could
probably have a really high-level conversation with our
witnesses today, and the rest of us will just sit and watch.
But, Mr. Foster, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, and I have to thank X-energy. I
think it was during COVID that we had a very interesting zoom
with your CEO, Mr. Sell?
Mr. Reinke. Mr. Sell. Clay Sell.
Mr. Foster. Mr. Sell, yes, and I have a lot of respect for
your technology. I also agree with Mr. Judson that the
challenges of nuclear are largely economic. I have been very
surprised over the last decade to see the really remarkable
drop in the cost of, particularly, wind energy and solar. And
the competition long term to nuclear, you can't just compare
the cost of adding one or two windmills or solar cells to your
grid. You have to have a full replacement, including baseload.
And that means the real cost comparison should be with
renewables plus energy storage, or renewables plus enough grid
transmission that you can effectively average over very large
geographic regions, and either adding the extra grid or the
extra energy storage is not cheap.
Mr. Judson, if you have to solve the problem without
nuclear, without baseload, what is the additional cost
associated with putting an all-renewable solution on the grid
right now? How much extra would you have to build? How much
storage would you have to build and pay for?
Mr. Judson. I think that is something that actually needs
to be studied in detail, but what we have seen preliminarily,
for instance, there was a really important study that was
published in 2016 called Prosperous Renewable Maryland by the
Institute for Energy and Environmental Research. Their goal for
the study was to evaluate the feasibility of getting to a net
zero emissions grid by 2050 for the State of Maryland, which
doesn't have a tremendous amount of resources for space and
other things with renewable energy.
And they looked at all these questions. It was very clear
that wind and solar balance each other very well in terms of
day and night and seasonally. When you think about the grid as
a whole, you are not just thinking about the grid in terms of
wind and solar power plants generating electricity, and not
just about storage, but a whole array of grid resources,
including demand response and flexible demand and micro grids
and energy stored in batteries and cars. And what they found is
that with the doubling of the economy of Maryland by 2050, and
an increase in population that matches that, or not double, but
an increased population, that the actual cost of a renewable
energy system for the State of Maryland would be substantially
less than the status quo today with 100-percent renewable
energy.
Mr. Foster. Okay. Yes. This is the right level to have the
discussion. I should also say that I am very impressed by your
first application of using this for process heat and for other
things. That is, I think, one of the really important missing
parts in solving the climate crisis is there are a lot of
fossil fuels that get burned for industrial process heat, and
technologies like yours are sort of unique in making a large
amount of very high-temperature process heat. Can you say a
little bit about the other markets that you are looking at,
aside from electricity generation?
Mr. Reinke. Yes. You have recognized, I think, a very
important piece of the puzzle. In the United States, roughly 25
percent of the energy emissions that we account for across-the-
board come from heavy industry, and these are the fundamental
building blocks of our modern society. At Dow's facility, as
you discussed, we are helping to decarbonize a polyethylene
plant where we make products that go into solar cells. They
make products there that, for example, provide the insulation
and jacketing for high-voltage transmission lines, so things
that we need across-the-board in the United States.
In addition to the opportunities for a manufacturing plant
like that, they are really pretty broad. I will give you a
handful. We have conducted study work for a large, integrated
steel manufacturer in the United States, and while that
customer isn't ready to pull the trigger yet, we have had very
promising results in integrating both the process heat and the
electricity for large manufacturing products. We also have
looked at mining applications. We think of mining as hard rock
mining, but there are a lot of other types of mining that form
building blocks in the world where you have to be able to
provide a dry product at the end.
Mr. Foster. Okay. And the last thing I would like to close
on is the national security aspect, because for dual-use
technologies, there is a national security interest in
subsidizing. One example of this are drones. We are suffering
greatly for the fact that the drone market is dominated by the
Chinese. We would have been better off as a country to have
subsidized the drone market so that we would dominate there.
So, how do we think about these dual-use technologies? In my
one second left, Ms. Korsnick, could you say a little bit about
what you think about that?
Ms. Korsnick. Absolutely, and I think it was stated
earlier. It is not whether or not nuclear plants are going to
be built. It is whether or not the United States is going to
build them, and if you look at it that way, anything that we
can do to encourage our fantastic technology and our strong
safety standards makes a lot of sense.
Mr. Foster. Okay. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, we go to the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Meuser, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and sincere
thanks to all of you for being here. It is certainly an
interesting and important subject.
I am from Pennsylvania. In my district, we have the Berwick
Susquehanna Nuclear Power Plant. We have several plants in
Pennsylvania. Throughout Pennsylvania, we utilize nuclear,
coal, natural gas, wind turbines, solar, thermal, and hydro,
very diverse, all of the above, but also all of the below, as I
like to remind people. So in this discussion, certainly
focusing on nuclear energy, and it is the broader aspects of
energy strategy. We are hearing about hitting capacities, these
data centers, the amount of new levels of capacity that are
necessary, that are really on the verge of perhaps being a very
big problem where we simply cannot develop due to the levels of
overall energy made available for business and homes and such.
What I would like to know is, just how challenging is the
regulatory environment for nuclear? Is it to the point that it
is making it just very, very difficult for new nuclear plant
developments because, as we all know, there are not many
nuclear plants in development, and that is the second question.
There are a couple, maybe in the United States I understand,
but I will go to you, Mr. McMurray. Can you tell me what you
think about the regulatory environment for nuclear plant
development?
Mr. McMurray. Yes. Thank you, Representative Meuser. The
current regulatory framework is designed around the large
reactors that operate in the U.S. today for the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission's requirements, decades of operating
experience for large, light-water reactors. They are not
designed for the new generation of reactors, like Dr. Reinke's
company, that use different fuels and coolants and safety
cases, the TRISO fuel, for example.
The NRC is working to modernize this, which is important,
and that is really an opportunity where the U.S. can also be a
global leader, where if you have countries that are looking to
build some of these new technologies, the Department of Energy
and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission can really take a
proactive role for the education on the technical side or the
education on the regulatory side.
Mr. Meuser. Does the regulatory environment of the U.S.
affect the international financing that takes place? I will ask
you, Ms. Korsnick.
Ms. Korsnick. Yes. Thank you for the question. Yes, I would
say the performance of our regulator matters worldwide, and why
do I say that? Because many of the other countries are looking
to see whether our regulator approved whatever technology that
you are talking about as they embark on it. So if our regulator
is sluggish and slow and inefficient, and it takes much longer
for us to get these products to the market, it affects what we
can do in the market.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. Nuclear plant hours in Berwick, for
instance, is 2500 megawatts. Building one, financing it, having
a return on investment (ROI), how feasible is that? Is that
right now considered a worthwhile investment in this regulatory
environment? I will ask you. Sorry. I can't see your name.
Mr. Reinke. Me? Yes.
Mr. Meuser. Yes.
Mr. Reinke. The question is a great one. There are two ways
to look at this. Number one, today in the United States, we are
bringing two reactors online that are large, light-water
reactors, and there are certain markets where that is doable,
and it has taken a tremendous amount of effort to get back into
the game. It was about 30 years before that when we last
deployed a new reactor from scratch. Those muscles had
atrophied.
Now, on the other hand, there are many of our competitors
that are developing smaller reactors. When you look at that
question that you asked on ROI, and you take a reactor that is
the size of the plant that you have, those plants today would
probably cost somewhere in the range of $20 billion to $30
billion for a couple of big units to deploy. Meanwhile, smaller
reactors that are about an order of magnitude less would be
somewhere in the range of about an order of magnitude less on
the cost as well.
So just to make the math simple, let's say you took a $25
billion reactor and you compared it to a smaller reactor that
cost $2.5 billion. The amount of money that you have to raise
in that project is phased over the life of the project. My
business development team does this on a regular basis. You
start with studies that are not very expensive--they are on the
order of hundreds of thousands of dollars--trying to figure out
whether or not there is a match, and if a site is licensable
from a nuclear perspective. You phase that in steps, each one
being roughly an order of magnitude, and spend as you go
through the life of the project. For a notional X-energy
project today, for the early ones, they will be about 7 years
in length, and that is a relationship where every year you
decrease the risk of the project and you increase the spend.
The type of level I am talking about in spending is what we are
used to doing with heavy industrials today. Dow, for example,
has a major capital budget where they allocate resources on
that regular basis.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you.
Mr. Reinke. It is absolutely----
Mr. Meuser. I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the ranking member of the Full Committee, the
gentlelady from California, Ms. Waters, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. Mr. Judson, I was just
talking with my staff about, and I remember very well, the
accident at Three Mile Island nuclear facility. That impression
was reinforced when negligence contributed to the 1986 disaster
at Chernobyl, and more recently, an earthquake and tsunami
caused a 2011 accident at the Fukushima nuclear plant. And
today, Putin has repeatedly bombed nuclear facilities around
Ukraine. Certainly, we understand that most power generation
from nuclear energy is safe. Nearly 20 percent of the
electricity in the United States is generated by nuclear, and
eyewitnesses from the nuclear industry have described it as an
improvement over fossil fuels in terms of carbon emissions. But
that doesn't mean that we must ignore the potentiality of the
catastrophic effects that disasters in these plants can cause
due to negligence, intention, or natural disasters.
Can you please comment on the essential safety aspects that
would need to be considered and assured before any
international financial institution invested the billions of
dollars and decades required to develop one of these plants,
these projects?
Mr. Judson. Yes. Thank you for the question, Ranking Member
Waters, and I am glad to hear some recognition of this from the
rest of the panel, that at the bare minimum, our own nuclear
safety regulator, the NRC, should have approved these designs
for construction and operation in the United States. And
preferably, before we start exporting these products to other
countries, we should have a demonstrated track record with them
here in the U.S., before we start selling them to other
countries.
And I think that the situation in Ukraine certainly shows
in the long-term picture why we also need to be really wary
about prioritizing exporting nuclear reactors to other
countries, namely, that we can't guarantee whether those
countries are going to be involved in a military conflict
decades down the road, and whether the U.S. is going to get
drawn into a military conflict in order to protect these
facilities that could cause widespread environmental damage to
those countries.
Especially in times of war, you can imagine that the
countries with nuclear power plants, if they are being invaded
or if there is a civil war, that those facilities could also
become more vulnerable to theft of nuclear materials from them.
In addition to that, I think what we have also seen in Ukraine,
in particular, is beyond the dangers to the nuclear power
plants themselves, Russia has staged its military operations
out of the Chernobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plants
because they know that Ukraine won't attack them there because
the danger to their own country is too great.
So, the national security vulnerabilities that are created
by the existence and operation of these facilities and the
nuclear waste that they create is not something to be taken
lightly. And I think we in the U.S. sort of tend to dismiss
these issues out of hand because we haven't been bombed the way
that Ukraine has been. We haven't had our infrastructure used
against us in the way that Ukraine has. But I think when we are
talking about prioritizing finance of nuclear energy projects
for other countries, this is absolutely something that we need
to think about, and it has national security implications for
our own country as well.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, and I just wanted to raise
the question of safety because I don't think we can take the
development of nuclear plants lightly. Everything that I
learned about Chernobyl--the earth was contaminated, and we
still don't know how many people eventually died. We know that
many of them were harmed, so we have to be very careful. And if
these bombings, and I have to find out a little bit more,
really do take place, you could have massive destruction, and
that worries me. And again, I am pleased that we are holding
this hearing and that we are talking about it, but this is an
opportunity for those who remember Chernobyl to caution all of
us about taking the development of nuclear lightly. Thank you
so very much.
Mr. Judson. Thank you.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady yields back. The
gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Nunn is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
to our panel for being here today on an issue that is important
not only to the world, but in my home State of Iowa, a place
where most of our energy comes actually from wind, coal, and
gas, but nuclear has played a part in our success growing up.
The facts are pretty simple, friends. Energy security
equals America's national security. We have witnessed over the
past 3 years the need of U.S. energy independence now perhaps
more than ever. In fact, Russia's invasion of Ukraine continues
to disrupt global natural gas prices, and Hamas' brutal attack
on Israel is jeopardizing oil exports throughout the Middle
East. Meanwhile, this Administration continues to prioritize a
political green agenda that can and is hindering America's
producers.
In my home State, the Hawkeye State, we understand the
importance of energy independence. We are champions of energy
production at all-of-the-above levels, meaning that we have
many ways that we are trying to drive energy here in the United
States, and I believe that Congress, Mr. Chairman, must act
proactively for the future of America's energy. Nuclear energy
is often overlooked as a source of safe, clean, and renewable
fuel. Lack of consensus, as we have just heard here,
surrounding nuclear energy has stalled our implementation of
efforts here in the United States, so when we fail to get our
energy sector up to par, our adversaries rapidly develop,
export, implement, and undermine the energy capabilities we
have right here in America. Therefore, I would like to jump
right into it and thank the witnesses for joining us.
Ms. Korsnick, you are the president and chief executive of
the Nuclear Energy Institute. My first question here is, in
your expert opinion, is Russia currently selling small nuclear
reactors, or SMRs, to our NATO allies?
Ms. Korsnick. They have small modular reactors. I am not
aware that they have sold them yet.
Mr. Nunn. Understood. Does China see the production and
export of SMRs as a critical component to their Belt and Road
Initiative?
Ms. Korsnick. Yes, I believe they see the export of large
and small as part of their Belt and Road Initiative.
Mr. Nunn. So, in short, it is safe to say that countries
around the world, including many of our NATO allies, are
looking to Russia and China to provide them this technology.
Ms. Korsnick. That is correct.
Mr. Nunn. Can the U.S. currently offer our NATO allies an
alternative to what Russia and China are putting on the market?
Ms. Korsnick. Yes. In Poland, for example, we have active
contracts to sell U.S. technology reactors to Poland, also in
Romania, and there is an open tender in the Czech Republic.
Mr. Nunn. Very good. Do you believe that we, as the United
States, need to be doing more to help lead in this area so that
it is the U.S. and our allies versus our adversaries leading in
this area?
Ms. Korsnick. Absolutely.
Mr. Nunn. Now, there was some conversation earlier.
Technology has changed quite a bit since Chernobyl. You are
working in this industry. Do you believe that current nuclear
facilities, particularly those that are being produced here in
the United States, bear that same risk, or has technology
helped to mitigate a number of the issues that were raised?
Ms. Korsnick. I have been in the nuclear industry for 37
years, and I operated and maintained power plants for over 30
of those years. I would live next to any nuclear plant we have
in the United States. It's perfectly safe and perfectly good to
export our technology. We should be very proud of U.S.
technology. We operate the best in the world at a greater than
90-percent capacity factor for all nuclear plants in the United
States for over 20 years, and you don't do that because you got
lucky. You do that because you are damn good.
Mr. Nunn. I think it is safe to say not only would you be
safe, but you would probably have a little bit more money in
your pocket as well because your energy would be lower produced
right here in America. I appreciate that.
Dr. Reinke, I would like to turn to you. As vice president
of global business development at X-energy, does nuclear energy
supremacy mean national security here in the United States?
Mr. Reinke. Yes.
Mr. Nunn. What does the U.S. stand to lose if we allow our
adversaries to lead on nuclear energy implementation?
Mr. Reinke. I think we have already seen this play out. As
Maria Korsnick rightly pointed out, for the last 30 years, we
have mostly abdicated our position in global exports of nuclear
technology, and we also, for the most part, abdicated our
position in the development of new technologies. So, we have
seen China and Russia jump ahead of the United States in the
deployment of technologies in their own countries, as well as
selling those abroad. Today, that means that we have
relationships that exist between developing nations often, but
also others that have been developed already that exist now.
They have for 20 years with Russia or China. That puts us at a
geopolitical and geostrategic disadvantage.
Mr. Nunn. I want to take that one step further, because you
are absolutely right. What happens in Russia and China to
undermine this also has an impact on my farmers back in Iowa.
And while we have wind power, we have water power, coal, and
natural gas, does this have an impact on everyday Iowans and
everyday Americans if left unchecked?
Mr. Reinke. Yes, absolutely, but it also means there is an
opportunity for your constituents, and I think there is a great
opportunity for reactor sales here in the United States. We
were discussing just a little bit ago about what it takes to
deploy a new reactor. It is not as big of a bite size as what
we have had to deal with in the past, and I think you are
beginning to see that play out. In fact, one of the utilities
that operates in Iowa has put in its Integrated Resource Plan
(IRP) and two of its other State territories, South Dakota and
Montana--that would be NorthWestern Energy--a plan for the
deployment of roughly a 320-megawatt electric small modular
reactor plant.
Mr. Nunn. That is excellent. Thank you very much. I yield
back the remainder of my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms. Pettersen, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
for being here for this very important discussion. We don't
usually get to talk about nuclear energy here in the Financial
Services Committee. And this is something that I think about
often because I have a 4-year-old son. He is turning 4 this
Friday, and when I think about the future that he is going to
grow up in, one of the most urgent threats that we face is
climate change. Nuclear technology is an essential piece of the
puzzle as we transition to a carbon-free energy grid.
There are some significant barriers, though. When I talk to
leading experts who are in the fight on researching
technologies to address the climate crisis and alternatives,
when I have asked if nuclear energy will be a key part of this,
their reluctance is around how costly it is and if we are
actually going to be able to deploy the necessary investments
for nuclear energy and meet the needs quickly enough. We want
to make sure that we are going to be responsible and protect
our workers and put these safeguards in place, and also, we are
in a race against time.
So quickly, what are some considerations that we should
have, Ms. Korsnick, about labor protections? As you have
overseen a site, you know what we should be considering if we
are going to actually fund nuclear investments and what we can
do to protect workers.
Ms. Korsnick. Thank you very much for your question. I
guess I will start by talking about how strong the relationship
is between the nuclear industry and the labor industry. We have
very strong support from the labor unions. We have had it since
the original reactors were built. We continue that relationship
as they maintain the assets that we have today, and they look
very forward to continuing to work on the new builds for the
future. If there was a concern on labor, either how they were
treated or concerns about safety, we would not have the strong
labor relationship that we have today. So I would just say,
rest assured, we have a very strong partnership and that
partnership continues.
I will also reflect on several times when the comment has
come up relative to cost. I would just say, let's look at some
countries that didn't stop building, and South Korea is a great
example. They continued building, and as they build, the cost
continues to come down. The challenge we have in the United
States is we stopped building for 30 years. You don't stop
building for 30 years, and then start again, and when you come
right out of the gate, everything's perfect. It is not. It
takes time. The DOE report on new reactors, in fact, showed
about a 50-percent reduction in cost over the 5 to 6 new builds
of a kind So, I think we need to step back and say the United
States has proven time and again that we are really good when
we focus and we build, and the more we build, the better we
will get.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you for addressing that. Another key
piece, since we are talking about costs and our ability to move
as quickly as possible, even when we look at housing, so many
of the barriers that we face are around permits and local
municipalities. What can we do to help support our local
communities who might actually need to be a target for
investment for nuclear technology? And just making sure that we
are actually investing in modernizing the grid now to make sure
that we are ready because as we have had an increase in a
demand to use electric energy, we actually don't have the
transformers, and we don't have the grid to actually rise to
the occasion.
Ms. Korsnick. Yes. Thank you. I guess I will begin by
saying, as you are pointing out, it is not just the generation
source, but it is the whole grid that you need to take a look
at, and you mentioned some of that infrastructure. One of the
values of adding nuclear to the grid, and the gentleman
mentioned it earlier--he called it baseload--but we have
intermittent sources. That is great. We are not trying to say
that intermittent sources aren't needed or useful, but you do
need that round-the-clock resource to provide power around the
clock. And study after study has shown that if you take the
wind and solar and you add nuclear to that grid, the overall
cost on that grid comes down. So at the end of the day, the
customer wins, because they pay a lower price.
You mentioned the States and permitting, et cetera. I will
just share that States are incredibly interested in new
nuclear. If 4 years ago, we would have had 12 bills that had
anything to do with nuclear power in all of the State
legislatures, I would have been impressed. Last year, we had
200 bills about commercial nuclear power. States are trying to
figure out how to incentivize bringing new nuclear power to
their States, and that should tell us all something. This isn't
just a worldwide hunger for nuclear, it is a State hunger right
here in the United States, and they want to bring it, and they
want to be part of the whole value chain. We just need to help
unleash that.
Ms. Pettersen. Thanks so much. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentlelady from Texas, Ms. De La Cruz, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
the witnesses for appearing today.
According to the Texas Comptroller, in 2022, there were
1,694 Texas jobs in the nuclear power generation industry, with
an average wage of $175,140. The industry contributed an
estimate of $1.4 billion in gross domestic product to the Texas
economy. When considering nuclear energy jobs outside of the
utility sector, such as those in manufacturing, construction,
or professional services, the number of jobs jumps to more than
3,000. It is incredible. Average wages of $175,000. Those are
jobs we need to be supporting, and it is in an industry that
ultimately produces emission-free energy.
As I was looking at some of the information that was given
to us here, I was reading a memo, and in our memo, it indicated
that nuclear energy not only qualifies as a low-carbon source
of energy, but it also possesses certain advantages over solar
and wind. Now, the Department of Energy notes nuclear is a key
source of baseload power that can compensate for the
intermittence of nature of renewables. In addition, nuclear
plants are able to run at maximum power more reliably than
other energy sources, and their typical output means that they
can produce as much as four renewable energy plants, and it is
not just reliant on sun and wind only.
With that being said, Mr. Judson, you had mentioned that
there are missed opportunities in renewable energy, and your
remarks lead one to assume that supporting nuclear energy means
not supporting renewable energy. And as I look at the witnesses
on the panel today, I see that their portfolios for the
companies and businesses that they work for include renewable
energy, and that it is part of their portfolio, and they have
invested. That being said, I would like to ask you, Mr. Judson,
you said that, ``We are missing a piece of the pie in renewable
energy by focusing on nuclear energy.'' Why do you think that
Russia and China are investing so much in nuclear energy if the
bigger slice of the pie is in renewable energy?
Mr. Judson. Sure. What we have seen is actually a fairly
narrow picture that has been painted. For instance, yes, China
is investing more in nuclear energy than any other country in
the world right now, but they are investing far more in
renewable energy than they are in nuclear, and wind and solar
are far outpacing----
Ms. De La Cruz. And I am going to stop you right there.
That is incorrect information. China, in nuclear energy, is
assembling more than one-third of the reactors globally. China,
in renewable energy, has only done $20 billion a year over the
past 10 years, so that is incorrect information, sir.
Mr. Judson. I am afraid it isn't, but I can refer you to a
source that will clarify it.
Ms. De La Cruz. I would like that, please.
I will tell you what I believe is happening here. I will
tell you that by having nuclear energy and putting monies into
nuclear energy, that is why China is doing it, that is why
Russia is doing it, because they see and they know that this
leads to long-term relationships, relationships that last 50 to
100 years, relationships where other countries can ultimately
become dependent on them. That is why they are putting money
and time and effort into nuclear energy. That being said, I
believe that China and Russia see the opportunity to have world
energy dominance, and this is important to them. That is why
they are in this space and focused in this space and not in the
renewable energy space. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady yields back. The
gentleman from California, Mr. Vargas, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. First of
all, I would say I did read that you are not going to be
running for reelection. I think that is sad for all of us. You
have been a very knowledgeable person up here and a very good
person to work with. Everyone respects you deeply, and we will
miss you, sir.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you.
Mr. Vargas. I have been here for a while, and one of the
things that I do remember is the fight we had over EXIM Bank.
In fact, one of my colleagues on the other side, who chaired
the committee, was very much against it. In fact, ultimately,
he had to be rolled to be able to even fund EXIM Bank, and it
was interesting because it was an ideological fight. I don't
think it was one that was practical or scientific. It was just
ideological. In fact, all of the other banks said we really
need the EXIM Bank if we are going to compete nationally, and
so here we are. We wasted some time.
But I bring that up because ideology is interesting. I
think it has gotten in the way of us looking at climate change
for the last, at least 2 decades. I know I have been preaching
the same thing, climate change is here, it is coming, and it
wasn't until more recently that Mother Nature really made
herself known with this extreme weather that I think has made
believers of most of us.
But I normally don't think that people should get a pass on
ideology. It should be science with exception, and again, with
exception, and that is religion. I am very devoutly Christian.
I can't prove God exists, but I believe very deeply in Him.
That is just faith. You either believe or you don't, and that
is the way it is, but everybody else doesn't get a pass. It has
to be scientific.
And I say that because, Mr. Judson, you sort of paraded the
horribles about nuclear. I don't want to put words in your
mouth, but I think you said that there is safety, there are
wars, invasions, theft of material, strategic place. To me,
that was kind of interesting when you were saying where you
might put them because maybe the enemy wouldn't attack or they
would, from there, attack because they wouldn't be bombed. But
anyway, that was all interesting, expensive, and they are puny
compared to the market they are going to build. I was just in
Slovakia, and they are going to build them, and if they are
going to build them, shouldn't we be involved in this? Mr.
Judson?
Mr. Judson. Well, no. I actually don't think that we need
to think about it that way. I think that, sure, Russia and
China have their reasons for why they are pursuing exporting of
nuclear reactors. China actually isn't doing it very much.
Russia is dominating the nuclear export market, but again, it
is a very small market globally. The development of renewable
energy and related resources is far, far outpacing that, and
so, are we going to go to other countries and say, well, we
will give you a different reactor than what Russia is going to
give you with their financing package and taking your nuclear
waste and all of that, whereas with renewable energy, we can
offer them total energy independence. We can offer them
affordable energy so that they won't have to rely on another
country to provide their fuel.
Mr. Vargas. If I could just push back a little bit because
again, I am not agnostic personally, but I am agnostic when it
comes to this, but they are going to build them. They are, and,
maybe it is not the big solution, but shouldn't we be involved
in this? I think our safety record is better than the Russians
and the Chinese.
Mr. Judson. What I think is that we should be very much
involved in global energy infrastructure finance, but what the
world is saying that it needs is not nuclear energy. Countries
need access to financing for renewable energy right now, and
this is critical right now.
Mr. Vargas. Believe me, I am in favor of renewables, I
think that is the way to go, but they are going to build these
things.
Mr. Judson. Sure.
Mr. Vargas. Just like climate change, ``I don't believe in
it.'' We don't have to believe in it; it is coming. I don't
care what you believe, it is coming, and they are going to
build these reactors. Let me ask somebody else. Isn't that the
case? They are going to build these. I was just in Slovakia.
They told me they were going to build them. They are going to
build them, aren't they?
Mr. Reinke. Yes, and we hear from customers around the
world that they want to build them and they are ready to move
forward with projects. They are looking at the offerings that
are available today, and many countries are just in the
beginning phases of changing their policies back to pro-
nuclear, so we have seen that happen as recently as this past
year in Sweden. Others are moving forward, and as they pivot
those policies, they are also then looking to try to find out
how they could develop reactors faster than they have.
Mr. Vargas. That is one of the things I know when I heard
that they are small now, but, Mr. Judson, they could become big
later on. That is the issue, right? Just a few years back,
renewables were small. Now, they are gigantic. And by the way,
again, I am very much in favor of renewables. I think that is
the way to go, and I do think we should invest more until we
get to this fusion that somehow is going to be the magic bullet
at the end of the day, or the magic pill, I guess I should say.
But anyway, my time is up. I have 6 seconds. I thank you very
much. It has been a great hearing, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
it. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you. The gentleman from
California's time has expired, and normally we alternate
Republican/Democrat, but we are out on our side of the aisle
other than Mr. Hill, who is not a member of the committee but
is here today to ask questions, and as a result, he asks last.
So with that, we go to Mr. Nickel, the last Democrat on the
dais, to ask questions. He is recognized for 5 minutes, and
then, we will go to Mr. Hill.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you very much, Chairman Luetkemeyer, for
holding this hearing today. Nuclear energy and the export of
U.S. nuclear energy technology is important for our national
security, our economic security, and for our climate.
Let me just take a second here to say this so everybody can
hear me clearly: 2023 was the hottest year on record. We are in
a climate crisis, and nuclear energy is a common-sense path
toward solving it. Additionally, Russia is the world's dominant
global nuclear supplier. Russia's state-owned nuclear energy
conglomerate currently has 70 percent of the worldwide export
market for new reactor construction and an order book
accounting to $200 billion over the next decade. Chinese
nuclear industry officials have said that China could build as
many as 30 nuclear reactors abroad, worth $145.5 billion by
2023.
Russia and China both funnel endless resources into nuclear
exports for geopolitical influence. Meanwhile, U.S. companies
are competing against foreign governments without meaningful
support from the Federal Government, and the U.S. just can't
fall behind, and that is why I am drafting legislation to
jumpstart nuclear financing at the Export-Import Bank. The
Export-Import Bank already has the lending authority and
functional capacity to finance overseas deployment of U.S.
nuclear technologies. Last year, the Export-Import Bank
approved $57.2 million in financing to help Romania lay the
engineering groundwork to build two nuclear reactors.
My first question is for you, Ms. Korsnick. What role do
you think the Export-Import Bank could play in financing
nuclear energy if their default rate limit were raised from 2
percent to 4 percent, and if civil nuclear facilities were
included in the China and Transformational Exports Program?
Ms. Korsnick. I think it would be game-changing. In fact,
it is one of our recommendations in our written testimony, to
legislate a permanent increase of EXIM's default rate cap from
2 percent to 4 percent and to expand the risk tolerance. Again,
I think you stated it very well. We need to compete against the
state-owned enterprises. We might not get all the way there,
but we have to get in the ZIP Code because then they will step
back and say, okay, now with whom do I want to do business? And
in that race, the United States will win. The preference will
be to work with the United States, but we have to get closer in
what we can offer.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much. Mr. McMurray, my next question
is for you. Some have argued that financing nuclear energy
comes at the expense of our climate. I certainly don't agree
with that, but given that nuclear is a clean energy, what is
your response to that viewpoint?
Mr. McMurray. Yes. Thank you, Representative. We are seeing
a demand for more energy and more clean energy globally, and
countries are going to want to build whatever options they
have. It is not renewables versus nuclear. We are going to need
every clean energy technology we have. And what we can focus on
is making sure we have the policies in place to support U.S.
companies to be able to export, and that can focus on at home
also regarding the financing to make sure that the companies
have that line of sight to say we are going to build these
manufacturing facilities, we know we have an order book abroad.
We can address those policies so they can see that to build the
facilities here at home, to support building reactors here at
home, but then also be able to build them internationally as
well.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much. Ms. Korsnick, back to you.
Given that Russia and Chinese nuclear enterprises enjoy access
to state-backed financing, do you agree that the U.S. must work
to level the playing field, and what are some of the critical
policy priorities that we need to do to accomplish this?
Ms. Korsnick. Absolutely we need to level the playing
field. It was mentioned earlier, but I will just add the
mandate that EXIM's China and Transformational Exports Program,
known as CTEP, accept greater loan risk across its portfolio
and expand its transformational export areas to include civil
nuclear facilities would be a great step forward. Also, items
that were listed in the Civil Nuclear Export Act, I think are
very important and needed, and it is an important step toward
helping the U.S. gain ground in commercial nuclear
technologies.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much, and I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr.
Hill is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you so much
for letting me waive onto this hearing. I have long been a
strong supporter of the United States using its sway with
international financial institutions to promote nuclear energy
by investing in projects, as they certainly do with renewables
like solar and wind. Nuclear is the ultimate carbon-friendly,
baseload, and long-lasting power source. I am a longtime
supporter of Chairman McHenry's International Nuclear Energy
Financing Act, which would require the Treasury Secretary to
overturn a longstanding ban on nuclear assistance at the World
Bank, which last considered a nuclear plant more than 6 decades
ago.
Recently, I was glad to see that the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development is finally taking steps to
revisit its ban on nuclear energy financing, which follows the
U.S. International Development Finance Corporation in 2020 when
it relaxed its own nuclear investment ban with bipartisan
support from Congress.
Last April, when Speaker McCarthy and a group of us were in
Romania and in Poland, we certainly heard an earful about the
need to expand their nuclear opportunities, and also, drill in
the Black Sea on their natural gas reserves, which they have
bought from the Austrians. And these are the kinds of things,
in a middle-income country like that, where we need the IFIs to
be fully participant in a long-term energy way. But yesterday,
I got a call from the energy policy leader in Romania, who told
me that they had agreed to go forward with a nuclear project in
their country, and I think that is a really positive
development.
I wish we had more projects ongoing, but let me start with
Mr. McMurray. Have we seen progress with the DFC's decision
since 2020?
Mr. McMurray. Yes, we have seen progress. DFC lifted their
moratorium recently in Poland by supporting the GE Hitachi
small modular reactors there, as well as in Romania for the
NuScale technologies. It is very exciting to see this, and
something to keep in mind is that next year, DFC will be
reauthorized, so how to kind of strengthen that unique equity
function that it has to make sure it has the right expertise,
it can support the right projects, and it is not limited by any
other financing abilities for building larger projects is a big
opportunity.
Mr. Hill. Yes, I think that is good, and I think,
obviously, the Germans and the Japanese and the Americans have
such an ability to do a major consortium here. Is there
anything else our national labs can do to streamline the small
modular nuclear design issue, or do you feel like there is a
template there that is perfectly fine and that we can press
forward with that from a sales point of view for U.S.
technology?
Mr. McMurray. Yes. The U.S. national labs are a true
treasure to really improve that competitive advantage of the
United States.
Mr. Hill. Yes.
Mr. McMurray. The research that they do, the public-private
partnerships that they have really makes the U.S. industry very
competitive in being innovative and developing these new
technologies. Broadening that to the international side, we can
actually equate this to LNG, where the DOE public-private
partnerships in hydraulic fracking have really allowed the LNG
industry to take off. The nuclear industry can do the same
thing, and that is also where we can leverage our internal
expertise at the Department of Energy and our national labs to
help countries learn about these technologies, and to get
comfortable with these technologies so we can export them.
Mr. Hill. According to the Atlantic Council, the 2
countries that built 60 percent of new nuclear plants since
2019, I think, are Russia and India. Do you think that these
steps on financing plus the small modular nuclear design
element are going to allow Western countries like the United
States to catch up and start taking market share there?
Mr. McMurray. Yes. I think we have a variety of
technologies, both large reactors----
Mr. Hill. And I think financing is a big piece.
Mr. McMurray. Yes.
Mr. Hill. President El-Sisi told us that the reason they
went Russian was purely based on the four-reactor package where
they didn't pay a nickel until the fourth reactor was up and
running, and then the payout was pretty long. I don't know if
that technology is superior or not. Does anybody want to
address that?
Mr. McMurray. I would say financing is critical, and making
sure that we can offer competitive financing needs to happen
to----
Mr. Hill. Who has a suggestion on how we could make the
financing even more competitive to benefit American
manufacturing?
Mr. Reinke. I would weigh in that the first thing that
could be done is to help the World Bank and the other
multilateral institutions lift their moratorium. When they say
no to nuclear, it has an influence in trickling down throughout
the banking system, so many institutions don't have the
technical capacity to evaluate a project from scratch.
Mr. Hill. Yes.
Mr. Reinke. They have to bring that in, and what they will
do first is look to an international bank, like the World Bank,
to try to determine whether or not there is risk, and that is a
policy decision that was made there.
Mr. Hill. Thank you very much. I am glad we have bipartisan
support for this. I think it is critical. I think if we are
serious about climate, then we need to be serious about
nuclear. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. With that,
we go to the gentlewoman from California, Mrs. Kim, who is also
the Vice Chair of this subcommittee, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Chairman Luetkemeyer, and I want to
also thank the ranking member for organizing this hearing, and
thank you, witnesses, for being with us today. I want to start
by asking each of you a very quick question. Would you rather
live in a world where the U.S. and our allies are financing
nuclear projects or in a world where Russia and China are
unilaterally providing lending for nuclear projects?
Ms. Korsnick. I will pick the first answer.
Mr. McMurray. Yes, the United States.
Mr. Reinke. Me, too.
Mr. Judson. The second answer.
Mrs. Kim. When U.S. leadership and influence is absent,
China and Russia do not hesitate to fill in the vacuum.
Unfortunately, U.S. leadership had been absent for way too long
in advocating for financing of nuclear projects. While long
overdue, I must applaud the Biden Administration's recent
decision to encourage the World Bank and other institutions to
support nuclear financing. We must support an all-of-the-above
energy strategy.
I do want to ask a question. The International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) has called nuclear power plants among the
safest and most secure facilities in the world, and one
analysis of the fossil fuels and low-carbon energy sources
showed that the risks to human life from accidents and air
pollution were so small with nuclear power, that they were
comparable to renewables.
So, Ms. Korsnick, and Dr. Reinke, could you help us
understand, from an engineering perspective, what makes nuclear
so much less of a risk to human health than other energy
sources?
Ms. Korsnick. I will start, Ben, and then I will hand it
off to you. Basically, to start with, there are no emissions
from a nuclear power plant, and when we say carbon dioxide,
there are no carbon dioxide emissions, but also no nitrous
oxides, no sulfur oxides, and those are some things that are
pollutants that damage the environment, but they are also
damaging to our health, and none of those emissions occur with
the operation of nuclear power. You also get a lot of energy
from a small amount of resources in nuclear power, and you get
that round-the-clock reliable energy.
Mr. Reinke. I also want to say that nuclear, broadly, has
adopted safety as its single most important cultural trait. In
the United States, safety is paramount. It is the number-one
thing that all nuclear operators focus on. It is the number-one
thing we focus on at X-energy as well. We have designed a
reactor that is even safer than what we have today, and the
reason we care to do that, despite the incredible safety case
of today's reactors, is that it makes the reactor design
simpler. You can get rid of a lot of things that you would
build in and engineer to make sure that a reactor stays safe
under all conditions, and that simpler design is then more
economic. And that is why we are bringing a new technology to
market.
The last thing to say is that we have done an analysis
internally as well, trying to look at the overall lifecycle
emissions for our plants versus what we do, and we use the
Argonne National Lab model, which is the standard for the
Department of Energy. Typically, that model spits out an answer
that is exactly what you said, which is that nuclear is
comparable to renewables, and I believe there is only one type
of renewable facility that would be, on a per-megawatt-hour
basis, actually less than nuclear power. When we have run that
model for our reactors, we actually come out lower than that
even.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. Mr. McMurray, as you discussed in your
testimony, the U.S. and over 20 allies pledged to triple global
nuclear energy capacity from 2020 levels to 2050. That would be
an unprecedented growth, with more than 14 new 1,000-megawatt
reactors every year starting in 2030. The U.S. and countries in
Europe haven't deployed even close to that pace in recent
decades, and some of the countries that made this pledge do not
even have nuclear reactors at all. So how important is
financing to reaching these levels of deployment, and how can
we, the U.S. and IFIs, play a role?
Mr. McMurray. Thank you, Representative. And thank you for
your support for geothermal permitting reform. It is a great
question. The U.S. has to lead in this, and it has the industry
to do that. It has the technical expertise and the regulatory
expertise to be able to make that happen. It also has the
ability to support the financing between EXIM and DFC, but it
is also where the World Bank removing its moratorium is
necessary. The World Bank is one of the few entities that can
support these large global infrastructure projects, and there
are things that the World Bank can do. It can create a trust
fund, which is actually a well-known thing at the World Bank.
About two-thirds of its analytical services are funded by
these, and that can solve----
Mrs. Kim. According to the World Bank, around half of Sub-
Saharan Africa still lacks access to electricity. So is it
realistic to expect Africa to obtain 100-percent access to
clean electricity unless we expend nuclear energy on the
continent?
Mr. McMurray. Thank you. This is an area of the world that
wants more energy and it wants clean energy, and that is where
you see China and Russia also looking at deploying their
technologies there. That is an area where the U.S. has to be
able to compete. Otherwise, these countries are going to look
for those sources of financing that is available, and right
now, that is China and Russia.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. My time is up. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady's time has expired.
With that, all of my colleagues today have asked all of the
questions we need to ask, hopefully, and we have some great
answers from all of you. We thank you for your testimony today.
One housekeeping item here. I would ask for unanimous
consent to enter two articles from Foreign Policy Magazine to
the record, which argue that our current approach to green
finance in Africa is only harming the poor. These articles are
entitled, ``Why False Energy Hopes Are Bad for Africa,'' and,
``The Dark Side of Climate Finance.''
Without objection, it is so ordered.
Just one question for you before we leave here. Mr. Foster
and I were talking a little bit ago when he was saying if a
bomb should hit one of the plants that have these little
modules, ceramic modules or whatever you call them, would they
destroy those modules or would they just be blown to pieces,
and you would just have to go collect all the round objects
around?
Mr. Reinke. It is a great question. The easiest way to
answer this is that we have also worked on a design for the
U.S. Department of Defense, a mobile micro reactor that was
part of Project Pele, and we are funded to do work for them
today. When DOD had originally envisioned the program, they
required that all applicants use a TRISO fuel because they knew
that if they put it in harm's way, it would be the safest
nuclear fuel that you could have deployed.
We are designing our reactors to U.S. standards today, and
typically, the U.S. fleet has to be able to take, post-9/11,
under a rule from the NRC, a direct impact from a 747 fully
loaded with jet fuel, so all reactors are incredibly robust.
And that is true, period, but with our fuel, if the pebbles
were to leak out of the reactor after some sort of catastrophic
accident, they retain that integrity. And under tests in the
past, even if you were able to break a spear, one of those
pebbles, in half, the individual TRISO particles are retained,
and they are bonded to the graphite matrix. When people have
done crush tests that are extremely robust, at the end of the
crush test on the outside, you end up with two spheres,
hemispheres, with the fuel bonded on the inside.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Very good. Question?
Mr. Foster. Oh, just pretty much, you answered what was
going to be my question there. Another advantage that the TRISO
approach has is you don't vent the long-lived radionuclides.
One of the problems with conventional nuclear fuel is that if a
jetliner lands on it or something like this, there is a lot of
stored, long-lived volatile radionuclides sitting around that
are also in your fuel, but since they are contained in little,
tiny internal microspheres or whatever, then they actually
don't come out, and that is a non-trivial advantage, along with
the fact that helium as a coolant has three big advantages:
first, it is noncorrosive; second, it doesn't corrode; and
third, it doesn't corrode stuff by itself. Just having done
helium designs and other designs, that is a huge deal.
Mr. Reinke. Yes.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. So, in layman's language----
[laughter]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. ----what you are saying is that the
new models, the new designs are such that you really don't have
a problem if there is some sort of an explosion or some sort of
accident, that they are designed so that there are going to be
very, very minimal, if any problems. Is that what you are
saying?
Mr. Reinke. That is right, and when we design the reactors,
we take that design from the fuel out, and you make sure that
you design a reactor so that under any accident scenario, even
if you were to have a huge leak of all the helium at one
moment, that safety case is such that the heat can dissipate,
and it continues to dissipate from that hot radioactive fuel on
the inside to the surrounding environment in perpetuity without
any human intervention.
Mr. Foster. Wow.
Mr. Reinke. And that is the key.
Mr. Foster. What it means operationally is that a terrorist
could take over the control room, and there is not much they
could do to make a Chernobyl-style accident.
Mr. Reinke. There are only four operations in our reactor,
so it is the most boring job in the world to be a nuclear
operator at our reactors. And if you would like, we can show
you our control room simulator where you can play with the
controls and try to run the reactor up and down in power, but
there really are only four actions that are even physically
possible with the reactor.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Very good. I thank all of the
witnesses today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:02 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

A P P E N D I X

January 17, 2024
