- MOVING THE MONEY: UNDERSTANDING THE IRANIAN REGIME'S ACCESS TO MONEY AROUND THE WORLD AND HOW THEY USE IT TO SUPPORT TERRORISM

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MOVING THE MONEY: UNDERSTANDING
THE IRANIAN REGIME'S ACCESS TO
MONEY AROUND THE WORLD AND HOW
THEY USE IT TO SUPPORT TERRORISM

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 26, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-52

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-317 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan, Chairman

PETE SESSIONS, Texas                 AL GREEN, Texas, Ranking Member
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee, Vice Chairman  SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
October 26, 2023.............................................     1
Appendix:
October 26, 2023.............................................    29

WITNESSES
Thursday, October 26, 2023

Goldberg, Richard, Senior Advisor, Foundation for Defense of
Democracies (FDD)..............................................     4
Noronha, Gabriel, Fellow, the Gemunder Center for Defense and
Strategy, the Jewish Institute for National Security of America
(JINSA)........................................................     6
Thomas, Clayton, Specialist, Middle Eastern Affairs,
Congressional Research Service (CRS)...........................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Goldberg, Richard............................................    30
Noronha, Gabriel.............................................    37
Thomas, Clayton..............................................    53

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Horsford, Hon. Steven:
``First look: Top Biden official heads to Europe in push to
cut off Hamas funding,'' dated October 23, 2023............    63
Goldberg, Richard:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................    65
Noronha, Gabriel:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................    67
Thomas, Clayton:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................    68
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nikema Williams.............................    70

MOVING THE MONEY: UNDERSTANDING
THE IRANIAN REGIME'S ACCESS TO
MONEY AROUND THE WORLD AND HOW
THEY USE IT TO SUPPORT TERRORISM

----------

Thursday, October 26, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:09 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bill Huizenga
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Huizenga, Sessions,
Wagner, Mooney, Rose, Meuser, Ogles; Green, Horsford, Garcia,
and Williams of Georgia.
Also present: Representatives Luetkemeyer and Steil.
Chairman Huizenga. Good morning. The Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Moving the Money:
Understanding the Iranian Regime's Access to Money Around the
World and How They Use It to Support Terrorism.''
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an
opening statement.
Mr. Goldberg, Mr. Noronha, and Mr. Thomas, I want to say
thank you for being here. We appreciate your time. I know for
at least two of you, you were also part of a hearing yesterday
with my colleague, Blaine Luetkemeyer, so you are pulling some
double duty, and we appreciate that.
At the end of the day, we are trying to find out how we can
help stabilize the Middle East. That is the ultimate goal here.
Let me be clear: Today's hearing should not be labeled as
partisan. Members from both sides of the aisle have concerns
about how the Iranian regime is able to support terrorism
around the world, continue its march towards developing nuclear
weapon capabilities, and suppress the human rights of its own
people.
Let's begin today by setting the stage. Since 2021, the
Iranian regime has profited nearly $80 billion from oil sales
around the world, which is due in part to relaxed sanctions.
Earlier this summer, reports indicated that the United States
and Iran had resumed diplomatic engagements after the Biden
Administration failed to revive the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA).
In September, the United States and Iran finalized a swap
involving the release of five American hostages in exchange for
five Iranian nationals who had been charged with sanctions
violations and Federal crimes, while agreeing to give Iran
access to approximately $6 billion in funds previously held in
South Korea. Similarly, the Administration waived sanctions to
allow more than $10 billion worth of Iranian assets held in
Iraq to be transferred to Oman and other jurisdictions.
Three weeks ago, Hamas committed one of the most brutal
terrorist attacks that we have ever seen on the state of
Israel, and 30 Americans tragically lost their lives in that.
It is important to note that Hamas receives approximately
$350 million per year in support from Iran, roughly 93 percent
of their total funding.
Finally, last week this subcommittee launched an
investigation to better understand the Administration's
decisions regarding economic sanctions on the Iranian regime.
So, today's hearing will focus around three central
questions: first, how restricted Iranian funds are held around
the world and how the Iranian regime accesses them; second,
understanding the genesis of the $6 billion used as negotiating
terms to release the hostages in Iran, and is that, in fact,
what happened; and third, how the Administration helped the
Iranian regime more easily access an additional $10 billion
paid by Iraq for electricity.
Here is what Congress can do. First, we can push for
greater transparency when any Administration is choosing to
waive sanctions that have been passed by this body, especially
as negotiating terms and any hostage deal with the Iranian
regime. Members of this body should not be kept in the dark;
the consequences are too great.
Next, we do not allow sanctions to be waived, rolled back,
or funds transferred. Time and time again, Iran has shown that
it is willing to starve its own people in pursuit of supporting
terrorism or achieving a nuclear weapon. Naively believing that
diplomatic agreements will deter the Iranian regime will be
done at our own peril. We must cripple their economy and return
to the previous Administration's maximum pressure campaign, in
my opinion.
Let me close with this. I know there are a lot of different
opinions about what is happening in Gaza and with the
Palestinians and with Israel. But we should all agree that
innocent civilians should not be used as political cover. Make
no mistake, Hamas is no friend of the Palestinian people, in my
opinion. And the Iranian regime is no friend of ours. We must
not waiver in our support for our ally of Israel.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today, and I
am going to yield back the balance of my time. I now recognize
the ranking member of the subcommittee, the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Green, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
witnesses for appearing as well.
Mr. Chairman, this hearing is ostensibly being held to
investigate how Iran accesses restricted funds around the
world, looking at two instances where the United States has
granted waivers for Iran to access these specific restricted
funds.
Some of my colleagues across the aisle, however, may try to
link these waivers to the attacks in Israel. That would be a
callous attempt to politicize what is already a horrific
crisis. We cannot allow this hearing to become a distraction
action by my colleagues across the aisle from 23 days of
legislative inaction. We cannot allow the blame game with
political fallacies to masquerade as proven facts.
Let's examine some of the political fallacies refuted by
proven facts. Political fallacy: The $6 billion transferred
from South Korea to Qatar has been handed over to Iran. Proven
fact: Not a scintilla of a cent. Some things bear repeating.
Not a scintilla of a cent has been released to Iran. On October
12, 2023, the U.S. and Qatar agreed to restrict the funds in
response to the attack on Israel.
Political fallacy: The $6 billion are U.S. taxpayer
dollars. Proven fact: U.S. Presidents, including President
Trump, have granted waivers for countries to purchase Iranian
oil with each country's own money. No President has given
foreign countries taxpayer dollars to purchase Iranian oil.
Political fallacy: President Biden shouldn't allow Iraq to
purchase electricity from Iran. Proven fact: Former President
Trump allowed Iraq to buy electricity from Iran with the
justification that Iraq had a fragile economy. Should former
President Trump be denounced for allowing Iraq to buy
electricity from Iran?
In closing, I ask this of my Republican colleagues: Where
were you when former President Trump allowed eight countries to
purchase oil from Iran? Where were you when former President
Trump allowed Iraq to purchase electricity from Iran? And why
is there no mention of former President Trump in your
distraction action memo?
Now, there are some things on which the Chair and I can
agree. What he said about Israel and what happened there, I
think we can find common ground on. It was a horrific event. It
is something that never should have happened and should never
happen again. But we also have to concern ourselves with peace.
And you have to concern yourself with peace of the genesis of
war, else you may not know what type of war to execute. And we
also have to concern ourselves with humanitarian aid for the
Palestinians. There are many other things that we might not
agree on, but I do believe we agree on some of these.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the time, and I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. Thank you. I appreciate that. And we
will get to a number of those issues that the ranking member
has brought up.
Today, we welcome the testimony of Mr. Richard Goldberg,
the senior advisor for the Foundation for Defense of
Democracies; Mr. Gabriel Noronha, a fellow with the Gemunder
Center for Defense and Strategy at the Jewish Institute for
National Security of America; and Mr. Clayton Thomas, one of
our own, is a Specialist in Middle Eastern Affairs at the
Congressional Research Service.
Thank you all for being here. We thank you for your time.
We know it is valuable, especially for those of you pulling
double duty. You will each be recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral statements. And without objection, your written statements
will be made a part of the record.
Mr. Goldberg, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD GOLDBERG, SENIOR ADVISOR, FOUNDATION FOR
DEFENSE OF DEMOCRACIES (FDD)

Mr. Goldberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Green. It is great to be back in this chamber a few hours later
for the double duty, and this is a really important topic. I do
hope we can find bipartisan common ground here.
I do want to address some of the ranking member's last
comments and questions, because I can answer them pretty
quickly and easily. Where was I when President Trump issued oil
waivers? Well, in 2018, I was at the FDD opposing those
waivers. And in 2019, I was in the National Security Council
ending them, because we ended them in May of 2019.
So, I don't know where this talking point keeps coming from
that Trump did this too. Maximum pressure started in May 2019,
Congressman. We ended the oil waivers. All of that money went
on lockdown in escrow accounts, and they have not been reopened
until this year, until these transfers.
Where was I when we were granting waivers under the statute
that I wrote as a staffer in 2012, the Iran Freedom and
Counter-Proliferation Act, when we allowed Iraq to continue
importing electricity from Iran? First, I was at FDD, and then,
I was at the National Security Council, and we worked for the
Treasury Department and the State Department to ensure those
funds were locked down. We allow, under the waiver, import of
electricity. We don't allow Iran to access the funds. Now, we
do.
I don't know where all of these claims keep coming from,
but let's stick with facts.
If we today, in the wake of October 7th, agree that we need
to do all we can to deny this regime in Tehran resources, that
it is in our national security interest for the Islamic
Republic of Iran to have less money, not more money at its
fingertips, understanding the fungibility of money, putting
aside whether this $6 billion you are pointing to has been
spent yet or borrowed against yet, there's an interesting
question that's never asked.
What about the $10 billion, Congressman? What about that
money that was moved out of Iraq to Oman? You have no
information about it. We just heard yesterday that the waiver
was introduced into the record. We just learned about it. What
has been spent out of there? Is that money frozen? Have the
Omanis agreed to that? Have the Iraqis agreed to that? When
that waiver expires, will we revert to the old waiver and
ensure that money in Baghdad gets locked down for electricity
payments?
We can allow Iraq to import electricity. We don't have to
allow Iran access to the money.
Oil sanctions. This is just new.
This summer, we saw a massive spike as the secret nuclear
deal that I outline in my written testimony started after Brett
McGurk, the White House Middle East Coordinator had gone to
Oman, and negotiated, through the Omanis, a secret nuclear
understanding, using all kinds of interesting pretext and
executive authorities to start releasing money and stop
enforcing sanctions. Why? Because they knew politically they
couldn't come to this House to submit a deal under the Iran
Nuclear Agreement Review Act to evade the laws we have all
passed, that you all have voted on in the past. Why did they do
that? Because they wanted a nuclear understanding. They wanted
to say, oh, please, just don't go across that 90-percent
enriched uranium threshold.
We heard yesterday in testimony that, oh, we should never
have gotten out of the JCPOA. Look at Iran's nuclear program
today. The vast majority of Iran's advancements in its nuclear
activities have happened since January 2021. That is when they
crossed to 20-percent enriched uranium, and then to 60 percent,
and now they're just a stone's throw away from showing us their
technical capability to get to 90 percent. Only when we went
from maximum pressure to maximum concessions, maximum
deference.
The policy needs to change. Oil exports have been steadily
rising with nonenforcement throughout 2021 and 2022. It was
only this year that they went through the roof, with some
reports topping 2 million barrels per day, in August, under
this nuclear deal.
And so, no, Congressman, I am not saying this $6 billion
was used to fund October 7th. It is factually inaccurate, but a
posture of appeasement for 2\1/2\ years that emboldens this
regime. A summer negotiated secret nuclear understanding that
allows this regime to say, well, the Americans are off the
table. They are afraid of us. They are deterred. We have
already cut a pact with Saudi Arabia, too, through the Chinese
earlier in the year. Now, we can turn all of our sights on
Israel, the only country in the Middle East operating inside of
Iran to stop that nuclear program. Now, we can activate all of
our terror tentacles that the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
(IRGC) coordinates in Beirut, a cell coordinating Hezbollah,
Hamas, and the Islamic jihad.
This is when we need to come together to say, let's lock
down these resources. Let's turn our posture from appeasement,
to deterrence, to pressure. That is how we take on the terror
tentacles of Tehran.
I look forward to your questions today. Thank you so much
for holding this hearing. I know that Qatar came up yesterday.
There may be a hostage deal today involving Qatar. I think it
is important we address that in the double game Qatar plays.
But I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goldberg can be found on
page 30 of the appendix.]
Chairman Huizenga. Our witnesses are reminded that they
need to address their remarks to the Chair, specifically. But I
appreciate your passion, Mr. Goldberg, and I look forward to
exploring a few of those issues.
Mr. Noronha, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF GABRIEL NORONHA, FELLOW, THE GEMUNDER CENTER FOR
DEFENSE AND STRATEGY, THE JEWISH INSTITUTE FOR NATIONAL
SECURITY OF AMERICA (JINSA)

Mr. Noronha. Thank you, Chairman Huizenga, Ranking Member
Green, and distinguished members of the subcommittee for
inviting me here today.
Over the past decade, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
spent more than $20 billion to support foreign terror groups in
the Middle East. It has spent tens of billions of its own
dollars on its own terror operations. And I think it is
important to understand that when the Islamic Republic chants,
``Death to Israel,'' and they chant, ``Death to America,'' they
are really deadly serious about those chants, and we learned
that 2 weeks ago.
And, Mr. Chairman, you are correct that this is not a
partisan issue. They do not distinguish between Republicans and
Democrats when they target us, and they don't in their ongoing
assassination plots on U.S. soil.
Hamas' attack on Israel was only possible because of the
increased funding from the Iranian regime over the last couple
of years--not just in the last couple of months, but over the
last couple of years. Historically, Iran has provided $100
million to Hamas. In the past year, that has increased to $350
million.
And I think it's important to understand how they got to
the position of being able to increase those funds. Today, Iran
provides Hamas 93 percent of its military budget. That funding
allowed Hamas to lay low over the last year and prepare for
these sneak attacks. Iran also trained 500 Hamas fighters
inside Iran as recently as September. I think that is certainly
a contributing factor to the success of their operations.
And the regime could afford this largesse because of the
problems with financing that has really flooded in--as you
mentioned, Mr. Chairman, $80 billion at least in oil sales
since the beginning of 2021. The $10 billion from Iraq,
facilitated by State Department waivers--which I saw that you
submitted into the record yesterday--which are very strange,
having written them myself, and very unprecedented. They may
now be laundering that money through China to get rid of all
humanitarian exemptions. And then, the $6 billion that was
deposited into Qatari accounts in exchange for the release of 5
Iranian-American hostages. There are also reports that Iran has
gained access to $6.7 billion in International Monetary Fund
(IMF) Special Drawing Rights. That is very much in this
committee's jurisdiction.
Supreme Leader Khamenei's philosophy is to use all the
funds it can obtain to advance its terrorism. They don't really
care about providing for the material needs of the Iranian
people. They will always prioritize terror. And the United
States should not aid the regime in this effort.
I have a few recommendations. First, Congress should force
the Executive Branch to enforce its existing oil sanctions
against shipping companies, tanker companies, ports, refiners,
and insurance companies. There are over 300 tankers
facilitating trade in Iranian oil which are not sanctioned
today. And these sanctions seem to be mandatory, not
discretionary. The same applies to Iran's--the United States'
sectorial sanctions against Iran's metals and petrochemical
exports. Those sanctions have really not been enforced in the
past 30 months.
Second, Congress should work to bring an end to these
ongoing energy waivers that we provide to Iraq and make sure
that those funds can't be laundered in China. This is a really
serious terror financing threat. This issue has gone on for a
long time, through multiple Administrations. And I think it is
incumbent on Congress to find a solution in the Executive
Branch on how we can wean Iraq off Iranian energy independence,
but then try to bring this to an end fast.
Third, the United States must claw back the $6 billion
provided to the Qatari fund for Iran last month. It has not
been disbursed yet. My concern, based on Iranian budgeting
principles, is that they plan out their foreign currency
payments months in advance, and they were planning to draw down
on this. And we are in the process of moving funds around until
just now, I think.
The deal we made with Iran in August and September became
irrelevant the moment they funded the slaughter of 30 Americans
in Israel last month and took a dozen more Americans hostage.
We should not view that deal as having any legitimacy anymore.
And I think the other point that is important to know is
that the regime has a long history of pilfering food and
medicine to resell on the black market in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The proceeds, even if we gave them food and medicine, would
likely go to terror or be stolen by the regime elite. And so, I
believe Congress should rescind the September 11th waiver to
formally and permanently freeze those funds and ultimately work
to provide the funds to the victims of terror.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Noronha can be found on page
37 of the appendix.]
Chairman Huizenga. Thank you.
Mr. Thomas, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF CLAYTON THOMAS, SPECIALIST, MIDDLE EASTERN
AFFAIRS, CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE (CRS)

Mr. Thomas. Chairman Huizenga, Ranking Member Green, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting the
Congressional Research Service to testify today.
This morning, I will summarize my written statement on
Iran's funds abroad, starting with a brief overview of the U.S.
sanctions authorities that underpin the funds and their use
before focusing on the Biden Administration's decision earlier
this year to facilitate the transfer of $6 billion of those
Iranian funds from South Korea to Qatar. I will finish by
suggesting some options and implications for congressional
action.
For background, the United States has, for decades, sought
to limit the Iranian Government's financial resources via
sanctions in an effort to deprive the government of the ability
to fund its programs to develop weapons of mass destruction and
the means to deliver them, its nuclear activities, and its
support for terrorist groups. Led by Congress, these U.S.
efforts have included a decade's long effort to limit Iran's
petroleum exports, a key revenue source for the regime.
Starting in 2011, Congress authorized exceptions from U.S.
sanctions for countries that otherwise could be subject to
penalties for purchasing Iranian petroleum to continue such
purchases if they gradually reduced their imports. Congress
further mandated that excepted foreign buyers had to deposit
payments for Iranian petroleum in financial institutions of the
purchasing country, not in Iran. Congress explicitly permitted
the use of those funds for humanitarian trade in multiple Iran-
specific sanctions authorities, in line with long-standing
provisions in U.S. law that exempt humanitarian goods like food
and medicine from U.S. sanctions programs.
Still, restrictions on those Iranian funds abroad lead many
to describe them as frozen, as foreign financial institutions
have generally restricted their use in order not to run afoul
of U.S. law and themselves become potential targets for
secondary sanctions.
In September 2023, in conjunction with mutual prisoner
releases from the United States and Iran, the U.S. approved the
transfer of $6 billion in Iranian funds from South Korea to
Qatar. These actions occurred in the context of broader
diplomatic engagement to de-escalate U.S.-Iran tensions. To
facilitate the transfer of funds, Secretary Blinken issued
sanctions waivers to allow European financial institutions to
participate without the risk of U.S. sanctions.
Executive Branch officials did not provide a detailed
description of the oversight mechanisms that would have applied
to the funds, but said that U.S. oversight, in partnership with
that of the Government of Qatar, would be substantial and that
the United States would take, ``appropriate action,'' if Iran
attempted to use the funds for purposes other than
nonsanctionable humanitarian trade.
The September 7, 2023, Hamas attacks on Israel and the
resulting conflict have prompted increased scrutiny of U.S.
policy towards Iran, a long-time backer of Hamas. That scrutiny
includes attention to the $6-billion transfer. According to
press reports, Deputy Treasury Secretary Wally Adeyemo told
legislators that in the wake of Hamas' assault on Israel, U.S.
and Qatari officials had agreed to prevent the use of the funds
indefinitely. The Administration has not made any official
statements on the status of those funds.
Going forward, as part of its oversight responsibilities,
Congress could consider whether or not to seek greater
visibility into Iran's funds abroad, including via legislation
to require regular reporting by the Administration to Congress
on the funds and their use. Congress could also consider
whether or not to mandate congressional review of
Administration decisions with respect to the funds.
Some Members of Congress are urging or seeking to compel
the Administration to act in a demonstrable, transparent way to
ensure the funds in Qatar are not used for transactions that
would benefit the Iranian Government. Since September 7th,
Members of Congress have introduced at least 18 pieces of
legislation related to Iran. Many of those bills would rescind
the waivers issued to facilitate the transfer and seek to
encourage third parties to block or otherwise decline to
conduct transactions with the funds. Other legislation would
seek to confiscate and repurpose the funds, although the United
States' ability to seize the funds appears to be limited, as
the United States does not have jurisdiction over them.
New official action to newly block the funds could provoke
an Iranian response or have other impacts on U.S. interests,
including with respect to Qatar, a major non-NATO ally of the
United States that hosts major U.S. military facilities. Formal
action to rescind the waivers or amend the authorities
underlying them could also have implications for Iraq, which
has long relied on U.S. sanctions waivers to import Iranian
electricity. Congress could also revisit long-standing
sanctions exemptions for humanitarian trade, weighing them
against the broader goal of pressuring the Iranian Government
and the interest some Members have expressed in supporting the
Iranian people.
This concludes my brief remarks. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thomas can be found on page
53 of the appendix.]
Chairman Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Thomas.
We are going to now turn to Member questions, and I am
going to recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Honestly, I really do wish we could have a long-form
podcast kind of conversation here today because there are so
many avenues to explore in this, but I will only have 5
minutes. We will all have 5 minutes, but I am sure we will be
having quite a bit of follow-up on that.
Mr. Noronha, yesterday at our National Security
Subcommittee hearing, I entered into the record, as you had
indicated, the report to Congress on the renewal of Iraq's
sanctions waiver for electricity payments. This is the Biden
Administration's sanctions waiver for the payment of
electricity by Iraq to Iran.
Have you seen this document?
Mr. Noronha. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. What are your immediate takeaways?
I know you touched on a few of those things, but just explore
that briefly.
Mr. Noronha. It struck me that they were trying to use the
2012 law which was intended to reduce imports of Iranian oil--
--
Chairman Huizenga. And let's be clear, this is the 2012
National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA)----
Mr. Noronha. Correct.
Chairman Huizenga. ----under the Obama Administration.
Mr. Noronha. Correct. This was passed bipartisan from
Congress and signed into law by President Obama. It was
intended to get Iran's oil and electricity revenues down. And
instead, what it appears the Administration used that law for
is to, in my view, illegally create a channel where Iran could
get euros.
Congressman Huizenga. Which was specifically the Korea
situation, correct? Korea had a reliance on Iranian oil and
this was part of trying to wean them off of that?
Mr. Noronha. There were eight countries that we were
working on to wean off their imports of Iranian oil. We
couldn't do so overnight. And we were trying to do this very
fast. Iraq is slightly separate.
Chairman Huizenga. Yesterday, you said you were immediately
struck a little bit that Germany, France, and Oman were the
three exceptions to that. Can you explore that briefly?
Mr. Noronha. France, Germany, and Oman have never imported
Iranian oil. They have never imported Iranian petroleum
products. They were never given waivers by the Trump
Administration because they didn't need them.
Chairman Huizenga. So, why in the world would they be
included in this now?
Mr. Noronha. It is, in my view, legal fiction that was used
to somehow cite this law so that they could be the mechanism to
launder funds from Iraq into euros for an Omani channel.
Chairman Huizenga. Mr. Goldberg, I am going to turn to you.
The Administration obviously allowed the transfer of $10
billion from Iraq as well. Where do you suspect this money is
now?
Mr. Goldberg. We don't have clarity on that. We do know
that, if you look back, and I document this in my written
testimony, we have multiple statements from various Iranian
officials and Iraqi officials in that May-June-July timeframe
that give us this dollar figure, some say $10 billion, or $11
billion. But remember, Iraq is still importing electricity, so
that money continues to grow. It is not one-time money like a
frozen account in South Korea or the $3 billion that is still
sitting in Japan or any money that is in Delhi or in Beijing
that may have been on the docket for transfer in the future
under this nuclear understanding.
This $10 billion--let's use that figure--is a public
number. Some amount of that was already paid out: $2.76
billion. We saw that. That was an initial allowance under a
prior waiver in June that was used to pay off various debts of
the Iranians, including imports from Turkmenistan, according to
public reporting. Then the rest of it, the balance at some
point is transferred under this new waiver, sir, that you have
just entered into the record. In July, we have the State
Department on record saying that they are designating Oman to
be the custodian. This waiver now provides France and Germany
in this as well.
Clearly, there is some movement of cash converting Iraqi
dinar to euro in Europe and moving it into Oman. The balance in
Oman is unknown, the balance in Iraq is unknown, and the
balance in France or Germany is unknown. But according to the
waiver, these are the institutions that would be involved. And,
of course, we don't have the names of the institutions.
Chairman Huizenga. Yes. Is Oman known as a straight-up
player in the banking industry?
Mr. Goldberg. Oman is viewed in some ways, in historical
terms, as worse than Qatar as far as playing all sides. We have
seen public reporting in the past of their ties to the IRGC, at
times in smuggling routes through Oman and around Oman that the
Iranians have used. They have been used--if you go back to
2015, 2013, right after Congress had enacted the two laws that
are really disgusting here, that secret negotiation of the now
National Security Advisor was with the Omanis to get to that
JCPOA originally, that is why the Omanis were used again by
Brett McGurk for this channel.
Chairman Huizenga. I just have a few seconds left, and so
much more to discuss. Are any of you aware if there is a
written agreement between the Qataris and the United States?
And the same question on the Omanis. Because when we see White
House spokespeople saying these funds are, ``frozen,'' it does
not appear that they really are frozen.
Mr. Noronha. Mr. Chairman, there is a written agreement
that outlines the hostage deal and the $6 billion payment. To
my knowledge, I do not know of a written agreement pertaining
to the potential freeze.
Mr. Goldberg. The waiver, I believe, sir, does make
reference to communications. The committee should ask for all
communications.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay. I appreciate that. And my time has
expired.
The gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Horsford, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, and good morning. Thank you to the
Chair and the ranking member for this timely hearing.
Like so many of us, I was shocked and appalled by the
horrific attacks on the people of Israel by Hamas terrorists.
It is our duty to ensure that never again happens anywhere, and
this hearing and the work of the Administration is imperative.
I am in a unique position here--I am a member of both this
committee and the House Armed Services Committee, so I received
classified information and attended closed-door hearings to
better understand the events that occurred on the ground, the
preparation and planning leading up to these despicable attacks
and, most importantly, the actions available to us going
forward.
Let me be clear: The response from the United States must
be unequivocal and project American strength internationally.
We stand with our ally, Israel, and are willing to use any of
the tools available to us to support that end. But we are here
today to discuss one of those tools, one that is undoubtedly
important. And we must take a serious look at solutions to
mitigate the ability of Iran and any other state sponsor of
terrorism to finance these kinds of horrific attacks around the
globe. So, it is imperative to deny Hamas and Russia access to
illicit funds.
I would like to enter into the record, Mr. Chairman, an
article from Axios. Actually, the Deputy Secretary of the
Treasury is en route to Europe. He will be speaking to the
Royal United Services Institute in London this Friday, and it
is specifically around the issues on sanctions against these
sponsors of terrorism.
Chairman Huizenga. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Horsford. As we have heard, it likely took multiple
years to plan the coordinated and multifaceted attack on
October 7th, which means that there were likely multiple years
of funding, in spite of strict U.S. sanctions. While we know
that Hamas isn't using U.S.-based financial institutions, they
are able to still engage in the financial sector writ large.
Mr. Thomas, would you please speak to the array of
financing options available to Iran in spite of the sanctions
regime? And what else can the United States Government do to
stem that flow of illicit funds?
Mr. Thomas. Thank you, Congressman. With respect to Iran's
support for Hamas, this is a relationship that goes back many
decades, nearly to the inception of Hamas as a group in the
late 1980s. Traditionally, Iranian financial support for Hamas
has been estimated at about $100 million a year. Although, as
we have heard, there have been press reports citing Israeli
sources indicating that support may have increased in recent
years, and there have been numbers as high as $350 million.
Of course, Iran's support for Hamas is not limited to
financial support. The means by which Iran provides material
support to Hamas vary. Clearly, the nature of these illicit
transactions makes tracking them difficult. But from what we
know, Iran relies on smuggling via tunnels under the Gaza-Egypt
border. The Egyptian Government has cracked down on those in
large part since 2013, but there are indications that trade
continues.
In terms of Iran's financial status abroad in general,
which I imagine we will discuss at length today, those funds,
pursuant to U.S. law and regulations, are limited to funds
transactions involving non-sanctioned humanitarian trade.
Mr. Horsford. On that point, we have heard many of my
colleagues on the other side emphasize that money is fungible
and that the dollars spent on humanitarian aid is $1 that is
freed up from the Iranian Government to spend on financing
terrorism. However, it seems that can only be true if they ever
intended to spend money on that in the first place.
Mr. Thomas, do you believe that without the $6 billion in
funds, Iran would otherwise provide this same aid to its
people? Yes or no?
Mr. Thomas. I think given the history of Iran's support for
these groups, and its support for these groups in spite of the
humanitarian needs of the Iranian people, again, Iran has
continued to provide support for terrorist groups regardless of
the economic situation.
Mr. Horsford. Is there any indication that links past
increases in humanitarian aid to an increase in availability of
Iranian funds to finance terrorism, given the numerous controls
that are in place?
Mr. Thomas. Not that I am aware of. Again, that support has
remained consistent for years.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Sessions, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. And I
think that your opening statement by this last discussion from
our colleagues does tell us this is a bipartisan hearing. And
thank you very much for doing that.
Mr. Thomas, can you give us more information about how the
Iranian accounts work, and are they special purpose accounts?
Mr. Thomas. These accounts really go back to 2012. We have
discussed at length the Fiscal Year 2012 National Defense
Authorization Act (NDAA). That legislation, as I mentioned in
my remarks, permits countries to continue to import Iranian
oil, provided that they keep it in special purpose accounts, as
you have described. The year after the 2012 NDAA was passed,
Congress, as part of the 2013 NDAA, included a provision
subtitle D, IFCA, which Mr. Goldberg mentioned, the Iran
Freedom and Counter-Proliferation Act. That Act tightens those
restrictions by mandating that purchases for Iranian oil--the
funds from those purchases must remain in the purchasing
country, not remitted to Iran.
The conditions that govern the restrictions on those
accounts are prescribed in U.S. law and U.S. regulations,
namely, that they must be used for bilateral, nonsanctioned
humanitarian trade that does not involve the Iranian Government
or Iranian entities. For example, funds in country X would be
allowed to be drawn down to pay an exporter in country X to
export humanitarian goods into Iran.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you.
Gentlemen, I would like for each one of you to take a whack
at the question about the Qatar relationship with Iran, because
it appears as though, from what I see, we do favorably count on
Qatar and their relationship, not only with us as a host
country, but also as an intermediary. Can you please discuss
that?
First, Mr. Goldberg?
Mr. Goldberg. Congressman, it is a very important and
timely question. I think it's important that for anybody who
had views of Qatar's relationship with Iran, Qatar's
relationship with Hamas before October 7th that didn't align
with my view, I hope we can all reset assumptions at this
point.
Mr. Sessions. I think they reset it.
Mr. Goldberg. Exactly, sir. They did reset it.
And any sort of hostage negotiations that are going on, if
there is a hostage exchange--today, I heard perhaps of a
release of some women and children--we want to have everyone
back that we can. We want all hostages released. But understand
that Qatar is playing us. It is the arsonist playing
firefighter at this point and coming to our rescue, as they
host a summit between the Iranians and Hamas after October 7th
so they can coordinate in Doha the day after Secretary Blinken
goes, while they continue to have financial channels, while Al
Jazeera is spitting out horrible anti-American hate, incitement
to violence, and pro-Hamas propaganda. I think it is absolutely
time for us to reassess that relationship. We have a lot of
leverage there. Yes, they host the Combined Air Operations
Center (CAOC), yes, they host our air operations center. And
yes, Al Dhafra Air Base in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) could
do it too.
Mr. Sessions. Thank you.
Mr. Noronha?
Mr. Noronha. Thank you. Qatar is more of a diplomatic and
political partner to Iran than an economic partner. They don't
do much trade. I believe that we should try to rescind some of
the agreements we have made with Qatar regarding Hamas.
There was an agreement made in 2012 to host the political
leadership office in Qatar. We should make a formal ask of the
Qataris and say we want this office gone and a formal
extradition request for the leaders of Hamas who are currently
in Qatar.
Mr. Sessions. Would they not have recognized that
themselves internally as a result of, ``this reset,'' or is
that still part of the relationship that the United States
needs to be out there pushing them this way?
Mr. Noronha. It needs to be a formal ask. They are
currently effectively the mediators for the hostage talks, so I
think there is a different policy view of what should happen in
the next 2 weeks versus what should happen----
Mr. Sessions. And we want to keep working with them.
Mr. Thomas?
Thank you, by the way, each of you.
Mr. Thomas. U.S. officials, as has been said, have credited
Qatar for the role that it has played in the release of
hostages. More broadly, again, Qatar does support some
important U.S. interests. It does have a very multidirectional
foreign policy in that it has relationships with Iran as well
as with many other U.S. partners in the Middle East.
What I would say is that Secretary Blinken has said that
business as usual with Hamas is over. And I imagine going
forward, it is going to be balancing this kind of new approach
with these long-standing U.S. interests with respect to
Afghanistan, and with respect to U.S. facilities in Qatar. And
this, I imagine, is going to be a place where Congress can play
a role in overseeing what the Administration's path with Qatar
is going forward.
Mr. Sessions. Gentlemen, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I would encourage us, as I know you will do,
to consider the region that we don't live in, but in which we
have vast interests. And thank you very much.
Thank you for your service to our country.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, Ms. Garcia from Texas is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to the witnesses,
thank you for being here on such a timely and very critical
topic.
Like most of my colleagues, I strongly condemn the horrific
October 7th attacks carried out by Hamas in Israel. We have all
seen the gruesome images and heard the heartbreaking stories of
those impacted. In the aftermath of this tragedy, it is
critical that we stand with our ally, Israel.
I am proud to have supported passage yesterday of the
bipartisan resolution expressing strong support for Israel and
its right to defend herself against Hamas and other terrorist
groups in the region.
Iran plays a key role in the financing of terrorist groups
like Hamas and Hezbollah. Therefore, U.S. sanctions in Iran are
critically important. I recently joined a bipartisan letter
with my colleagues demanding that Iran be held accountable for
its role in funding Hamas and for the maximum enforcement of
all U.S. sanctions in the region.
We have heard testimony here today that places a lot of
focus on the Biden Administration's work this summer to free
American prisoners in Iran. I want to inquire further about the
history of the financial relationship between Iran and its
proxies.
Mr. Thomas, can you speak a little more about the financial
ties between Iran and groups like Hamas and Hezbollah?
Mr. Thomas. The relationship between Iran and Hezbollah is
a little bit different than the relationship between Iran and
Hamas. When we are talking about Hezbollah, Hezbollah is really
kind of the crown jewel of Iran's regional network of proxies.
Iranian support to Hezbollah is thought to be about $1 billion
a year. And I think that is a reflection of the much closer
political and ideological ties that link Tehran to Hezbollah in
Lebanon.
Hamas, on the other hand, has fewer of those kind of
natural ties to Tehran. And I think that is reflected in the
support, which is generally estimated to be $100 million in
recent years. Again, some estimates that it may be higher.
In terms of how Iran provides support, as I said, much of
this is covert and evasive. But what we do know is that Hamas
does rely on kind of international networks of both licit and
illicit financing.
In the past, the Department of the Treasury has designated
networks of financiers across the region for their role in
providing support to Hamas and its activities.
With respect to Iran, Hamas officials have said in the past
that a lot of this is cash. They have talked about going to
Tehran and coming back with suitcases of cash. There is a wide
variety of ways that Iran can support these groups. It is going
to be a little bit harder with Hamas, given the restrictions on
entry into and out of Gaza, as opposed to Hezbollah, which has
a much larger presence in Lebanon.
Ms. Garcia. So, these suitcases of cash, what currency are
they using, and what role is cryptocurrency playing?
Mr. Thomas. The report that I was referring to was from, I
believe it was 2009, when Hezbollah representatives talked
about not being able to leave with Tehran because they had so
much cash. I don't remember if they specified the currency.
With respect to crypto, there have been reports--and I
would defer to the testimony that some of your colleagues heard
yesterday from Mr. Zarazinski--that tens of millions of dollars
in crypto funds have been interdicted by Israeli and U.S.
authorities, and those funds were belonging to or on their way
to Hamas.
What I would say in context is, first, as I understand it,
with Hamas financing, a much larger portion of that is coming
from the funds that Hamas generates by virtue of its de facto
control of the Gaza Strip and, second, that it received $100
million or more from Iran. So, the crypto is, I imagine, a
little bit less than those other sources of funding, but any
provision of financial resources to Hamas would be a major
concern to U.S. policymakers and likely sanctionable under U.S.
law.
Ms. Garcia. Did Iran actually receive any of the $6 billion
transferred in exchange for the release of the prisoners?
Mr. Thomas. U.S. officials said on October 8th, I believe
for the first time, that none of the funds had been drawn down,
and that appears to still be the case. U.S. officials maintain
that----
Ms. Garcia. So, none has been disbursed?
Mr. Thomas. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Garcia. Okay. I just want to make sure that we get that
on the record again. The U.S. Treasury Department recently
sanctioned individuals and businesses in South America which
are accused of financing Hezbollah.
Mr. Thomas, can you speak to the dangers that groups like
Hezbollah and Hamas pose beyond the Middle East?
Mr. Thomas. Hezbollah, in particular, does have networks in
South America largely drawing on expat populations from which
they are able to secure funding and support. And this is an
issue of long-standing concern going back, I would say, well
over a decade. Congress has looked at this issue. And as you
say, the Administration has sanctioned numerous officials for
their participation in this trade as well.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, if the witness would provide any other
detail on that, my last question, it really would be great. I
think he was----
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlewoman will submit written
questions to the Chair, which we will then pass along.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. If would like an expansion, you may put
that down in writing, and we will pass that along to our
witnesses.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you.
Chairman Huizenga. With that, the gentlelady from Missouri,
Mrs. Wagner, who is also the Chair of our Capital Markets
Subcommittee, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
On this very past anniversary of 9/11, the Biden
Administration announced this reckless and extremely dangerous
deal with Iran, a state sponsor of terror. President Biden's
decision to release $6 billion in Iranian funds is nothing
short of a windfall of cash and economic relief for Tehran to
use for its military and to fund terrorist proxies like, as we
have discussed, Hezbollah, Hamas, and the Houthis. This was a
shameful payout to a regime that is responsible for countless
deaths, including Americans.
Less than a month later, Hamas, an Iran-funded terrorist
group, launched the deadliest attack on the Jewish people since
the Holocaust. Let's be clear about Iran's role in the Middle
East. It is the world's worst state sponsor of terror, and it
is bent on attacking U.S. and Israeli interests with every
resource it can muster.
This money should never have been released in the first
place. And now, the U.S. must claw it back to ensure that it
cannot be used in further efforts by Iran or Hamas to target
Israel.
Mr. Noronha, the Biden Administration has mentioned a,
``quiet understanding,'' with Qatar regarding the $6 billion in
Iranian funds exchanged in the hostage deal. What does a,
``quiet understanding,'' look like in practice?
Mr. Noronha. It means nothing at all, because a quiet
understanding has no legal basis. It does not legally prevent
Qatar from distributing those funds to Iran in the future. And
more importantly, in my mind, it does not prevent or discourage
Iran from taking, say, Qatari or American hostages and saying,
okay, now you really have to turn that spigot back on. We have
made this practice now of saying you can get cash for hostages.
And now that that practice has been exemplified to the Iranian
regime, they will use and abuse that as long as it is a
possibility.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you.
Mr. Goldberg, the Biden Administration said that the $6
billion in accounts in Qatar could only be used for
humanitarian purposes. Can you explain why that is impossible
to ensure, given the fact that we all know that money is
fungible?
Mr. Goldberg. Thank you for the question, ma'am. They also
said this about the $10 billion going to Oman; the same
language was used by Mr. Miller at the State Department. That
is why we should take a close look at what has been spent there
too.
Obviously, money is fungible. Even if they say, this is all
for non-sanctioned goods, which, by the way, is wider than what
we traditionally think of as humanitarian, because there are
all kinds of debts that can be paid off in that respect as
budget support. We also know and have documented, as Mr.
Noronha went through yesterday, so many times in history when
Iran has filed paperwork that is fraudulent, with front
companies and false transactions that have gone to money
laundering, that have gone to the IRGC, and have gone to Assad
in Syria or to Halkbank in Turkiye. Remember that massive
scandal still being prosecuted today? It was all based on
humanitarian transactions, billions of dollars of a scheme that
Iran had cooked up and nobody caught it.
Mrs. Wagner. Let me press on. Mr. Noronha, approximately
how much money does Iran provide to Hamas each year? And would
the terrorist attacks that Hamas perpetrated on October 7th
have been possible without that Iranian support, including
financial support?
Mr. Noronha. They have historically provided $100 million.
During maximum pressure, they had to institute an austerity
plan; they had to lay off a bunch of fighters. They were really
struggling on budgets. Since 2021, that funding has increased
to as much as $350 million. And my view is that their strategic
surprise would not have been possible without the funding.
Mrs. Wagner. So, the sanctions were working when we forced
them into their austerity plan so they could not, in fact, fund
these terrorist proxies to the extent that they are currently
doing so.
One other question, because it just rubs me the wrong way,
Mr. Goldberg. Why does the foreign minister of Iran have a visa
to be in New York City right now? I was reading about it
earlier today. It is absolutely unbelievable to me that this
man who was working on plotting with Hamas on an attack against
Israel has been given a visa and is currently--this foreign
minister is in New York City.
Sir?
Mr. Goldberg. It's completely shameful, ma'am. There are
Americans being held hostage, there are Americans dead, and
Iran is complicit. This man should not be in our country.
Mrs. Wagner. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentlelady yields back.
The gentlelady from Georgia, Ms. Williams, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you, Chairman Huizenga, and
Ranking Member Green.
I agree with you, Chairman Huizenga, I wish this could be a
roundtable discussion, more of a dialogue so that we could have
a much more robust discussion and conversation, because I am
going to tell you now, I have many questions that I am going to
need answered for the record that I will be submitting because
we are not going to get through all of this today.
I thank all of our witnesses for joining us today. I am
heartbroken by the continued loss, not just on October 7th, but
continuing today, the loss of innocent Israeli, Palestinian,
and American lives in Gaza and in Israel. In no way, shape, or
form is terrorism ever acceptable. Congress and our President
have a responsibility to respond swiftly and humanely when our
allies need us.
But at the time of an unprecedented attack on one of our
most critical allies, Israel, Congress was frozen and unable to
take any action to aid Israel, and provide global leadership.
Only yesterday, a full 2\1/2\ weeks after the attack occurred,
did the House vote to condemn Hamas' vicious terror attack and
affirm our support for Israel.
I have been getting texts, calls, and emails from rabbis
and other members of the Jewish community in my district in
Atlanta urging Congress to take action since October 7th. But
again, under Republican leadership, it took 2\1/2\ weeks for
this body to officially condemn this heinous terrorist attack.
Extreme MAGA Republicans pose a real threat to our national
security when things happen like kicking out their own Speaker,
and a 22-day lapse without a Speaker, and then replacing our
Speaker with the chief legal architect of attempting to
overturn the 2020 Presidential election results.
I am from Georgia, so it hits a little differently for me.
In Congress, I always center on the most-marginalized people.
And it pains me as a mama and a leader in this country, and as
the co-Chair of the bipartisan Congressional Caucus on Black-
Jewish Relations, that Congress was paralyzed and couldn't
properly respond while innocent civilians and babies--babies,
y'all--were being killed.
It is our responsibility to ensure that our foreign policy
not only stands up for marginalized people, but holds
accountable those facilitating the financing of terrorism.
Mr. Thomas, if necessary, how can the U.S. structure
additional sanctions on Iran to maximize the impact on
political leaders and minimize the impact on everyday Iranians?
Mr. Thomas. This is a debate central to Iran sanctions, but
it is much broader than Iran. Congress has long wrestled and
successive Administrations have wrestled with the dilemma of
how to hold regimes that the United States finds objectionable
accountable, while not bringing harm to the populations over
which those regimes rule.
I think the way that Congress has tried to do that in the
Iran space is by creating specific humanitarian exemptions for
sanctions. Those aren't always perfect, and there are reports
of diversion. I think at this point, Congress--basically, the
situation in which the Biden Administration is operating is a
sanctions architecture created by Congress, and that refers
both to the waivers that the Administration has used and going
back to previous Administrations, as well as the authorities
that they have used.
So, if Congress decides that the indirect or ancillary
benefits to the Iranian regime of those waivers are greater
than the benefits that the Iranian people receive, then
Congress could perhaps take a look at revising those
authorities.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Thomas.
I am also concerned about the continued push that I hear
from some of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle to
pull back from the United States' role in protecting democracy
and facilitating global cooperation, especially after
witnessing the importance of the U.S.-Israeli partnership
firsthand just last month as I visited Israel on a
Congressional Black Caucus delegation trip. It is clear to me
that we need to engage with the rest of the world, not hide
from it.
Mr. Thomas, how did the Trump Administration's withdrawal
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and the
Paris Climate Agreement impact our ability to work with
European allies and conduct diplomacy in the Middle East?
Mr. Thomas. The Trump Administration's decision in 2018 to
cease U.S. participation in the JCPOA was welcomed by some U.S.
partners and was strongly criticized by others. In the region,
a number of U.S. partners welcomed the decision. But as you
say, in Europe, many European allies saw the JCPOA as a
critical international diplomatic achievement and sought to
preserve the benefits. Ultimately, that was not possible. And
while the JCPOA is still technically in effect, obviously we
have seen Iran surpass its requirements under the JCPOA, and
the U.S. has moved beyond even where it was in 2018 in terms of
sanctions.
In terms of the kind of broader impact, where the Biden
Administration appears to be now is really engaging with
partners, including----
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Mr. Thomas, unfortunately I am out
of time----
Mr. Thomas. Sorry.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. ----which I knew would happen. And
I have many more questions to submit for the record.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Rose,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Huizenga, for holding this
incredibly important hearing. And thank you to our witnesses
for being here. I know you have had a busy week.
I would like to start off by saying how incredibly
disappointed I have been in the Biden Administration's lax Iran
policies. Iran is a long-time state sponsor of terror and a
major supporter of Hamas. The unspeakable terrorist attacks
that occurred in Israel by Hamas have left all of us sick over
the barbarity of these atrocities committed against Israelis,
Americans, and numerous other nationalities.
It is crystal clear that Hamas, and Hamas' benefactor,
Iran, have zero regard for the sanctity of human life. It
greatly concerns me that the Biden Administration has recently
allowed billions of dollars in Iranian funds to be transferred
around the globe in an opaque and completely nontransparent
manner. It is absolutely essential that Congress fully
understand how these money transfers were allowed, and the
current status of the these Iranian funds.
And, Mr. Chairman, I might note, we don't need necessarily
more sanctions; we need the ones we already have to be enforced
by this Administration.
Mr. Thomas, are you aware of any database or set of
information available from Treasury that allows the public to
understand where Iran's money is in the world?
Mr. Thomas. I am not.
Mr. Rose. Mr. Noronha, do you think it would be in the
public interest for Treasury to publish data that would help to
allow the public to understand where Iran's money is in the
world?
Mr. Noronha. Absolutely. And I think it would help Congress
do its oversight job and not just rely on the Executive Branch
to do what Congress tells it to do.
Mr. Rose. In September, the Administration established a
new humanitarian channel in Qatar to administer $6 billion in
Iranian assets from South Korea. Treasury describes this
channel as a way to, ``further facilitate the flow of
humanitarian assistance to the people of Iran.''
Mr. Thomas, is it unusual for Treasury to create a
humanitarian channel? And why would Treasury need to create a
humanitarian channel?
Mr. Thomas. I think probably the closest analog to the
humanitarian channel in Qatar was the Swiss Humanitarian Trade
Arrangement which was set up by the Trump Administration in
February of 2020. That was based on October 2019 understandings
between the Departments of State and Treasury to basically
create mechanisms to facilitate humanitarian trade into Iran.
In terms of why it is necessary, I believe the intent is to
give extra cover to private organizations, private businesses
that want to participate in this trade but otherwise might be
deterred for fear of U.S. sanctions. It is basically telling
people who want to participate in this, ``You will not be
exposed to U.S. sanctions if you participate in humanitarian
transactions involving Iran.''
That doesn't mean that those businesses are going to
participate in it. You can open the door, but you can't force
anybody to walk through it. And my understanding of the Swiss
Humanitarian Trade Arrangement is that only a few transactions
were processed through it.
Mr. Rose. Is there a stark difference between a
humanitarian channel and other escrow accounts that are
available to Iran for humanitarian trade purposes?
Mr. Thomas. It is difficult to say with respect to the
humanitarian channel in Qatar. As you said, that was announced
by the Treasury Department in mid-September, and as of early
October, it appears that the circumstances surrounding those
funds have changed. Although, the Administration has not made
an official statement on the status of those funds.
Based on the arrangements that governed the Swiss
humanitarian channel, I would imagine that basically, it
involves increased due diligence requirements on the financial
institutions involved in processing those transactions.
Mr. Rose. In your opinion, is there enough information
publicly available on the humanitarian channels to understand
how effective they have been in the past or how effective this
one might be in getting the appropriate assistance to Iranian
citizens themselves?
Mr. Thomas. I think we already see Congress starting to
take this up as an oversight mechanism. I will point you to
H.R. 5826, which was marked up in the House Foreign Affairs
Committee last week. That legislation would require biannual--
every 6 months--reports from the Administration specifically on
the $6 billion in Qatar. But I don't think there is any reason
why Congress couldn't broaden that reporting requirement to try
to have more visibility, as Mr. Noronha said, into where those
funds are and what is the status.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
I see my time is about to expire, Mr. Chairman, so I yield
back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman yields back.
With that, the ranking member of the subcommittee, the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
While I greatly appreciate the commentary of Mr. Goldberg,
my questions were not directed to Mr. Goldberg. And there is a
reason I didn't direct my questions to Mr. Goldberg. Mr.
Goldberg is not a Member of Congress. Mr. Goldberg doesn't have
a vote. Mr. Goldberg has an opinion, and I respect his opinion.
But my questions were directed to the Members of Congress who
have the opportunity to vote.
Now, to you, Mr. Thomas. You indicated that the
architecture for the transaction that took place, the $6
billion, was created by Congress. Is that correct?
Mr. Thomas. Yes, sir. I am referring specifically to
Section 1245 of the Fiscal Year 2012 NDAA, as well as
additional restrictions added by the Iran Freedom and Counter-
Proliferation Act in the 2013 NDAA.
Mr. Green. And for verification purposes, you are with what
entity, please?
Mr. Thomas. I am a Specialist in Middle Eastern affairs at
the Congressional Research Service.
Mr. Green. And that is an entity associated with what
organization or what body, please?
Mr. Thomas. We are part of the Library of Congress. We
provide nonpartisan authoritative information and analysis to
all 535 Members of Congress and their staff, and all
committees, and we work equally on behalf of all Members of
Congress.
Mr. Green. The transaction that took place, the $6 billion
in question, did that transaction take place in contravention
of the law?
Mr. Thomas. The Administration issued waivers on September
11th pursuant to Section 1245 of the NDAA to facilitate the
transfer of those funds from South Korea to Qatar.
Mr. Green. And if those funds never get to Iran, can they
be fungible as they relate to spending in Iran?
Mr. Thomas. I would say that the terms governing the use of
those funds are the same as the restrictions that govern the
use of Iranian funds that are held anywhere in the world;
namely, that they can only be used for nonsanctioned,
bilateral, humanitarian trade. And that is the system that
Congress set up, that these funds had to stay in the
jurisdiction where they originated and not ever touch Iran.
Mr. Green. And the same Congress that produced this
architecture that you called to my attention is the Congress
that can change this architecture, is that a fair statement?
Mr. Thomas. Exactly.
Mr. Green. They have a vote.
Mr. Thomas. Yes, sir.
Mr. Green. You don't have a vote, do you, Mr. Thomas? You
work for an entity associated with Congress, but you don't have
a vote, do you?
Mr. Thomas. I do not, sir. I am not a Member of Congress.
Mr. Green. Okay. I think it is pretty fair to say that we,
the Members of Congress, may have some responsibilities, but
what you have is an opinion, as is the case with the other
witnesses.
Moving on to something else, Hamas is a terrorist
organization. What they did was a crime against humanity and
should never happen again. But I have lived long enough now and
have enough courage to say that we ought not to allow innocent
people, regardless of their place of origin, to be killed.
I care about babies in Israel, but I also care about babies
in Palestine. Those babies have lives, too. We ought to be
concerned about all babies. And we ought to be concerned about,
not just winning a war, but winning the peace. You can win a
war and lose the peace. How you execute a war has a lot to do
with the peace you will have.
And I will tell you that while I did not cosign the
resolution, there is a reason: I believe that we should have
had language in there about a two-state solution to this
problem. Because if we do not, if Congress doesn't go on
record, we give the impression that we may be abandoning the
two-state solution.
I have not abandoned it. I voted to fund these agreements
that we have had with Israel, each and every one of them. But I
did it because I thought we would have a two-state solution.
And without a two-state solution, I don't see a path to peace.
I thank you for the time, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired.
And I will note that, yes, we all do have a vote up here,
and we are responsible for those votes and explaining those
votes to our constituents. We also have staff that we rely on
as well, and I have appreciated those opinions from former
staff who have helped us as Members.
Mr. Green. And in response to your comment, Mr. Chairman,
which you allowed yourself time for; I just ask for equal time.
I respect the comments of staff, too. I have no problem with
staff. It is just that----
Chairman Huizenga. Excellent.
Mr. Green. ----we have the votes.
Chairman Huizenga. There we go.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this very
important hearing.
And certainly, thank you to our witnesses. I appreciate
your information very, very much. It is pretty serious stuff.
Mr. Goldberg, the Biden Administration had secretly made
available to Iran, since May, $50 billion for nothing more than
a promise that Iran would not provoke an immediate nuclear
crisis by producing weapons-grade uranium. This package did
include the $6 billion transferred to Qatar.
I met with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
last year, and they were very clear that Iran was in all kinds
of violations, and they were making a trip there within about a
week to express to them that they are in complete violation of
any sort of a--the so-called deal that was being made, the Iran
nuke deal.
What are your thoughts there? Why would the Administration
continue to work with some sort of deal?
By the way, a colleague in the hearing yesterday, if you
remember, stated that that would go down in history as one of
the greatest flaws ever, that the previous Administration had
gotten out of that.
I don't know what kind of agreement there is when one side
just blatantly doesn't follow it, doesn't allow surprise
inspections. You give them a month's notice to show up, and
then, they can tell when the uranium was moved and how much was
actually extracted from the area. Yet, this Biden
Administration continues to try to work with this Iranian
terrorist state.
Why do you think that is?
Mr. Goldberg. Congressman Meuser, as a staff member to
people who voted many years ago when I wrote both of those
sanctions laws we are talking about, and they passed 100-0 and
94-0 in the Senate, and by unanimous consent here in the
House--and I thank everybody who voted on it at the time and
the staff who worked on it.
Mr. Meuser. Yes.
Mr. Goldberg. I would say that, at that time, we had a
bipartisan consensus that more money for the Islamic Republic
of Iran was bad and that we should continue to pressure,
contain, and roll back that regime across all of its malign
activities.
Mr. Meuser. Right.
Mr. Goldberg. That changed during the JCPOA. We have gone
into camps. It is ideological. It is political.
Mr. Meuser. Right.
Mr. Goldberg. And we advised----
Mr. Meuser. It is amazing the level of Iranian sympathizing
that is taking place. I agree with you.
And you wrote, I think, that we now see the results of
policies and appeasement that enrich the world's leading state
sponsor of terror, and then we just go on.
And I want to talk to Mr. Noronha and Mr. Thomas as well.
There is no debating that things such as the increase of
exports--1.5 million barrels per day, the highest monthly rate
since 2018--there is no getting around those facts.
And the level of funding that is coming into Iran, the
sponsor of terror, that is clear and known to Democrats and
Republicans, that is happening. And yet, at the same time, they
are selling it to China at discounts, and we know this.
And it is also stated there is no way for Iran to boost its
exports to this extent without the White House ordering the
nonenforcement of U.S. sanctions and providing clear signals to
Beijing that U.S. sanctions will not be enforced.
What is going on here?
Mr. Noronha?
Mr. Noronha. $150 million a day in Iranian oil revenue is
currently what is happening. And that does not go to the
Iranian central budget; that goes to the IRGC's budget. They
have a special deal; they get the Iranian oil revenue.
Respectfully, sir, that is exactly what is happening. It is
a funneling for terror financing across the Middle East that
reaches to Washington, D.C., because there are assassination
attempts ongoing here in this Capitol.
Mr. Meuser. Right.
Mr. Thomas, allowing the missile embargo on Iran to expire;
granted, the national legitimacy to Iran's transfer of armed
drones to Russia, who were sending billions and billions of
American taxpayer dollars to the Ukraine, and yet we are
allowing this to help fund Russian drones and ballistic
missiles. What do you think about that?
Mr. Thomas. The sunset you are referring to that happened
this week did draw condemnation from a number of Members of
Congress. It also drew attention in Europe, which has been the
focus of a number of Members who have sought to have European
partners of the United States join U.S. efforts to continue
those restrictions.
Mr. Meuser. I think it is insane.
I want to ask you a question. Do we have any documentation
or any reason to believe, or are there any facts or connections
to the idea that there may be a transfer of funds from Iran to
any member of the Biden family? Does anybody have any
information on that?
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Meuser. If you do, please let me know for the record.
I yield back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman can pose that question in
writing if he so chooses.
With that, the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Steil, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Steil. Chairman Huizenga, thank you for holding today's
hearing, and thank you for waiving me on to the subcommittee.
It is such an important topic that we are discussing, and
incredibly timely following the attack by terrorists from Hamas
against defenseless Israeli citizens. And when we see Iran as
the world's largest state sponsor of terrorism, and we look at
the Biden Administration's policy allowing Iran to have access
to funds, I think it is imperative that we in Congress examine
that and move this Administration in a new and different
direction.
I think the direction that this Administration has been
going--providing access to funds to Iran, looking the other way
as it relates to oil sanctions in particular, where billions of
dollars are able to move into Iranian-controlled coffers--is
incredibly dangerous.
And I want to dig in a little bit, if I can. I want to
start with you, Mr. Noronha. Walk us through a little bit of
how these funds are flowing, because I think it is really
imperative for the American people to understand.
We had the Biden Administration come forward and say that
the Iranians don't have access to these funds in Qatar. Yet,
clearly, they issued the waiver and then a license to transfer
those funds to Qatar.
Last year, in the NDAA, I successfully got an amendment
passed and signed into law that will force this Administration
to disclose those types of licenses. Waivers previously were
enforced under the 2012 NDAA. Now, we have access to the
licenses, so we can actually see with transparency how this
Administration is giving deference and giving access to Iran.
We now know it went to Qatar.
Do we actually have any proof that what the Administration
is saying as it relates to these funds--that the Iranians don't
have access, that they haven't done that--what is the proof of
this?
Mr. Noronha. There has been no documentation sent over to
Congress. They did not affirmatively provide the package, the
written agreement, to Congress.
I think one point that is relevant here is that the laws we
have been describing here from 2012 allowed bilateral trade in
South Korean won to Iran; they didn't allow for euros and
dollars. That is a permissive waiver in the granting of a
concession to Iran to allow that money----
Mr. Steil. I think that is really important. That is the
actual waiver. And then, they provide the license to transfer
that over to Qatar such that they can be dealing in a much more
liquid currency form. Is that right?
Mr. Noronha. That is correct. If they wanted to buy food
and medicine from South Korea, they could have, but they chose
not to. Again, the emphasis is not on helping the Iranian
people.
Mr. Steil. So, someone should suspect, why would they not
want to buy some food or some medical supplies, and load it
onto a boat in South Korea that would then go over to Iran. And
maybe then, they could at least argue that they are trying to
help people, that they are not going to pilfer these things off
the top.
What if, all of a sudden, they want access to euros?
Mr. Noronha. Because euros are what Hezbollah and Hamas
want, at the end of the day, and it is much easier to do this
if it is in those currencies.
Mr. Steil. So, the Administration was hoping everyone would
look the other way on the transfer of these funds to Qatar, and
most likely, most of the international community would have but
for the attack by terrorists from Hamas in Israel, where the
world's attention turned to this region once again. And the
Administration was exposed for their poor decision to allow the
transfer of these funds from custody in South Korea to Qatar.
Is that accurate?
Mr. Noronha. I believe that is, sir.
Mr. Steil. Let's dive in one step further. I think you made
an important point about the Administration looking the other
way as it relates to oil sales, which from a dollar standpoint
or from a value standpoint--dollar, euro, whatever currency
they are operating in--is probably a more relevant discussion
point.
And this Administration has looked the other way while Iran
has been able to transfer oil to China as well as Syria. Is
that accurate?
Mr. Noronha. They have been notified many times of all the
tankers that are evading their sanctions. They know all of
this, and they haven't done it.
Mr. Steil. And why is the Administration looking the other
way?
Mr. Noronha. Because they want to advance their nuclear
deal with Iran, which is a broader political objective.
Mr. Steil. And who gets the funds?
Mr. Noronha. Iran, at the end of the day------
Mr. Steil. Does it go to the central bank account? Does it
go to a food organization? Does it at least go to some warm and
fuzzy operation in Iran so that they can at least pretend they
are doing the right thing with it?
Mr. Noronha. It is a complicated international financial
network. It is not easy for them to move things under
sanctions. Sanctions make it harder, which is the point. But it
is sort of like a sieve; it slowly drips in and comes back into
Iran.
Mr. Steil. And in particular, when Iran has access to new
funds, it is like a gift card that gives Iran the ability to
purchase other things. And as we know, Iran is the leading
state sponsor of terrorism around the globe. And ultimately, I
am wildly concerned that these funds are falling into the hands
of operations like Hezbollah and Hamas.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing. I yield
back.
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Ogles, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Ogles. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all for
being here today.
I want to touch on something that Mr. Meuser said, and that
you kind of mentioned in passing, Mr. Noronha, which is the
idea that Iran has somehow been involved in attempted
assassinations on U.S. soil. Can you please expand on that?
Mr. Noronha. Iran is currently trying to assassinate my
former boss, Brian Hook, who has testified before Congress
multiple times. They are trying to assassinate Mike Pompeo, and
John Bolton, but also Democrats. They are trying to assassinate
current officials of the Biden Administration: General Mark
Milley, who served both Presidents; and Masih Alinejad, who
testified before Congress yesterday.
They are trying to do it, and they have made active
attempts. And I will leave that to your imagination. They have
been described in some Department of Justice filings as showing
up on people's doorsteps with guns, and getting within 100 feet
of targets.
A lot of our public servants have to live with 24-hour
security details, and they have been living with them for 3
years, if not longer. That is not how Americans should have to
live. This is not a Republican/Democrat thing; this is a
disgrace to our public servants who have served this country,
in both Administrations, and shouldn't be treated this way.
Mr. Ogles. So, to emphasize, both Republicans and Democrats
live under constant fear. It is documented, and we know it
because of assassination attempts or plans against their lives.
Is that fair?
Mr. Noronha. It is, sir.
Mr. Ogles. Is it reasonable to assume that giving Iran or
Qatar any mechanism by which money would flow into Iran would
somehow aid and abet the missions to kill Americans on U.S.
soil?
Mr. Noronha. These operations are expensive. They need the
money to do it. They have bounties of up to a million dollars
on the heads of each of these Americans. That money is
absolutely subsidizing these assassination threats. They would
probably still try to do them, but it makes their job much
easier.
Mr. Ogles. Would it be in the best interest of our homeland
and the aforementioned individuals whose lives are under a
fatwa or assassination orders that these monies be pulled back
and blocked in perpetuity?
Mr. Noronha. I believe it could save their lives--at least
some of their lives, if we do so.
Mr. Ogles. Mr. Goldberg, do you have any comments?
Mr. Goldberg.No, sir. The leading state sponsor of
terrorism with active plots to kill Americans should not have
access to a nickel, if we can stop it.
Mr. Ogles. Would you like to say that again a little
louder?
On that, Mr. Steil mentioned Qatar. What active role has
Qatar played in essentially aiding Iran to get around
sanctions, which then allows moneys to flow to these active
terrorist organizations, state sponsors of terrorism, the
literal active, ongoing assassination attempts against former
and current public officials?
Mr. Noronha?
Mr. Noronha. My understanding is that, separate of the $6
billion which we are debating, Qatar is not typically an
economic partner of Iran. They are not typically the sanctions-
busting jurisdiction involved here.
Mr. Ogles. Mr. Goldberg?
Mr. Goldberg. Listen, in general, we should have a
principle that there is no access to cash, there are no
relationships, there is no safe harbor. You should not be in
the capital of Qatar, Doha, and have a summit between the
Iranian foreign minister and the head of Hamas, and then, by
the way, allow that same Iranian foreign minister, who was also
in Beirut earlier this summer before the attacks, to come to
New York on a visa.
Mr. Ogles. Mr. Goldberg, when we look at the $6-billion
Iran deal, there was a prisoner swap, obviously the funds. In
my opinion, it is appeasement. But can you give us a broader
scope of that deal and, again, the risk associated with it as--
again, we have a minute, so I am going to give you the floor--
but the unintended consequences of this, again, appeasement of
state terror?
Mr. Goldberg. I think it is a very important time to zoom
out and think about this at a strategic level. Right now, we
have all talked about the brink of regional war. Why would we
be on the brink of regional war? Because Iran is not deterred.
Why has Iran not deterred? Because as much as the President
says, I am going to send another carrier strike group--don't do
it, don't do it, Iran--they also, at the same time, see a
posture of saying, how much money can we make available to you
so that we don't have to confront you if you continue to
escalate your nuclear program?
As long as we have $10 billion-plus in a waiver that is
continuing to build up money available to the regime in Oman,
$6 billion moved from South Korea, all the oil that is
flowing--it is not possible to allow that much oil to go
without having built-up sanctions targets that you are sitting
on, that you are not imposing sanctions on and not talking to
Beijing about first.
All of that--$50 billion or more, the $80 billion since
2021--needs to stop; otherwise, they will continue to push and
push until this escalates further.
Mr. Ogles. Mr. Goldberg, really quickly, is the world a
more dangerous place because of this $6 billion?
Chairman Huizenga. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Goldberg. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ogles. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Huizenga. Okay.
I would like to thank all of our witnesses for their
testimony today and, frankly, for their current and past
service to our country, and to the various legislative and
executive organizations that have helped this government.
And at some point, we are going to need to explore doing
this in a podcast format. I believe this is something--between
two hearings yesterday, and a hearing today, and there is a
hearing happening in the U.S. Senate right now as well, this is
certainly at the forefront of many of the conversations that
are happening in Congress writ large and, I think, around the
world.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
With that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:34 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

October 26, 2023

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
