- HUD OVERSIGHT: TESTIMONY OF THE HUD INSPECTOR GENERAL

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HUD OVERSIGHT: TESTIMONY OF
THE HUD INSPECTOR GENERAL

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HOUSING
AND INSURANCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

JUNE 21, 2023
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-34

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-200 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2023

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JUAN VARGAS, California
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           RITCHIE TORRES, New York
YOUNG KIM, California                SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE LAWLER, New York                BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Housing and Insurance

WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio, Chairman

BILL POSEY, Florida                  EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri, Ranking
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri             Member
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           RITCHIE TORRES, New York
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
MIKE LAWLER, New York                SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas             NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana                STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
June 21, 2023................................................     1
Appendix:
June 21, 2023................................................    27

WITNESSES
Wednesday, June 21, 2023

Oliver Davis, Hon. Rae, Inspector General, U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD)............................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Oliver Davis, Hon. Rae.......................................    28

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

McHenry, Hon. Patrick:
Written responses to questions for the record submitted to
Hon. Rae Oliver Davis......................................    54

HUD OVERSIGHT: TESTIMONY OF
THE HUD INSPECTOR GENERAL

----------

Wednesday, June 21, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Housing
and Insurance,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:22 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Warren Davidson
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Davidson, Luetkemeyer,
Fitzgerald, Garbarino, Flood, Lawler, De La Cruz; Cleaver,
Velazquez, Tlaib, Garcia, Williams of Georgia, and Pettersen.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Chairman Davidson. The Subcommittee on Housing and
Insurance will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``HUD Oversight: Testimony of
the HUD Inspector General.''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Today, the subcommittee will hear from the Inspector
General of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD), the Honorable Rae Oliver Davis. We welcome your
testimony today, and thank you for all your work to ensure that
HUD operates more effectively for the people it serves and the
taxpayers who fund its programs. Indeed, it is no small task to
oversee an agency like HUD with a long-documented record of
waste, fraud, abuse, and mismanagement.
Most recently, the Office of Inspector General reported
that it found $950 million in HUD funds that could be
redirected, and recovered $49 million in overdue collections.
Your office has also made numerous recommendations that, if
executed, would save taxpayers tens of billions of dollars. In
addition, Ms. Oliver Davis, your team pursued enforcement
actions that resulted in 51 criminal convictions, 5 civil
actions, 12 government debarment actions, and $28 million in
restitution and judgments, and that's an impressive record.
These actions saved taxpayers money and helped protect the very
people HUD is supposed to be helping, which is why we have
proposed legislation along with this hearing to make the IG's
appearance before this committee an annual event.
And the work of the Inspector General has only gotten
tougher, more complicated, and even more essential in recent
years. HUD's annual budget has grown from $44 billion in 2015
to $75 billion today, a 70-percent increase. Further, as a
result of the spending on natural disasters as well as COVID,
HUD now manages over $100 billion in Federal grants. That is a
staggering amount.
And as you reported, Ms. Oliver Davis, HUD has had numerous
challenges in overseeing grant money for programs like the
Community Development Block Grant for Disaster Recovery, or
CDBG-DR, as it is known. Community Development Block Grants for
Disaster Recovery is now HUD's single-largest grant, and
believe it or not, it is a program that has never been formally
authorized by Congress. In fact, most of HUD's programs are
funded each year but remain unauthorized. These include
programs for the nation's most-vulnerable populations, such as
public housing, Section 8, and health and safety programs. It
is a problem that I believe this subcommittee must address to
ensure that HUD receives proper oversight.
A lapse in authorization is also a lapse by Congress in
providing the scrutiny that HUD, of all agencies, needs. It is
clear to me that we must take a closer look at HUD's management
organization structure and the way it operates. Creating a
smarter, better-run, and more-efficient HUD should be a goal we
all share, which is why I have proposed setting up a new
bipartisan independent commission to study what works and what
does not work within HUD's current organization. And they would
report back to Congress on how we can streamline HUD's
operations to better get productivity and the actual outcomes
that we see for the same kinds of dollars we are currently
spending.
Thankfully, however, we are able to hear from the Inspector
General today, whose boots on the ground at HUD have done
important work in highlighting some of the Agency's most-
serious deficiencies. Notably, Ms. Oliver Davis and her team
have found a shocking abundance of health and safety concerns
in HUD-assisted properties. For example, one report identified
almost 33,000, ``life-threatening exigent health and safety
issues in public housing.'' These homes should be safe for
their residents. Another identified poor physical conditions in
multifamily housing developments as well as the failure of HUD
to flag these conditions. And yet another one reported
inadequate oversight of the lead-based remediation in HUD
properties, a particular problem for young children who are
susceptible to the harmful effects of lead. This is
particularly concerning as HUD's core mission as a Federal
agency is to provide decent, safe, sanitary, and affordable
housing.
I expect that HUD will do everything in its power to
immediately address these failures that the IG has identified,
and it is, quite honestly, unacceptable if they do not do so
because lives are indeed at stake. All of this only shines a
light on why the testimony and the work of the HUD Inspector
General is so critical.
Ms. Oliver Davis, we look forward to hearing your remarks
and working with you on ways to address these and other issues
for what I would say is an agency with significant challenges.
Thank you.
And I now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee,
Mr. Cleaver, for his remarks.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I get into my
remarks, let me say that I do agree that maybe we should spend
some time looking at programs, looking at those that work and
those that can be improved, and the chairman and I have had
this discussion. Housing is less affordable today than it has
been in the last, well, forever. This is true for both rental
housing and homeownership, and the lack of affordable housing
has fueled a national crisis of housing and homelessness.
HUD is on the forefront in trying to respond to the
devastating impacts of this crisis through the pursuit of
transforming housing and community building policies and
programs with the mission of creating strong, sustainable, and
inclusive communities, and quality affordable housing. The HUD
Office of Inspector General plays an important role in
advancing the integrity, efficiency, and effectiveness of these
policies and programs.
We are fortunate to have this perspective today from our
Inspector General, the Honorable Rae Oliver Davis. And before I
proceed any further, I want to take some time to just say I
think your report is very valuable to us. But the memo that my
Republican colleagues put forth looks at funding trends between
Fiscal Years 2017 and 2023. First, rather than 5 years, this
would be a period of 7 years. That is a small, but very
important detail. Second, the increase from Fiscal Years 2017
to 2023 in regular appropriations, not accounting for emergency
funding, would be $20.4 billion. More than half of this
increase was driven by increases in per-unit costs to renew
existing subsidies, which are primarily driven by increasing
rents in March of 2017, when average monthly cost of a voucher
was $682 per month. In March 2023, it was $896 per month,
according to HUD. That is a 30-percent increase in rent cost
from 2017 to 2023.
This cost increase is the result of inaction on the
affordable housing crisis by Congress, including the inability
to pass any of a number of bills that Democrats have put
forward to lower costs. I am pleased that this week, under the
leadership of Full Committee Ranking Member Maxine Waters,
Congress has again seen the introduction of the Housing Crisis
Response Act, the ending of homelessness through the Ending
Homelessness Act, and the Downpayment Toward Equity Act. It is
my continued hope that this committee can find bipartisan
support on a housing bill of substance during this term.
Another $2.98 billion of the increase in funding for HUD
from Fiscal Year 2017 to Fiscal Year 2023 is attributable to
congressional-directed spending, earmarks, whatever you want to
call it, which were not funded in Fiscal Year 2017 but were
funded at $2.98 billion in Fiscal Year 2023. These two factors,
rental assistance costs and earmarks, account for most of the
increased funding for HUD since Fiscal Year 2017, 65 percent of
the increase, excluding emergency rental assistance.
Despite increased funding at HUD, several challenges
remain. In the period between 2012 and 2019, the number of
full-time equivalent employees at HUD declined from 8,576 to
6,837. This was a reduction of 20 percent and presented serious
risks to HUD's ability to deliver on its mission. President
Biden's Fiscal Year 2024 budget requests funding for 8,635
full-time employees, which is still below the capacity of the
Agency in 2012. As noted in testimony, a common theme in HUD
OIG oversight findings has been that HUD does not have the
capacity necessary to address the challenges it faces, and that
the Department is underfunded and understaffed. And while the
memo put out by my Republican colleagues points out that HUD
had 985 outstanding recommendations open from OIG, we should
also note that that number is down from 2,335 in 2027, a
reduction of more than half.
Mr. Chairman, I will forego the remainder of my comments
and use them during the question-and-answer period. Thank you.
Chairman Davidson. I thank the ranking member.
Today, we welcome the testimony of HUD Inspector General
Rae Oliver Davis. She was sworn in as the Inspector General for
HUD on January 23, 2019. Previously, she served as the Acting
Assistant Inspector General at HUD, and prior to that, as the
Chief Investigative Counsel for the Office of the Special
Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program. She
earned her juris doctor degree from the University of Memphis.
We thank her for taking the time to be here here.
Inspector General Oliver Davis, you are now recognized for
5 minutes to give your oral remarks. And without objection,
your written statement will be made a part of the record.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RAE OLIVER DAVIS, INSPECTOR GENERAL,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HUD

Ms. Oliver Davis. Good afternoon, Chairman Davidson,
Ranking Member Cleaver, and members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for inviting me to testify about my office's oversight of
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
HUD plays a critical role in the American economy,
providing billions of dollars for rental assistance, preventing
homelessness, and recovering from disasters, as well as
ensuring trillions of dollars from mortgage insurance and
guaranteeing trillions of dollars in housing finance. The
stakes are high for HUD and its 40,000 program participants if
they do not deliver their significant economic and health
impacts on communities and vulnerable families.
The supply of affordable housing has reached unthinkable
levels and many low-income families have been waiting for
vouchers to help them find a home to rent. What is available
has fallen into disrepair, exposing residents to health hazards
like mold, infestations, lead-based paint, or collapsing
structures. Communities ravaged by natural disasters have been
waiting years for HUD funding to help them recover and build
back stronger.
HUD faces significant challenges in executing its programs,
many of which are longstanding, because they are complex and
the solutions are not easy. For example, there is a well-known
backlog of deferred maintenance in America's public housing
stock, which is the root cause of many physical condition
problems in those buildings, and there is not enough funding
available to fix these problems. HUD cannot control that, but
it can control how it oversees public housing authorities
through the inspection process, and HUD can control how it
monitors the remedying of deficiencies found during
inspections.
We recently issued reports which found that HUD needs to do
more to ensure that inspections happen timely and that those
with historically-poor scores receive priority for inspections.
We also found HUD's field offices need to be more consistent in
their oversight of the housing authorities' handling of
emergency health and safety findings and inspections. Oversight
of housing authorities and other program participants is a
major key to HUD success. HUD must ensure that they execute
effectively, efficiently, and with integrity.
HUD is also facing enterprise-level challenges. HUD
staffing has decreased over the years, while its program
responsibilities have grown. Many of its experts are retiring,
which strains the support that it provides participants and
threatens their customer experience. HUD has also been uniquely
challenged in managing IT modernization and cybersecurity
efforts, resulting in too many of its programs running on old
systems that were not built for today's business world and are
not optimized to gather the right information or to protect it.
My office's approach is to focus on the spaces that HUD can
and should control and help them to deliver the best they
possibly can. Since becoming the HUD Inspector General, my goal
has been to make a difference and our strategy is centered on
that goal. Last year, we released our first Priority Open
Recommendations Report highlighting the open recommendations
that could have the greatest impact. This effort helped push
HUD to bolster its oversight of assisted housing near
contaminated sites, strengthen its hiring process, close gaps
in the cybersecurity framework, and enhance its strategy for
increasing utilization of vouchers.
HUD deserves recognition for this significant progress, but
there is more work to be done. Looking forward, areas of focus
for my office are safety hazards in assisted housing and fraud
risk management. We are attacking safety hazards in assisted
housing at the community level by reviewing unit conditions and
lead hazard management at housing authorities across the
country. We have increased criminal investigations into bad
actors in this space, targeting landlords, contractors, and
inspectors who knowingly fail to follow environmental and
safety requirements or who sexually assault or harass tenants.
We have also recommended that HUD review fraud risk in each
of its programs and enhance controls that prevent fraud. HUD's
historical position has been that its grantees are primarily
responsible for managing fraud risk. Our oversight has shown
that many grantees struggle in this area, especially those
responding to disasters, that are already challenged in
building capacity and establishing strong internal controls. We
have launched our own audits to review fraud risk and
management practices at the Puerto Rico Department of Housing,
which is currently overseeing $20 billion in HUD funding, as
well as several entities that received pandemic emergency
solution grants. Congress appropriated, overall, $4 billion for
this program during the pandemic, which represents a 1,391-
percent increase in funding for these grantees.
As we continue to fight fraud, waste, abuse, mismanagement,
and misconduct in HUD's programs, we look forward to working
with this committee to help HUD improve its delivery for
Americans, and I look forward to answering your questions
today.
[The prepared statement of Inspector General Oliver Davis
can be found on page 28 of the appendix.]
Chairman Davidson. Thank you, Ms. Oliver Davis. We will now
turn to Member questions. And I recognize myself for 5 minutes
for questioning.
Ms. Oliver Davis, as I noted in my opening remarks, almost
every single HUD program is funded but technically
unauthorized, which means that they are not receiving the
proper scrutiny from Congress. Your office has conducted
numerous audits, investigations, and other actions that further
demonstrate a critical need for actual oversight.
For example, in one of your reports published last month,
you noted that HUD was in violation of the Payment Integrity
Information Act of 2019 when they failed to report improper and
unknown payment estimates for the Office of Public and Indian
Housing's Tenant-Based Rental Assistance Program and the Office
of Multifamily Housing's Project-Based Rental Assistance
Program. From my position, it is frustrating, because Congress
passed this law and HUD simply hasn't abided by it.
There are other programs going on in D.C., and thankfully,
the D.C. Inspector General uncovered an example that clearly
has criminal implications, where the D.C. Public Housing
Authority was forgiving rental payments, not collecting money
that is owed to HUD, i.e., the American taxpayers, and then
charging others in excess of the amounts owed, and it is not
clear from anything I have read that HUD is actually taking
action to do anything about it.
So I applaud your work, Ms. Oliver Davis, for highlighting
the problems like this that are going on, but I think that is
the tip of the iceberg.
When I think about the challenges of HUD, America broadly
supports a social safety net, and HUD offers one of the most
important ones--housing, a place of shelter and a core need for
just human survival--and it doesn't do as good a job at it as
we think they could, and I think that is bipartisan. A lot of
people will say, if you have these concerns, Republicans simply
want to cut spending. Well, that is not entirely true. We
support the idea of a social safety net. And frankly, if
Republicans are accusing Democrats, they will say that you just
want more free stuff for more people, and that is not entirely
true. They would just want people to not have the need in the
first place, ideally, but there are needs and there are
challenges.
And that is why I hope that we can get one of the bills
that we noticed for this hearing across the finish line, which
would create a commission with two Republicans, and two
Democrats, and give them a period of time to work together. And
it takes off the table the scary things, that we are going to
somehow cut funding, or that we are going to somehow launch
more free stuff for more people and expand the scope of the
programs.
What would they do? My hope is, and I think the ranking
member's hope is, that they would make the program better so
that by the end of this 118th Congress, we could have passed a
bill that not only addresses the authorizations for HUD that
have lapsed, but it prioritizes the things that are most
needed, that it maybe addresses benefit cliffs, maybe
simplifies the role for the social worker who would sit down
with someone in need of assistance, who would then look at a
simple income and asset test versus a patchwork and what have
you. Surely there are ways to make the system work better for
the people that it is supposed to serve. Surely there are ways
to manage the maintenance budget more effectively so that the
houses are properly maintained.
I had someone tell me that they believed that the New York
City Housing Authority (NYCHA) could be run better as a literal
commune because at least the people who lived there would fix
the place. I don't know how that goes. We may have field
hearings to kind of look at some of these situations around the
country.
But, Ms. Oliver Davis, when you look at what HUD does, what
do you think they do best?
Ms. Oliver Davis. Thank you for that question. You touched
upon a number of topics that are quite important to my
organization, our oversight. In terms of what HUD does well,
that is something we are always striving to accomplish on our
oversight is give credit where credit is due and make sure that
we highlight places where HUD has made progress.
I would note it is a vast mission. As I said in my opening
statement, there are 40,000 program participants that help HUD
carry out that mission, so it is not without its challenges.
And especially when we look at capacity challenges, like we
have been talking about, in terms of what HUD does well, I
believe the ranking member flagged the closure of
recommendations. We have worked very closely with HUD. We had
over 2,000 outstanding recommendations when I became Inspector
General, and that is something that HUD has worked very hard
on. In addition, they are closing what I would call priority
recommendations. We issued our first Top Priority
Recommendations Report last year in order to focus the
leadership on what is truly important.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you, and I will have to get more
information from you in writing for the record, since my time
has expired.
I now recognize the gentlewoman from New York, Ms.
Velazquez, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am happy to
hear you saying that you support the safety net, and I believe
you. But when we look at the Appropriations Committee, the
Republicans on the Appropriations Committee approved an
estimated $131-billion cut to the topline spending level for
Fiscal Year 2024, effectively cutting next year's Federal
spending to Fiscal Year 2022 levels. Under the Republican
proposal, HUD programs will be cut by over $22 billion, more
than a 25-percent cut from Fiscal Year 2023 levels. In a letter
to Ranking Member DeLauro, HUD Secretary Fudge said that almost
1 million tenant-based and project-based Section 8 participants
will lose their assistance. HUD's public housing operating fund
will face a 78-percent cut, and almost 100,000 people
experiencing homelessness will lose their assistance.
Inspector General Oliver Davis, your report on HUD's top
management challenges highlights ensuring access to and the
availability of affordable housing as a top challenge for the
Department for Fiscal Year 2023, specifically citing preserving
its aging housing stock as a significant concern. As you know,
the public housing capital backlog is currently estimated at
more than $70 billion. In your view, is there a correlation
between this capital repair backlog and HUD's ability to meet
this critical management challenge?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I believe that there is certainly a
crisis in public housing. The capital backlog, as you pointed
out, is in the billions of dollars. Funding has not kept pace
with the need there, so certainly that will affect conditions
going forward. Funding cuts, as you mentioned, will be the
responsibility of the Secretary, certainly, to prioritize and
to figure out, frankly, what to do should those funding cuts
come down the pike. My oversight is definitely focused on what
can HUD do with what it has, certainly, and I think that is an
area where HUD is struggling. It is struggling in its oversight
of public housing and its program participants.
Ms. Velazquez. So what you are saying is that if HUD was
appropriated more money to address the deterioration of its
public housing infrastructure, it could address this challenge?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I don't think it would be reliant solely
on HUD. Public housing authorities (PHAs) don't get their
funding solely from HUD. So, there will be a lot of judgment
calls down the road on how to address those capital needs as
well as the health and safety concerns in those housing
projects.
Ms. Velazquez. Inspector General, your testimony also
highlights decreasing utilization of the Section 8 Program as a
top management challenge for HUD in Fiscal Year 2023,
specifically stating that more than 191,000 authorized vouchers
were unused and unfunded, but that HUD would need additional
appropriations to utilize these vouchers. Could you explain
this finding?
Ms. Oliver Davis. We focused on voucher utilization because
it is a key part of rental assistance. It is a key part in
ensuring that we have affordable housing. Given the capital
improvements and the aging public housing stock, the natural
answer is to segue to the private sector and define rental
assistance for individuals. So, we found that work to be very
impactful in terms of the success of rental assistance.
Our recommendation was that HUD look at optimizing the
program, that they look at whether or not they had the
legislative authority to reallocate funding from one section to
another. There are some areas where vouchers are going unused
and others where they simply don't have enough. HUD has since
closed out that priority recommendation. They have issued
guidance on optimizing the program. They have several things
that they are exploring, and we will look for the
implementation of that to see how it goes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you for that answer. I just would like
to say to my colleagues on the other side that it is unfair to
starve a department of resources and then criticize it for not
meeting its mission. I yield back.
Chairman Davidson. The gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, who is also the Chair of our Subcommittee on
National Security, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, Ms.
Oliver Davis, to our committee today, and thank you for the
good work of your team.
This hearing is probably one of the most important we have
all year from the standpoint that hearing from you and reading
your report enables us to do our job, which is to provide
oversight over the HUD and its programs, and you are an
integral part of that oversight. Thank you for what you do and
for being here today. With that being said, did you do any sort
of oversight or counting of noses on how many people actually
show up for work every day at HUD?
Ms. Oliver Davis. Congressman, we have not done any work on
that. We did some work initially on HUD's capacity during the
pandemic to go into full telework mode, but we have not done
any sort of look into who is coming back into the office at
this time, no.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Thank you. It is a really important
question from the standpoint that we see a lot of agencies that
still have way, way, way too many people working from home, and
it really hurts the efficiency of the agencies. So, thank you
for that.
With regards to grant management, you talked a little bit
about that, I think--in your testimony, you talk about HUD's
challenges in overseeing over $100 billion in Federal grants,
and that your office found that HUD had difficulty ensuring
that grantee expenditures are eligible and supported, as well
as requiring complete financial and performance information.
You also found that HUD struggled with spending these funds in
a timely fashion, a particular problem considering the billions
of dollars in disaster grants that HUD is responsible for
managing as part of the Community Development Block Grant
Program. In your opinion, does HUD have the capacity and
competence to effectively oversee such enormous levels of
spending through these Federal grants?
Ms. Oliver Davis. Congressman, I think HUD's capacity is
quite limiting, and it is limiting----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Is quite what?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I think HUD's capacity is quite limiting,
and it is limiting throughout their portfolio. Whether we are
talking about grants or we are talking about public housing or
voucher assistance, frankly, it is one of the number-one----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. When you say capacity to do this, they
don't have the people with the capabilities of doing this, they
don't have the training? What is the problem with their
capacity to handle the problem?
Ms. Oliver Davis. When we talk to external stakeholders
about HUD's capacity, they say that the skills are concentrated
in particular parts of HUD's workforce, some of whose employees
are about ready to retire. We have recommendations about IT
solutions that will require money. That is capacity. We have
attrition of individuals that I think has already been
discussed in the committee. They have attrition of 13 percent
over 10 years at HUD. So, there is a shortage of capacity in
terms of all of the oversight that we are talking about. I
would call it the number-one management challenge, frankly.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. That begs the question, if they don't have
the capacity to do this and they are handling over $100
billion, what should we do differently? Should we restrict
their ability to do this, since they are not doing it? One of
my questions here shortly is with regards to fraud risk
management, if they can't do fraud risk management, we are just
throwing money off a roof and hoping some of it lands in
somebody's hands. Is that a fair characterization here?
Ms. Oliver Davis. There has to be prioritization,
certainly. HUD has to do the best it can with what it has. In
terms of fraud risk management, there are some things that they
can do that will not require additional bodies. Now please,
keep in mind, I have not done a workforce assessment of HUD,
but I can tell you, putting together a checklist at the program
level of issues that a particular program has that makes it
susceptible to fraud, that is something that can be easily
accomplished, in my mind. It is something we are pushing the
Department to do.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. That brings up the question with regards
to improper payments. It has been 9 years in a row now that we
have seen HUD not be compliant with the Improper Payments Act.
Is it going to turn around in the next 9 years? What do we need
to do to get somebody to shake them by the shoulder and say,
hey, things have to change?
Ms. Oliver Davis. This is definitely a concern. We want HUD
to be able to evaluate its programs, identify the risk from
improper payments, get an estimate of improper payments, and
then mitigate these things going forward. What it is going to
take for the Tenant-Based Rental Assistance and the Project-
Based Rental Assistance, which is 40 percent of HUD's
expenditures, is a technological solution. It is going to take
them having a platform where they can take in tenant files,
secure personally identifiable information (PII), and validate
the information.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Ms. Oliver Davis, you have outlined to me
here today that we don't have the management, the capacity to
handle a $100-billion program here. So, how do we affect this
program in a way that can be successful? If we are going to sit
here and hope things change, hope is not a solution. That is
not an effective strategy. Somebody is going to have to be
answerable to this. There will have to be a shakeup someplace
to go get things changed. Otherwise, nothing is going to happen
except more money being wasted. Is that a fair assessment?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I believe HUD has to focus. They have to
have the modernization of their technology, and they have to
focus on the improper payments, and they have to see fraud as a
risk that----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. So, what you are saying is we need
change. Thank you. And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Davidson. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentlewoman from Michigan, Ms. Tlaib, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Inspector General Oliver Davis, for highlighting the outcome of
not having capacity or the resources available for HUD to do
its job or to be able to follow their mission. One of the
things that you mentioned is mold. And you may have mentioned
lead.
I ask unanimous consent to submit for the record a July
2020 news article entitled, ``Inkster Public Housing Exec Under
Fire After Two Baby Deaths.'' The claim from the family, and
there is an investigation going on, is that they were exposed
to mold or to lead in that HUD home.
Inspector General, the outcome of not having the capacity
or the resources available for HUD to implement on the ground
to protect the families who are in housing is very detrimental
to the communities that I represent.
You noted in your testimony that HUD has roughly 30 percent
fewer employees than it did 10 years ago, and a common theme in
your findings was that HUD does not have the capacity necessary
to address the challenges it faces, even though we increasingly
have seen the housing affordability crisis get worse every
single year. Can you talk a little bit about the instances and
what has resulted because of the lack of capacity that has
prevented HUD from being able to effectively address the
nation's housing challenges?
Ms. Oliver Davis. Thank you for the question. I think that
we are seeing capacity and a lack of capacity play out
throughout HUD's portfolio, certainly in oversight. HUD has to
rely on program participants to carry out its mission, whether
we are talking about public housing, rental assistance, etc..
We are talking about grants, disaster relief, and they have to
have oversight of those program participants, and they are
really suffering in that respect.
In terms of housing, we have quite a focus on unit
conditions right now. I have launched an environmental
initiative, looking at lead, looking at living conditions. I
also have an initiative looking at sexual harassment in
housing, but we have seen, quite frankly, failures time and
time again and struggles with oversight in these areas. We have
highlighted them in two recent reports that came out. We looked
at the oversight of health and safety, corrective actions in
public housing, and we found that HUD did not have a nationwide
standard that they were rolling out to their field offices in
order to hold people accountable for correcting these problems.
They were not consistently tracking what we call emergency
health and safety problems. And then, something that might not
be deemed an emergency, they weren't tracking it at all.
And we have problems with the inspection process. We have
long since pointed out compromises in the Real Estate
Assessment Center (REAC) inspection process, and recently we
reviewed the timeliness, and they are really struggling in
their timeliness. They are struggling with prioritizing the
right properties to make sure they are reviewed, and that calls
into question the annual inspections. All of the landlords have
a requirement to do an annual inspection of their units, and
the reason they have that requirement is because the REAC
inspection has traditionally been a sample. HUD can't, and has
never had the capacity to look at every unit, so we have to
rely on the landlords to do that as well. So, all of this is
being called into question.
Ms. Tlaib. And some of the units, the majority of them, are
under city housing commissions. How does that work? There is a
city housing commission that oversees some of the operations in
some of this housing. How are they interacting with HUD,
according to your findings?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I would be happy to talk with you, and,
frankly, learn something about that from you, but what I know
is that all of these program participants have to adhere to HUD
standards. They have to produce housing that is safe, sanitary,
and free of hazards, so that is something on which we are
missing the mark.
Ms. Tlaib. Also, for my colleagues to know, I read in, I
think it might have been your report, that half of HUD's
workforce is eligible for retirement in the next 5 years. Is
that correct?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I don't have that number in front of me.
I did mention in my opening statement, though, that many are
retirement-eligible. I think that is a government-wide problem,
but it certainly will exacerbate HUD's capacity issue and,
frankly, their expertise.
Ms. Tlaib. According to the Congressional Research Service,
from 2002 to 2019, HUD's regular non-emergency appropriations
increased roughly 10 percent, adjusted to inflation, yet to
take just one measure over the same nearly 2-decade period, the
average sale price of a home has increased by 65 percent in the
United States. How does your funding picture change if we zoom
out to look at the past 2-plus decades? You can respond in
writing for the record. Thank you.
Ms. Oliver Davis. I may need clarification.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. I will submit the question to you in
writing for the record.
Ms. Oliver Davis. Thank you.
Chairman Davidson. Thank you. The gentlewoman's time has
expired. The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Fitzgerald, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Inspector General Oliver Davis, thank you
for being here today. I am concerned about GSEs taking market
share from the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). It would
obviously leave FHA with only the riskiest mortgages. And as we
know, riskier mortgages need kind of commensurate controls to
ensure that only eligible individuals receive FHA. Do you think
there is a balance there or that enough is being done to
protect taxpayers from these riskier mortgages at this point?
Ms. Oliver Davis. FHA certainly has the distinction--its
loans carry the full faith and credit of the government, so it
is important that HUD does its best to manage risk against the
mortgage insurance fund. It is the largest mortgage insurance
fund in the world. We have looked at this issue with our audit
work, and we have made some priority recommendations around
this. We do see a remarkable amount of ineligible mortgages
become approved for FHA insurance, and we have made some
recommendations around flood insurance. We see individuals with
delinquent tax debt. I think the number was $13 billion in
loans that HUD insured with individuals who had delinquent tax
debt. And for individuals with child support way up, an offset
for child support as well. So this is definitely an issue, and
it is something that we are hoping that HUD will shore up. Yes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. The situation for the most part is that
adults 25- to 35-years-old simply can't enter the housing
market at this point, either because they can't get the
downpayment, or because they are just being denied based on the
level of income that they have. I know that HUD offers some low
downpayment programs. If you look across-the-board of what HUD
has available, are there certain things that you see as
shortcomings right now or things that need to be changed to
assist kind of this decade of adults who are completely unable
to purchase a home at this point?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I have those same adults in my family,
and they are all talking to me about their struggles right now.
Frankly, that would be something I believe the Secretary would
be better suited to address in terms of what they are offering
and how they are trying to reach individuals who are trying to
accomplish homeownership at this time. I can't think of
anything in the moment that I see as a real shortcoming. We are
really looking at the rest of the fund. I am not aware of any
programs that are causing risk right now outside of these
eligibility issues to FHA.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Yes. We talk about it kind of ad nauseam
right now in Financial Services, because with everybody who
comes before the committee, I try and raise a question, and I
know other Members do as well, that obviously with
homeownership being the cornerstone of building wealth in this
country, if we continue to have these 25- to 35-year-olds who
are being denied access to the market overall, there have to be
some flexibilities built in.
I guess what I would ask is, what is HUD's role in kind of
encouraging more entry-level housing, and is this something you
could work with financial institutions on as well, or how do
you perceive this issue right now?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I understand the concern. Our oversight
hasn't touched that necessarily. We have been looking at the
riskiest parts of HUD's portfolio and making recommendations
there. I am not sure I am doing my best to answer your question
here, but I think the Secretary would have some thoughts on how
they can extend options for homeownership.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Yes. In the minute I have left, there is
kind of direct messaging that has been done to these
individuals. It could be any of the social websites, it could
be Instagram, or whatever it might be, where they specifically
talk about the difference between a 35-year-old in 1995
compared to a 35-year-old right now. The home they are trying
to purchase is almost 4 times the price, and their ability to
pay is not even close to being equal.
I don't think anybody on the committee is trying to waive,
and I certainly am not trying to waive any of the basic points
that you would look at when you are trying to make a mortgage.
But what we are trying to say is, I think that if there is a
way to try and accommodate or to make changes to programs that
would allow them the ability to get into the market--there are
a lot of different programs obviously in the private sector,
but certainly, FHA should be aware of this and should be
working on it.
Ms. De La Cruz. [presiding]. Thank you. The gentlewoman
from Georgia, Ms. Williams, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you, and thank you, Ms.
Oliver Davis, for coming before the committee today, and for
upholding your responsibility to keep the Department of Housing
and Urban Development accountable since you took office.
It is disappointing to hear some of my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle continue to complain about HUD programs
and the management of the Agency, when nearly 2 years ago, in
late October of 2021, we held a hearing to discuss the housing
provisions of the Build Back Better Act. It was an opportunity
to replace the dollar signs with faces, real people, to really
see how much it will harm the people that we are sent here to
represent. To not make these investments was devastating for a
lot of people that I represent in Atlanta. To see the human
impacts of the decisions that we make here in Washington should
weigh heavily on all of us.
At that time, 39 percent of all individuals experiencing
homelessness in our country were Black. We are only 12 percent
of the U.S. population but 39 percent of Americans experiencing
homelessness are Black. Two years later, we are seeing the
consequences of abandoning the housing-related provisions of
the Build Back Better Act. As of last month, over 1.8 million
people reported that they were at risk of eviction or
foreclosure within the next 2 months. Nearly 54 percent are
Black or Latino.
I consistently remind everyone who is willing to listen
that the City of Atlanta, the heart of my district, has the
widest racial wealth gap in the nation. And I just heard one of
my colleagues on the other side mention how homeownership is a
way to build that generational wealth, and without
homeownership, and the provisions, and the policies, and the
opportunities provided by your Agency, that racial wealth gap
only continues to widen in my home district.
What I have heard and read is that it is only going to
continue to be more desperate for the people I represent until
the Republican Majority joins with House Democrats to put
people over politics, and actually look at faces and people,
and not just numbers and dollar signs. There is a shortage of
nearly 14 million homes for families to rent or purchase. And
as a member of this committee, I am dedicated to not only
filling that shortage, but ensuring that HUD has all the tools
in its toolbox to ensure that families of color are not bearing
the brunt of this housing crisis.
Ms. Oliver Davis, it is concerning to me that the
Republican Majority is fighting tooth and nail to roll back
spending to levels that pre-date current housing costs and
inflation. But if you ask any relative or anyone looking to buy
a home in Atlanta, housing costs are still sky high, and there
is no rolling back on those costs in sight. Returning to Fiscal
Year 2022 funding levels will result in funding cuts to HUD
programs, less affordable housing, and more families losing
their homes.
Ms. Oliver Davis, could you provide an analysis of the
impact these funding cuts may have on HUD programs,
particularly in terms of HUD's ability to address housing needs
and provide assistance to vulnerable populations?
Ms. Oliver Davis. Thank you for the question. I think the
HUD Secretary is best-positioned to talk about how cuts could
actually impact the Department. Certainly, in my oversight, we
look at how HUD can do better with what it has. Look, less is
less, right? Less money is going to translate into less aid. It
is going to translate into less capacity overall. But in terms
of where that money goes, how it is spent, I would have very
little input or impact into that, but I believe the Secretary
would certainly be able to speak to that.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you. It is critical that we
understand that slashing agency budgets prevents public
servants from doing their jobs and serving our constituents.
Anyone here who has talked to their casework teams knows that a
fully-staffed and properly-funded agency is going to be much
easier for both staff and constituents to work with. So far
this Congress, the Majority has both failed to convene serious
housing-related hearings and neglected to include homelessness
or affordable housing in their oversight plan. This lack of
focus, coupled with the absence of viable legislation and
solutions, raises concerns about the Committee Republicans'
ability to effectively tackle the challenges of affordable
housing and the unhoused.
Ms. Oliver Davis, in light of this, do you believe that the
ongoing and proposed cuts to HUD, along with the Committee
Republicans' focus on program oversight investigations,
hindered the potential for substantial progress in addressing
our nation's affordable housing and homelessness crisis?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I would feel presumptuous trying to opine
on the intent of the subcommittee and the oversight actions
that it is taking, I truly would, but I appreciate the
engagement. I appreciate the question.
Ms. Williams of Georgia. Thank you so much. I have many
more questions, but I am out of time, so I will submit them for
the record. I yield back.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you. The gentleman from Nebraska, Mr.
Flood, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Following up on
Representative Luetkemeyer's questioning, HUD recently
submitted their congressional budget justification to the
Appropriations Committee. That justification recommended a
$101.834-billion budget from Congress for Fiscal Year 2024, an
increase of 35 percent over their enacted level in Fiscal Year
2023. Now, it is not uncommon for any and every Federal agency
to advocate for more funding from Congress. However, in the
case of HUD, we are talking about an agency that recently had
the responsibility of doling out large amounts of COVID-related
assistance, such as the Rental Assistance Program, and does not
have a great track record of conducting strict oversight of the
funds that it disburses.
Inspector General Oliver Davis, can you summarize the
results of your office's audit of HUD compliance with the
Payment Integrity Information Act of 2019 and the Office of
Management and Budget's (OMB's) guidance for reducing improper
payments?
Ms. Oliver Davis. Thank you. This has certainly been a
focus of our oversight. And what we really are hoping for here
with the Department and their compliance with this Act is that
they can take a look at their portfolio, identify areas that
are susceptible for what we call improper payments, give an
estimate of what they think those improper payments are likely
to be, and then take action going forward to mitigate against
those.
What we found is that in one of HUD's largest grant
programs, Tenant-Based Rental Assistance and Project-Based
Rental Assistance, which accounts for about, I believe it is 60
percent of the expenditures, and I apologize if I am incorrect;
I will correct it for the record. But I believe it is 60
percent of HUD's expenditures, that they can't arrive at an
estimate, so they are identifying it as being at risk, but they
can't test the full cycle of the payment.
And what that means is they can say what HUD is paying to
landlords because that is the payment that we are talking
about, the money that goes to the program participants, but
they can't say what happens after that. So, we can't look at
the money that goes to the tenants and the expenditures, and we
can't say for certain if those are appropriate payments that
are being made. And HUD doesn't have a reliable platform to
collect that information, secure it, and test it, and then give
us an estimate for it.
That is really what we are talking about. It has been 6
years in a row. The last time they had an estimate on that
particular pool of funding was 2016, and I believe the estimate
then was $1.6 billion, so it is significant. It is a
significant thing that we just don't know.
Mr. Flood. To be clear, HUD was noncompliant with a law
passed by Congress that was focused on preventing and reducing
improper payments. Specifically, the OIG's audit found that HUD
did not report improper and unknown payment estimates for 2 HUD
programs that make up more than $41 billion in spending in
Fiscal Year 2022. In other words, HUD is a long, long way from
having the kind of tools necessary to catch fraudsters reliably
in programs that make up more than 60 percent of its budget.
Inspector General Oliver Davis, can you please walk us
through what the problems are with HUD's implementation of the
Payment Integrity Information Act requirements?
Ms. Oliver Davis. Certainly. In one respect, it is
technology. They need a platform that will collect tenant
files, and secure PII that is contained in those files. They
normally would be able to manually check that information if
they were to go onsite and look at the files. They didn't do
that during the pandemic. They are in the process of
modernizing the Enterprise Income Verification (EIV) System, so
I am hopeful they will get something there, but frankly, it is
a technology issue. They need the right platform there. They
need the right platform, and they just, of course, place
importance on this and make it a priority.
Mr. Flood. Would this be resolved with more resources or
prioritizing resources inside the Agency currently? What do you
think the hurdle is here?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I think there has been significant
discussion between my office and the Chief Financial Officer's
(CFO's) office on improper payments. I think they are headed in
a direction to modernize that platform and achieve this. They
have made progress. The year before, we didn't have an estimate
that we consider reliable from the Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and
Maria part of the money, which was also significant, but they
have cleared that up. They have made strides there, so I
believe we are headed in the right direction. I am certainly
hopeful. It is important.
Mr. Flood. Let me just say this. I appreciate your work as
the HUD Inspector General. It is imperative that we ensure that
taxpayer dollars are spent wisely and in concert with the
requirements laid out by Congress. We need to ensure that money
is getting into the hands of those who need it, not fraudsters
who seek to manipulate the system. With that, I yield back.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you. The ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Cleaver, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And I thank you
again, Inspector General Oliver Davis, for being here. HUD is
always being put in a tough situation, and I will try to do
this quickly. We have been dealing for almost a year with a
growing problem all over this country, in the suburbs, in the
urban centers, and that is the theft. And I know that you have
put out an OIG fraud bulletin, which means that you recognized
the issue.
The first case I dealt with came from a couple in their
early 70s in Independence, Missouri, a suburb of Kansas City.
They lost their home. It was stolen. They had to go out and
hire an attorney to try to get their home back. I have met with
local police, FBI, I met with officials in Dallas who called
when they saw that we were dealing with the problem. It is
exploding all over the country, $350 million in the fraudulent
taking of homes all over the country. It is growing. And when
you add the likelihood that we are going to start having cyber
title theft, there is some of that already going on, so it is
just going to get worse.
So, we are in a situation, HUD needs to deal with the
issue, and we need to deal with it right now. I have a bill,
the Good Documentation and Enforcement of Estate Deeds (Good
DEED) Act, designed to try to create at least the awareness,
but it is going to cost $10 million, whatever a year. And then,
if you say to HUD, this is an important program, people are
losing their homes, but you have to take the $10 million
somewhere else. You are squeezing the water in the balloon. We
are going to have a problem. And I have become really concerned
about this as Black, White, suburbs, urban, New York, Los
Angeles, Hollywood--people are losing their homes.
I know you are aware of it, but I don't think your office
can handle it. I know you are dealing with it in terms of
awareness, but what can be done? My bill puts the
responsibility on HUD, but then it costs money, and so we say,
well, we can't do this because it costs money. But thousands of
people are losing their homes.
Ms. Oliver Davis. You mentioned our fraud bulletin, and we
attempt to issue those when there is something that is just so
important that we need the public to know about it immediately.
As soon as we started hearing about that scam, we issued that
bulletin. I haven't studied, frankly, what HUD can do about it.
I would love to learn more about that. I appreciate hearing
about all of the various examples that your constituents are
suffering from; it is a terrible thing. It is something I would
have to investigate a bit more, talk to my staff about, but I
would love to talk to you about it more.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes, I know more about it than I want to
know----
Ms. Oliver Davis. I'm sorry.
Mr. Cleaver. Because I have sat with a police captain in
Kansas City and just mentioned this--you stopped getting mail,
and you are thinking, well, I am going to be mad at the U.S.
Postal Service. And then, you find out you are not getting mail
because somebody has taken your name and your address, and they
are now in control of your life, and all of that. I get excited
about it because I have sat down and had this discussion with
people crying because they lost their homes, and HUD needs to
deal with it. I would love to have a conversation with you.
Ms. Oliver Davis. Yes. Absolutely. I would welcome that.
Mr. Cleaver. I yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you. The gentlewoman from Colorado,
Ms. Pettersen, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you,
Ms. Oliver Davis, for being with us today. My 3-year-old son's
name is, ``Davis,'' so I am a big fan of your name and also a
huge fan of your work.
I just want to thank you for the critical work that you and
your team are doing every day to support our most-vulnerable
people, to support those first-time homebuyers. One of the
programs specifically is very important to me, because my mom
was one of the lucky ones who was able to qualify through the
Housing Voucher Program. And it is because of that program that
my mom was able to stay housed. She would absolutely not be
alive today without that support, and I can only imagine how
much money your Agency is saving the U.S. every day at the
local level because of keeping people housed. I can say that
she was one of the lucky ones, but my dad, unfortunately, was
one of the ones who was denied because the wait list was so
long in Colorado.
I was surprised to see in a report that you submitted in
November of 2020, that the estimate was that 62 percent of the
public housing agencies had unused vouchers. So, I would love
to talk about what you are doing to make sure that you can
increase the number of vouchers being utilized and what you are
doing to make sure that it is more appealing or what we can do
to make sure it is more appealing for private owners.
Ms. Oliver Davis. Thank you for pointing out our work. The
Housing Choice Voucher Program is certainly important in going
towards solving the affordability crisis that we see in this
country. In terms of landlords, we have certainly recognized in
our work that landlords often don't participate in this
program. It is a problem in that just because someone gets a
voucher, it doesn't mean for certain that they are going to get
a home. And often, they have to relocate and go elsewhere to
find the home away from family, away from their source of
income, or simply away from their community where they want to
be. So, there are challenges. I believe HUD is working to study
landlord incentives for participating in the program. That is
what we have learned during our work.
In terms of the Housing Choice Voucher Program, we made a
priority recommendation to the Department that they look at the
vouchers that are going unused. They have closed out that
recommendation. They have issued guidance that should help PHAs
optimize their program with very specific tools. This is a new
development and it is something that will look for the
implementation of, and we are very hopeful that it reaches
people who need these vouchers.
Ms. Pettersen. Great. Thank you very much for that. And I
know that something that you have covered in your testimony, a
common theme in the oversight findings has been that HUD does
not have the capacity necessary to address the challenges that
you face. We know that we continue to ask you to do more. The
needs are so great, but you are understaffed and underfunded,
and your IT is significantly outdated. What would it look like
if we actually invested in the work that we are asking you to
do, and how different would those outcomes be if we did what we
needed to on our side?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I will echo my comments about capacity.
HUD's capacity is strange. We hear that from external
stakeholders, both stakeholders that represent housing owners
and developmental entities, as well as people who represent
tenant groups. We are hearing this from all across HUD's
portfolio. I know through my work that they have technology
challenges, and that itself is a capacity challenge and will
take funding and prioritization to fix. The Secretary is really
the best person, I think, though, to sit and talk about an
influx of funding and how it might help her, but I can
certainly speak to that in the realms of the risk that we see
in our work as the oversight entity, certainly.
Ms. Pettersen. We have a little bit of time left. What
programs are you most proud of, that you think our constituents
should know about?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I am certainly proud of the work that we
are doing overseeing the programs. HUD has a very, very, very
important mission. I know if the Secretary were sitting here,
she would have many things to say about her pride in the
programs and what they are doing for the country. I certainly
have pride in our work. We are trying to make HUD the best it
can possibly be with our oversight. That is our goal, that is
our mission at the end of the day, so that is what I would say
I am most proud of; the people of HUD OIG are serving the
community very well these days. They are making a very good
impact on HUD's programs.
Ms. Pettersen. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you. The ranking member of the Full
Committee, the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, and I am very pleased
about this hearing today because there are so many unanswered
questions about housing. The one thing that we do know is we
need more housing. We are in a crisis in this country. And I
would like to ask in terms of your responsibility, usually I
think of your capacity that you are looking at what happens
inside HUD, what the personnel is doing, et cetera. I want to
know, how far does that extend? For example, if you discover
that vouchers are not being used, do you go so far as to deal
with the issues about why they are not being used?
There are some communities that discriminate. They do not
want Section 8 vouchers in their community. We have that
problem in Los Angeles County. Does your investigation go that
far as to say, yes, we have vouchers that are unused, but let
me tell you what we know about what is happening in, say, San
Bernardino County?
Ms. Oliver Davis. Thank you for the question. We certainly
look at the effectiveness of the program, so we look at how
effective the program participants are in carrying out HUD's
mission. If we see something that falls within our purview to
actually open an investigation, we will certainly do so. If we
see something that would be a fair housing violation, that
would be something for the Department to look at in their
capacity, we would refer that to the Department as well. We are
looking for any kind of wrongdoing or abuse or waste that
touches these programs.
Ms. Waters. Oh, that is very good to know. Let me raise
another question. Do you know how long a person has to utilize
that voucher? Is there not a cutoff date for the length of time
they are holding that voucher?
Ms. Oliver Davis. That is a very good question. I don't
know the specifics of that.
Ms. Waters. I think there is a problem there in that after
a certain length of time, I think the voucher is no good.
Please check that out, because if that is the case, we need to
understand those communities where the housing is not easily
available. And they need to look and look and look to find a
landlord who will take that voucher, and that may take more
time. So, would you take a look at that also, please?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I will look into that. I would love to
talk to you more about that to see if that is a far-reaching
program. If you are having experiences with that, hearing about
that from your constituents, I would love to hear about that.
Ms. Waters. In addition to that, I heard you allude to the
landlords and that there are complaints about the local housing
authorities and how they manage their responsibility working
with HUD. And there are some complaints about whether or not
they are required to do too much in order to get a person in.
For example, if they find a vacant apartment, if the person
finds it and the housing authority has a responsibility for
putting it in its top shape as mandated by HUD, what is being
done to shorten that length of time, but ensure that it is safe
and it is secure? Do you have any idea about things like that?
Ms. Oliver Davis. Can I ask for clarification? Are you
speaking about when they initially do an inspection before a
tenant moves in?
Ms. Waters. Yes, absolutely.
Ms. Oliver Davis. Okay. I am aware that is what is supposed
to happen, that a unit should be inspected before a new tenant
comes in. I am aware of overall challenges with the inspection
process and we are now aware of challenges with annual
inspections on the part of landlords. I can't speak to that
particular issue in my work, but I would love to hear more
about that if you are aware of shortcomings there.
Ms. Waters. What I would like to know is whether there is a
certain time that the housing authority must get that tenant
ready, get that apartment ready for the tenants, or can they
take 3 months to do it or 4 months? Do they have to do it in 30
days, and if it is not being done, is that part of what you do?
I am asking you a lot of questions beyond what I think I have
always thought you were supposed to do, but maybe you know more
about it. How far does it go?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I think those are great questions. They
are things that I would like to know more about, but I confess,
I don't know if there is a standard length of time that they
have to inspect before a tenant enters a unit. I don't know
that. That may very well be reflected in our work somewhere and
I would want to get back to you on that.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. We have three or four things we need
to talk about and delve into. Thank you, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Thank you, Inspector General Oliver Davis, for appearing
before us today. As the Representative for a district that is
predominantly Hispanic, and which also includes one of the
poorest counties in the entire nation, I am deeply concerned
about the Department of Housing and Urban Department's ability
to consistently and safely execute its public housing mandate.
Inspector, with a simple yes or no, does HUD have the
capability today to ensure, on a consistent basis, that its
grant programs are not exposed to instances of waste, fraud,
and abuse?
Ms. Oliver Davis. You are giving me a tall order here. I
think it would be difficult to always ensure that grants are
free of fraud. To me, it seems like something that is very
difficult to do regardless of capacity.
Ms. De La Cruz. With that being asked, is there a better
way to steward the dollars, the taxpayer dollars, that are
being used right now in HUD?
Ms. Oliver Davis. There are several recommendations that we
have made, that we deem priority, that would certainly help in
that respect. We have what we call slow spenders in the world
of grants, in the world of disaster relief, and those are
entities that take a longer time to spend the money. We find in
our oversight work that the longer funds hang out there, the
more susceptible to fraud they become.
So, we have made a priority recommendation for the
Department to work more closely with grantees, to ask them for
projections on spending and to hold them accountable when they
don't meet those, and to work with them to find out why in
order to set a course for a better future for that grant and
that grantee going forward. So, that is something that we could
do. We could work closer with slow spenders.
Fraud risk management is something that I can't speak
enough about; it is a very important activity that we are
urging the Department to undertake. It is something they need
to be doing at the program level. So if we are talking about a
grant, the people who administer that particular grant, the
people who get that particular program off the ground, are best
suited to talk about fraud in that program and to put anti-
fraud measures in place. And to do the testing, again, the
improper payment testing is crucial. All of these things go
hand in hand, so yes.
Ms. De La Cruz. What I am hearing is that currently, there
is no system in place to see what type of fraud is happening in
the grant programs. Has there been a study done?
Ms. Oliver Davis. A study on particular types of fraud?
Yes. We at HUD OIG, along with the Pandemic Response
Accountability Committee (PRAC), which I serve on, did a series
of audit work looking at fraud in virtually every program that
was touched by the CARES Act and the American Rescue Plan, and
we put together a fraud risk inventory for all of these
programs. We identified dozens of risk factors, sometimes 60
fraud schemes, so we have, in fact, put that information out
there. We have urged HUD to use it in its own assessments of
its programs, so yes.
Ms. De La Cruz. And have they used those suggestions?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I believe we are making progress in that
area. We have talked about it quite a bit. I know that CPD, in
particular, has made some strategic hires of individuals who
have some anti-fraud backgrounds. I know that the CFO is
interested in getting fraud risk assessments off the ground, so
we are working towards that. However, our recommendations
remain open, so it remains to be seen.
Ms. De La Cruz. When were these recommendations made?
Ms. Oliver Davis. They were made during the pandemic. I am
taxing my brain for the exact date of those, but it was during
the pandemic.
Ms. De La Cruz. So, a couple of years ago?
Ms. Oliver Davis. Within the last couple of years, we did
that work, yes.
Ms. De La Cruz. It is very concerning to me that when you
all have done an internal audit, you have found, as you said,
several cases of fraud, however, it has taken 2 years and you
are still just talking about it. It is time that we implement
these measures so that we can look for dollars that are being
wastefully spent and use them to people who really need those
dollars. With that, I yield back.
I now recognize the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Garcia, for
5 minutes.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you, Ms.
Oliver Davis, for being here today. I understand that you are
the first one in 5 years to come down and visit with us, so I
hope we are both learning from each other today.
One of the things that really struck me from the report
that you gave us was the number of outstanding or open
unimplemented recommendations from OIG audits: 985. That sounds
like a lot today. How old are these items? Are they all these
that weren't found last year or the year before? Have you aged
these and determined how far back we have had them on the
books?
Ms. Oliver Davis. We have aged these. I don't have those
numbers off the top of my head. I will tell you that we have
closed many recommendations in the last 4 years. We
concentrated first and foremost on some of the older ones, so I
suspect that we are dealing with more recent recommendations,
but I would want to get back to you on that exactly on how old
some of these are. There may be some aged ones----
Ms. Garcia. Can you tell us how many, where findings are
unopened since before January 2021?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I wish I could. I don't have those
numbers in front of me, but I will certainly get those to you.
Ms. Garcia. How long have you been Inspector General at
HUD?
Ms. Oliver Davis. Since 2019.
Ms. Garcia. Since 2019, so you are familiar with many of
these then?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I am, and some of these certainly pre-
date me, and they span Administrations and policy changes
certainly, yes.
Ms. Garcia. So, some of these audit findings are not just
within the last 28 months of the current Administration? These
are carryovers, in fact, from the prior Trump Administration?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I would expect we have some beyond that.
Ms. Garcia. Because, in fact, you have actually had some
findings about the lack of attention to some of these issues
with Secretary Carson before Secretary Fudge. And some of these
were management alerts for unreasonable delays in HUD OIG
access to the Department's information, which caused OIG
oversight efforts to be diluted, to become stale, or worse,
halted entirely. Is that still an existing challenge? Have you
been able to correct that with the current Administration? Are
you getting timely information? Do they have the staffing
requirements to be able to implement these, or what seems to be
the problem?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I have asked my staff to keep me abreast
of any issues we have regarding access or delays in getting
electronically stored information, and I have not been made
aware of any.
Ms. Garcia. So, you currently don't have any challenges
with dealing with Secretary Fudge?
Ms. Oliver Davis. Secretary Fudge and I meet regularly. We
issued a joint cooperation memo. I think we have a workable
relationship, certainly.
Ms. Garcia. Right. And what are your plans to be able to
reduce this backlog?
Ms. Oliver Davis. We work on this all the time, frankly.
This is a concentrated effort between us and HUD leadership. We
have a number of teams. The CIO's team works with our people.
The CFO's team works with our people to reduce these
outstanding recommendations. We have done our first Priority
Recommendations Report last year in order to really focus
leadership on the things that we think are the most important,
the things that we think should rise to the top. So, that is
how we will proceed going forward.
Ms. Garcia. And what criteria do you use for deciding what
rises to the top? Is it based on the savings that you could get
from some implementation, or is it the efficiencies to the
programs, or is it better oversight on the management, or give
me a sense of what criteria you use to establish it? When I saw
the number, again, 985, that is almost a thousand.
Ms. Oliver Davis. It was much larger than that.
Ms. Garcia. You can't tell me today how many you have done,
so in my mind, it is still a thousand until I get that letter
from you telling me, no, we have already closed another 300,
but 985 is a hell of a lot.
Ms. Oliver Davis. It is a lot, and I appreciate your
interest in that. I appreciate your interest in our efforts to
close those recommendations. With the top recommendations
report, we are really doing risk assessments constantly. That
is how we decide what work to look at, is the riskiest parts of
HUD's portfolio, so our top recommendations span the portfolio.
There are things like lead hazards. There are things like
radon. Those are certainly of the utmost importance. Then,
there are things with a bigger risk, fiscal impact. We
discussed earlier the ineligible loans that receive HUD
insurance. Sometimes, those were in the $13-billion range. So
really, each one is different, but they are very impactful and
of the high-risk areas in the portfolio.
Ms. Garcia. Okay. My time is running out, but I look
forward to your document showing me the aging of the 985 and
how many were inherited in January 2021.
Ms. Oliver Davis. Okay.
Ms. Garcia. Thank you.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you. The gentleman from New York, Mr.
Lawler, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Inspector General,
the New York City Housing Authority, known as NYCHA, has a long
history of mismanagement and corruption, which has created
unsafe and unacceptable living conditions for thousands of New
York City residents. In 2021, the Brooklyn District Attorney
charged nine NYCHA contractors with bribery as part of a
kickback scheme. Your office recently participated in an
investigation that led to the sentencing of two NYCHA
superintendents for accepting bribes from contractors. It seems
that every time you turn around, someone tied to NYCHA goes to
jail for one form of corruption or another.
Inspector General, in 2019, New York City formally
committed to addressing the serious problems with living
conditions in NYCHA Housing as part of an agreement with HUD,
the EPA, and the Southern District of New York. In your
opinion, have they fulfilled this commitment?
Ms. Oliver Davis. You are referencing the monitor that was
assigned to NYCHA. We have not reviewed the activity of the
monitor. We keep an eye on NYCHA. We look at their reports as
they come out. We have a----
Mr. Lawler. I'm sorry. To whom does the monitor report?
Ms. Oliver Davis. That is a good question. I don't want to
get out too far on the issue with the monitor and be incorrect,
so I would have to get back to you on that.
Mr. Lawler. Okay. But when you say that you have not
reviewed any of the actions of the monitor, did HUD not enter
into an agreement with NYCHA with respect to improving the
living conditions of its residents?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I believe HUD is a party to the agreement
with the monitor. We, as the oversight agency, are not a party
to that agreement. And when I say we didn't look at the
monitor, we do look at the reports that the monitor puts out,
and we take NYCHA into concern when we are looking at our work.
We learn from NYCHA, and we have several investigations
involving NYCHA, as you pointed out.
Mr. Lawler. Who administers the Federal funds that go to
NYCHA?
Ms. Oliver Davis. HUD does.
Mr. Lawler. So, you are telling me that we continue to
administer Federal funds, NYCHA was party to an agreement with
HUD, with the Southern District of New York, with the EPA, on
serious problems with living conditions, and we haven't done
anything to talk to the monitor? We haven't done anything to
provide oversight of the serious failures of NYCHA?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I confess, Congressman, I have not spoken
to the monitor. Perhaps, I should speak to the monitor.
Mr. Lawler. I would strongly recommend that when you leave
here today, you might want to pick up the phone.
Ms. Oliver Davis. Okay. And I would be happy to speak with
you about this and learn what you know about this.
Mr. Lawler. Oh, I can tell you, last year being part of the
New York State Assembly, I voted down the New York City Public
Housing Preservation Trust because it was nothing more than a
scam. New York City Public Housing was changing the way that it
was getting funding as part of this scam. It was using tenant
protection vouchers instead of Section 9 so they can get more
money. And yet, you are telling me not only are we giving them
more money now, but we are not providing any oversight?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I believe the monitor is providing
oversight. I can't speak to the quality of that oversight,
frankly. I can't. I can tell you we do investigations----
Mr. Lawler. Whose job is it to investigate the quality of
that oversight?
Ms. Oliver Davis. I am not certain to whom the monitor
reports. I will do my best to find out.
Mr. Lawler. That is just remarkable. So given that, based
on your testimony, you have not had any conversations with the
monitor. You are, frankly, unaware of what the monitor has been
doing. Is that what you are testifying today?
Ms. Oliver Davis. We speak to the Department. I speak to
the Southern District of New York. We ask for updates
periodically, and we read the reports that come out, and we
also conduct our own independent investigations and activities
at NYCHA.
Mr. Lawler. Okay. What independent investigations have you
recently conducted that would answer my original question,
which is, has NYCHA fulfilled its commitment to improve the
health and living standards for its residents?
Ms. Oliver Davis. We conducted an investigation of a lead
worker at NYCHA, who was a whistleblower who came forward, and
we uncovered hundreds of inspections at NYCHA that did not live
up to the Lead Safe Housing Rule. They were falsifying
documents. They were getting out of visual inspections because
of the falsification of those documents, and it caused me to
start my entire initiative looking at health and safety issues
and public housing.
Mr. Lawler. And yet, what HUD is doing is giving NYCHA more
money, despite its failures to improve the living conditions of
its residents. It is shameful, and I would strongly encourage
you as the Inspector General to meet with the monitor
immediately.
Ms. De La Cruz. The gentleman's time has expired. I would
like to thank our witness for her testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place her responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:46 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

June 21, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
