- REFORMING THE PROXY PROCESS TO SAFEGUARD INVESTOR INTERESTS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REFORMING THE PROXY PROCESS
TO SAFEGUARD INVESTOR INTERESTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CAPITAL MARKETS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 13, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-38

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-577 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Capital Markets

ANN WAGNER, Missouri, Chairwoman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JUAN VARGAS, California
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York, Vice     WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
Chairman                         STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
MIKE LAWLER, New York                EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 13, 2023................................................     1
Appendix:
July 13, 2023................................................    41

WITNESSES
Thursday, July 13, 2023

Berry, Jonathan, Managing Partner, Boyden Gray PLLC..............     5
Doyle, Tim, Senior Policy Advisor, Bipartisan Policy Center (BPC)     7
Minow, Nell, Vice Chair, ValueEdge Advisors......................    12
Netram, Chris, Managing Vice President, Policy, National
Association of Manufacturers (NAM).............................     8
White, Joshua T., Assistant Professor of Finance and the Brownlee
O. Currey Jr. Dean's Faculty Fellow, Vanderbilt University's
Owen Graduate School of Management.............................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Berry, Jonathan..............................................    42
Doyle, Tim...................................................    67
Minow, Nell..................................................    80
Netram, Chris................................................    99
White, Joshua T..............................................   114

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Lucas, Hon. Frank D.:
Additional information provided in response to questions
posed during the hearing to Tim Doyle......................   126
Meuser, Hon. Dan:
Written responses to questions for the record submitted to
Jonathan Berry.............................................   128
Waters, Hon. Maxine:
Better Markets Fact Sheet, ``ESG Investing is Here to Stay''.   214
Written statement of Green America...........................   223
Written statement of the Interfaith Center on Corporate
Responsibility.............................................   229
Written statement of Out Leadership..........................   231
Written statement of Principles for Responsible Investment...   237
Written statement of the Shareholder Rights Group............   244
Written statement of various farmers and ranchers groups.....   250
Written statement of various investor organizations..........   256
Written statement of various undersigned organizations.......   259
Written responses to questions for the record submitted to
Jonathan Berry.............................................   265
Written responses to questions for the record submitted to
Tim Doyle..................................................   266
Written responses to questions for the record submitted to
Nell Minow.................................................   267
Written responses to questions for the record submitted to
Chris Netram...............................................   268
Written responses to questions for the record submitted to
Joshua T. White............................................   269

REFORMING THE PROXY PROCESS
TO SAFEGUARD INVESTOR INTERESTS

----------

Thursday, July 13, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Capital Markets,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ann Wagner
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Wagner, Lucas, Huizenga,
Hill, Steil, Meuser, Garbarino, Lawler, Nunn, Houchin; Sherman,
Meeks, Scott, Vargas, Gottheimer, Gonzalez, Casten, Nickel,
Lynch, and Cleaver.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Chairwoman Wagner. Good morning. The Subcommittee on
Capital Markets will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Reforming the Proxy Process
to Safeguard Investor Interests.''
I want to ask for a point of personal privilege from the
ranking member to recognize one of our staff, one of the
minority staff members, if that is okay with you, sir?
Mr. Sherman. It would be objectionable to me if we didn't.
[laughter]
Chairwoman Wagner. I do want to take this point of personal
privilege and recognize one of our really important staffers,
whose last day with the committee will be tomorrow, after about
4\1/2\ years. Bring him out here. Don't let him hide back
there. Is he here? Okay, good. I want to recognize Franklin
Thornton. Franklin, stand up.
[applause]
Franklin served the committee as a committee clerk in the
117th Congress, and was extremely helpful and patient to our
Members on both sides of the aisle during much of our COVID-19
pandemic when hearings, and markups, and doing everything
online via Webex was very difficult. So, I want to thank him
for facilitating those hearings and those markups, and I want
to thank him for his service, and I think we all wish him the
best on his next career in Denver. So Franklin, thank you for
everything.
[applause]
Chairwoman Wagner. And now we will move on, and I will
recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an opening statement.
Thank you all for joining us today. This hearing will
examine policies that prioritize increased transparency,
accountability, and economic analysis in shareholder voting
decisions, while also addressing concerns with the outsized
influence of proxy advisor firms.
I am greatly concerned with the Biden Administration's
continued efforts to force non-material environmental, social,
and political issues on American companies and investors.
Prioritizing these ideologically-driven regulations drives up
the costs and burdens of participating in the U.S. public
markets. This, in turn, diminishes the appeal for private
companies considering going public or remaining a public
company, and fewer publicly-traded companies means fewer
investment opportunities for Main Street investors. These
increased costs hinder the ability of American public companies
to compete on a global scale, putting them at a disadvantage,
while China's economic influence continues to grow. What is
even more concerning is that these policies end up burdening
retail investors, who rely on solid financial returns to save
for retirement, purchase a home, or pay for their child's
education.
We must remember that the primary purpose of our public
markets is to foster economic growth. Unfortunately,
unrestricted shareholder activism is diverting attention and
limited resources from core issues undermining the
attractiveness of U.S. markets and discouraging companies from
going public. The prioritization of shareholder proposals that
deviate from a company's strategic direction or long-term goals
has transformed boardrooms into partisan platforms where fringe
political agendas overshadow sound financial management and
business strategy.
For our public markets to remain focused on long-term
shareholder value, it is crucial to reform the proxy process to
reduce the financial burdens on small and mid-sized companies
and minimize distractions for management. By ensuring that
shareholders' proposals align with a company's interests and
long-term goals, we will promote value creation for all
shareholders.
Today, we will also discuss the Biden Administration's
imposition of climate reporting and other requirements that
place unnecessary burdens on companies, hindering their ability
to grow and compete in a global economy. For example, the SEC's
proposed 500-page climate disclosure rule would replace
voluntary sustainability reports with mandatory disclosures,
including detailed emissions data and climate risk management
strategies. Congress has not granted the SEC the authority to
create regulations that compel companies to disclose general
information about environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
issues. In fact, Congress repeatedly expressed dissatisfaction
with the current number and complexity of disclosures the SEC
requires and repeatedly urged the agency to simplify them
rather than adding to their complexity.
Piling on pages of complicated disclosures minimizes their
usefulness to Main Street investors and impedes the ability of
younger, smaller companies to compete against large incumbents.
In light of these challenges, it is crucial that we address
these issues with a focus on fostering economic growth,
promoting sound financial regulations, and reducing unnecessary
burdens on American businesses.
I very much look forward to hearing from our esteemed panel
of experts today as we delve deeper into these matters in order
to safeguard the interests of Main Street investors.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, for 4
minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Sherman. And I would ask unanimous consent that if the
ranking member of the full Financial Services Committee isn't
here to give her 1-minute opening statement, that she can do it
after one or all of the witnesses.
Chairwoman Wagner. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Sherman. This month, we have a series of hearings
designed to prevent shareholders from getting the information
they want to decide whether to invest and make sure that those
shareholders don't affect the behavior of the corporations they
own. We prevent investors from making decisions based on any
criteria not approved by the Governors of Florida and Texas by
depriving them of information, and then, in this morning's
hearing, preventing them from introducing resolutions, and in
this afternoon's hearing, preventing them from getting the
advice they need to decide how to vote on those resolutions.
We are told that these considerations are fringe or
immaterial, and there are those who say that it is material
only if it is 5 percent of earnings per share, but the
Republican witness correctly testified yesterday that what is
material, is what is important to investors. Now, there may be
a few unusual investors. Yesterday, I posited the idea of
someone who only wants to invest in companies whose boardrooms
are painted purple. Those folks do not need to be catered to,
but where a material portion of the investment community finds
something material, it is our job to get them the information
and to allow them to affect the corporate behavior of the
companies they own.
There are at least two groups of investors, the first I
call the, ``Ebenezer Scrooge investors,'' who are interested
only in earnings per share, but even they need information
about global warming. They have to decide whether to invest in
the Maldives Coconut Plantation Corporation, and they will get
an SEC document that details the risk factors in terms of
competition. Coconuts might be grown elsewhere, but if you are
going to invest in the Maldives Plantation Corporation, you
also need information about another risk factor, inundation,
because the Maldives are only 4 feet above sea level. Even the,
``Ebenezer Scrooge invester,'' needs information about the
effect of global warming on earnings per share.
Second, we have the, ``John Denver investors.'' This is
hundreds of billions of dollars of investment capital that
cares what the effect of their investment is on our
environment, and if we don't provide them with the information
they want, many of them will invest in European companies that
do provide that information.
And third, what I call the, ``John Bolton investors,''
those who are concerned about the national security impacts of
the investments they make.
Today, we are going to focus on the rules for introducing a
resolution, and we have the Republican SEC raise that. You have
to be an investor of $25,000 worth of shares for a period of 1
year. I might go along with that, but what I can't go along
with is they prevent aggregation. What would this mean in the
context of running a political campaign? What if we said that
any contribution of under $2,000 cannot be accepted by a
campaign? So, if you can run your campaign with only $2,000 and
up, fine, but if you have 100 donors who want to give you $20,
that doesn't count. Shareholders who invest $1,000 or $500 in a
corporation, if there are a lot of them, should count just as
much as one investor with $25,000 of investment.
We are told that the SEC should, in effect, conspire,
collude with corporate boards to keep out of the proxy
statement resolutions on certain topics, and look at how these
topics overlap. One topic is that you shouldn't have something
that doesn't relate to the company's business and at least 5
percent of the business. The other says you shouldn't have a
resolution that relates to ordinary business operations. So if
it doesn't relate to the company's business, you can't propose
it, and if it does relate to the company's business, you can't
propose it. Thank God today's SEC is no longer issuing no-
action letters that, in effect, disempower all shareholders.
We are told that this is about cost. It isn't. This hearing
is being held for those who think these resolutions might win,
and they don't want to give these shareholders a chance.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga,
who is also the Chair of our Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, for 1 minute for an opening statement.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I appreciate you
having this hearing today. Last year, ESG shareholder proposals
continued their upward trajectory as activist investors
continued their assault on the returns of actual retail
investors. At the center of this debate are the proxy advisory
firms, which in many cases support policies that run counter to
their own fiduciary responsibility to maximize returns for
investors. Coupled with the recent politicization of the SEC,
proxy advisory firms have seized immense power to shift policy,
often using a one-size-fits-all framework to promote a liberal
social and political agenda. The proxy process is broken. It no
longer promotes long-term shareholder value and operates
without transparency or accountability and ignores materiality.
As the Biden Administration continues to focus on
implementing costly environmental, social, and political-based
regulatory requirements, which have significant ramifications
for U.S. public markets, Republicans will promote policies that
protect retail investors, maximize returns, and increase
financial security. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the ranking member of the Full Committee, the
gentlelady from California, Ms. Waters, for 1 minute.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman. I would
like to take a point of personal privilege to acknowledge
Franklin Thornton, who served our committee as clerk for the
past 2 years, including during the difficult months during the
pandemic. His patience and professionalism enabled the
committee to conduct its business during that time. And for the
past few months, he has been serving dutifully on our housing
policy team, and I would like to wish him the best in his
future endeavors.
Chairwoman Wagner. Thank you. We did the same at the
opening. We are all so grateful for Franklin, and we wish him
the best as he moves on. Thank you.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. Today, Republicans are
giving the term, ``investor protection,'' new meaning by
pushing legislation that would protect investors from their own
ideas. For a party that supposedly values free speech and free
market capitalism, they are now trying to muzzle the ability of
shareholders to bring forth proposals that can influence the
direction of the companies they own. MAGA Republicans would
prefer that shareholders only be able to vote on what corporate
management wants, completely avoiding any sense of
accountability or transparency. When it comes to corporate
board decision-making, this committee has real work to do when
it comes to investor protection, and this paternalistic,
disingenuous approach to shareholder rights is not it. I yield
back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentlelady yields back.
We now welcome the testimony of our witnesses: Mr. Jonathan
Berry, managing partner of Boyden Gray PLLC; Mr. Tim Doyle, a
senior policy advisor at the Bipartisan Policy Center and the
founder of Doyle Strategies LLC; Mr. Chris Netram, the managing
vice president of policy at the National Association of
Manufacturers; Dr. Joshua White, an assistant professor of
finance and the Brownlee O. Currey Jr. Dean's Faculty Fellow at
Vanderbilt University's Owen Graduate School of Management; and
Ms. Nell Minow, the vice chair of ValueEdge Advisors. We thank
you all for your testimony here today, and we will now get
started.
Mr. Berry, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN BERRY, MANAGING PARTNER, BOYDEN GRAY PLLC

Mr. Berry. Thank you. Good morning, Chairwoman Wagner,
Ranking Member Sherman, and members of the subcommittee. My
name is Jonathan Berry, and I am the managing partner of the
law and policy strategy firm, Boyden Gray. I was previously the
Acting Assistant Secretary for Policy at the U.S. Department of
Labor during the Trump Administration. I also currently
represent the National Center for Public Policy Research and
other shareholder clients in litigation against the SEC
regarding its shareholder proposal rule, 14a-8. While my views
on the subject of today's hearing are informed by that work, I
do not appear here today on behalf of any client, and the views
I present are my own.
Politically-motivated shareholder proposals are a main
entry point by which ESG-focused activists, and money managers,
and advisors influence public companies to adopt their agendas.
This process starts with 14a-8. Now, the SEC did not invent the
shareholder proposal. To the contrary, prior to 14a-8, there
existed and still exists a robust system of State corporate law
governing proposals. While Exchange Act Section 14-a gave the
Commission authority to compel disclosures of existing
information, Congress left the substantive regulation of
stockholder meetings to State law, as was traditional. Rule
14a-8 upended this arrangement, first by compelling companies
to include shareholder proposals and, over time, by contorting
the law governing the substance of shareholder proposals in
ways far beyond State law.
For a time, the SEC permitted the exclusion of social
proposals if they also related to the company's ordinary
business operations, but in 1998, the Commission narrowed the
ordinary business exclusion to prevent excluding proposals
that, ``focus on sufficiently-significant social policy
issues.'' The SEC opened the gates even wider in 2021 with a
staff bulletin effectively cutting ties between social
proposals and ordinary business completely. Environmental and
social proposals now represent a majority of all proposals in
Russell 3000 companies, and 58 percent of proposals in 2022.
While so-called anti-ESG proposals have risen somewhat, the
SEC has blocked many of them from consideration on company
proxy statements. This last proxy season, my client, the
National Center for Public Policy Research, took a shareholder
proposal that the SEC had blessed on a discrimination issue and
substituted the terms, ``viewpoint'' and ``ideology,'' for the
prior proposal's terms, ``sexual orientation'' and ``gender
identity.'' But the SEC said that my client's proposal could be
struck off the ballot, that viewpoint discrimination in the
workplace was not a significant social policy question.
The SEC's pattern of disfavoring conservative proposals is
the only rational explanation for the disparity here, and we
see the pattern. A recent analysis found that the SEC granted
no-action relief on 46 percent of all requests for liberal-
aligned proposals but 72 percent of all conservative-aligned
ones. Put the SEC's viewpoint filter on top of the enormous
volume of pro-ESG proposals that activists put out, and you see
why pro-ESG viewpoints are overrepresented in the proxy
process.
Now, once proposals make it to the shareholder ballot, the
rest of the proxy process takes over to use the proposal as an
opportunity to pressure companies to adopt ESG goals. Here, I
want to call attention to the proxy advisory firms in
particular. ISS and Glass Lewis control upward of 90 percent of
the relevant market, and, for example, ISS recommends voting
against directors of many companies flagged by climate
activists unless the company has issued detailed disclosures of
its climate-related risks and implemented net-zero-by-2050
reduction targets. Both advisors threaten in their voting
guidelines directors at companies that fail to respond to
proposals that receive broad shareholder support, and Glass
Lewis guidelines seem to say that even 20 percent counts as
broad support.
I would like to close by applauding the committee for
grasping the fundamental nature of the problems caused by Rule
14a-8 and supporting the exclusion of shareholder proposals if
the subject matter is environmental, social or political, and
ultimately barring 14a-8 altogether. I commend the committee's
focus on ensuring proxy advisors and asset managers face
greater accountability for how they recommend and vote on
shareholder proposals, and I would also like to note there is
increasing activity in the States on these subjects.
I thank the committee again.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berry can be found on page
42 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Berry.
Mr. Doyle, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF TIM DOYLE, SENIOR POLICY ADVISOR, BIPARTISAN
POLICY CENTER (BPC)

Mr. Doyle. Good morning, Chairwoman Wagner, Ranking Member
Sherman, Ranking Member Waters, and members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me to testify today. My
name is Tim Doyle, and I am the senior policy advisor at the
Bipartisan Policy Center, or BPC, where I provide subject
matter expertise on corporate governance and ESG-related
matters.
BPC is a nonprofit organization founded in 2007 by four
former Senate Majority Leaders: Howard Baker, Tom Daschle, Bob
Dole, and George Mitchell. BPC drives principled and
politically-viable policy solutions through analysis and
negotiation, and by providing a forum for diverse views. BPC's
funding reflects the character and diversity of the
organization in that it comes from charitable philanthropies,
individuals, and corporate donors. As such, we believe all
donors have unique and diverse interests. However, we believe
that bipartisanship is the only way to forge a sustainable
public policy solution. It is with that policy philosophy that
I testify today.
BPC has been evaluating and discussing ESG-related issues
for a number of years now. We have learned that the key to
understanding ESG is looking into how one intends to use the
ESG data. As a result, the use of the ESG acronym varies widely
depending on sector, company, and an individual's perspective.
Given the difficulty in fully understanding the breadth of ESG-
related topics, the committee should continue to work
collaboratively with nonprofits, think tanks, academics, and,
of course, investors and issuers in finding common language
when using the term, ``ESG.''
The ESG debate raises profound questions about the way to
deliver returns for investors. The next few years will
determine what comprises ESG in the future or even whether the
term has lasting power. Furthermore, given the exponential
growth in ESG investment funds and other financially-based uses
of the term, ``ESG,'' establishing some consensus around the
definition of, ``ESG,'' would greatly improve the capital
markets, further protect retail investors, and ultimately
encourage more companies to go public.
Of course, at the center of the ESG debate is disclosure.
Determining what is disclosed involves numerous factors
depending on if it is legislatively mandated, regulatorily
required, or individually requested at annual shareholder
meetings. My written testimony focuses on the regulatory
requirement disclosure, which, historically, is used in
materiality analysis, and also for or regarding the need for
enhanced oversight of the proxy advisors, given the influence
that their voting recommendations have on ESG-related issues.
Materiality has been a standard used for determining
disclosure at least since the 1976 Supreme Court case, TSC
Industries, Inc. v. Northway, Inc. What many don't realize is
that leading up to the holding in that case was years of
litigation involving disclosure. The, ``reasonable investor,''
standard described in that case was itself a compromise in that
it provided analysis to be used so investors would receive
enough information to make informed investment decisions, but
not so much as to become overwhelmed with an avalanche of data,
as the Court stated. This standard has stood the test of time,
and this committee should strongly consider codifying that
decision if, for no other reason than to bring some regulatory
certainty and disclosure for both investors and issuers.
The growth of the proxy advisory industry is, in some ways,
an example of a success story. The transition from defined
benefit to defined contribution retirement plans resulted in
the exponential growth of institutional investors over the last
couple of decades. This, in turn, has created the potential
need to vote on thousands of shareholder proposals. It is all
too clear, however, that proxy advisors began to have what some
have called an oversized influence on the proxy process, and
ultimately, an indirect, and in some cases, a direct influence
over corporate disclosure and policy.
We sometimes forget that the proxy advisors are for-profit
entities, and inherent in that is a conflict between their
recommendations and their clients. Moreover one proxy firm, in
particular, even started providing consulting services to the
same companies for which they were providing recommendations.
In both scenarios, the appearance of impropriety requires
enhanced transparency and accountability to protect investors
and ensure a strong capital market.
Another issue that is regularly raised is that some proxy
advisor reports which are used to make recommendations have
errors in them that may well affect voting results on certain
proposals. This committee should develop policies that ensure
transparency to alleviate the conflicts of interest, to protect
investors, and to create a framework for issuers to correct
errors before proposals are voted on. It is important to
mention that many of these issues have had bipartisan support.
For example, proxy reform, which has been contemplated by the
SEC for more than a decade, has previously had congressional
support. There have also been several Republican- and
Democratic-appointed Commissioners at the SEC who have
supported reforming the proxy process, including additional
oversight of proxy advisory firms.
In closing, I truly appreciate the opportunity to share
some of what we have learned over the last few years at BPC.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Doyle can be found on page
67 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Doyle.
Mr. Netram, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS NETRAM, MANAGING VICE PRESIDENT, POLICY,
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MANUFACTURERS (NAM)

Mr. Netram. Good morning, Chairwoman Wagner, Ranking Member
Sherman, Ranking Member Waters, and members of the
subcommittee. My name is Chris Netram, and I am the managing
vice president of policy at the National Association of
Manufacturers (NAM). I appreciate the opportunity to testify
today on behalf of the NAM's 14,000 members and the 13 million
men and women who make things in America.
Manufacturing supports local communities across the
country, creating well-paying jobs for Americans from all walks
of life. Manufacturing pioneers groundbreaking technologies and
lifesaving innovations, and manufacturing is an economic driver
that powers growth here at home and supports American
competitiveness on the world stage. Manufacturing is capital-
intensive, and manufacturers often turn to the public markets
to finance investments that create jobs and strengthen
communities. The public market allows businesses to access
capital, and it lets Americans share in the industry's success.
Investments like mutual funds and pension plans help workers
save for a child's education, a new home, or a secure
retirement.
Manufacturers have a fiduciary duty to act in these Main
Street investors' financial best interest. Focusing on
financial returns helps businesses grow and safeguards
investors' retirement security, but in recent years, third
parties have hijacked the proxy process to distract companies
from this duty. Activists use the proxy ballot to advance
political and social agendas, proxy firms dictate corporate
governance decisions, and the SEC is empowering these groups
while also proposing ESG disclosure mandates of its own.
As you have already heard, ESG proposals are at an all-time
high. They now make up approximately 60 percent of all
proposals, and it takes only $2,000 to get an ID on a ballot.
The SEC is encouraging these proposals, telling companies that
anything with broad societal impact can't be excluded from the
proxy ballot, even if totally unrelated to a business's
operations. Turning the proxy ballot into a debate club diverts
time and resources away from shareholder value creation and
forces companies to wade into controversial topics over which
they have no control. Congress must prevent the SEC from
empowering activists and forcing companies to include
irrelevant proposals on their ballots.
Cheerleading for activists are proxy advisory firms, where
proxy firms' influence goes well beyond ESG proposals. Their
policies shape corporate decisions, and their recommendations
dictate shareholder votes. Despite their power, proxy firms
operate with minimal regulatory oversight, and the SEC has, in
fact, rescinded the modest protections that were adopted in
2020 to inform and protect investors. This means that the
firm's conflicts of interest, errors, and lack of transparency
go largely unchecked. Nevertheless, asset managers continue to
rely on their services, in many instances even allowing proxy
firms to robo-vote on their behalf. In other words,
unaccountable, error-prone firms are robo-voting on decisions
that affect Americans' retirement savings.
I want to take this opportunity to thank Congressman Steil
for his years of leadership on legislation to rein in proxy
firms. Manufacturers believe that Congress must act to require
the firms to engage with businesses, protect investors from
conflicts of interest, enforce anti-fraud standards, and limit
robo-voting.
Not only is the SEC empowering proxy firms and ESG
activists, the agency is also undertaking an ESG agenda of its
own. New ESG disclosure mandates threaten to increase costs and
liability for manufacturers and overwhelm investors with
immaterial information. Even small and privately-held
businesses will feel these effects. That is because many of
these new requirements impact supply chains, like the climate
rule, Scope 3, mandate. Investors need material information to
make informed investing decisions and grow their retirement
savings. Instead, the SEC has proposed far-reaching mandates
that won't inform investors but will harm manufacturers.
Congress must limit the SEC's regulatory onslaught and require
the agency to focus only on material disclosures.
In conclusion, manufacturers believe strongly in the
importance of tackling climate change, improving
sustainability, and enhancing diversity. Taking a company-
specific approach to these issues can support business growth
and drive shareholder returns, but politically-motivated
activists are pursuing inflexible ESG agendas with little
regard to their impact on everyday Americans' financial
security, and the SEC is increasingly a partner in that effort.
If this trend is allowed to continue, small manufacturers will
be the hardest hit. I have spoken to small manufacturers around
the country who are deeply concerned about potentially losing
public company customers and are facing insurmountable
regulatory costs because they just can't keep up with ESG.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Netram can be found on page
99 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Netram.
Dr. White, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF JOSHUA T. WHITE, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF FINANCE
AND THE BROWNLEE O. CURREY JR. DEAN'S FACULTY FELLOW,
VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY'S OWEN GRADUATE SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT

Mr. White. Thank you, Chairwoman Wagner, Ranking Member
Sherman, Ranking Member Waters, and members of the Subcommittee
on Capital Markets. Thank you for inviting me today to discuss
reforms of the proxy process. I look forward to your questions
on this important issue.
The House Financial Services Committee is considering
several legislative proposals aimed at safeguarding investor
interests. These issues are paramount for ordinary investors
who put their money into public equities to save for college or
retirement. In my written testimony, I discuss what I believe
are three key challenges running counter to the interests of
most investors. The first is a dramatic upswing in the volume
of non-governance ESG shareholder proposals. The second is the
influence of proxy advisory firms on managers' and
institutional investor behavior. And the third is costly SEC
mandates to disclose non-material public information that
reduces the attractiveness of U.S. capital markets. I ask that
my written testimony be entered into the record.
The proxy voting process plays a pivotal role in corporate
governance. It is how most shareholders vote for directors who
have a fiduciary duty to represent their interests. Equity
investors also vote on other matters, such as advisory votes on
any shareholder proposals that appear on the proxy. In the past
2 years, we have seen a record number of environmental and
social proposals, which are the, ``E','' and ``S,'' component
of ESG, with the, ``G,'' representing governance. Managers can
ask the SEC to exclude shareholder proposals from the proxy,
which is known as no-action relief. Research shows that the
stock price tends to increase when the SEC approves such
exclusions. This suggests that managers are skilled at spotting
proposals that risk investor welfare and only serve to advance
special interests.
In November 2021, the SEC updated its exclusion policy with
Staff Legal Bulletin 14L, which notes the SEC will no longer
honor prior admission policies if a proposal has significant
social policy implications. In my written testimony, I provide
data analysis showing the profound influence that this bulletin
had on proxy voting. In 2022, there was a 100-percent surge in
environmental and social proposals, yet investor support for
these proposals plummeted. In July of 2022, the SEC proposed
additional changes to the rule underlying proposal exclusions.
If adopted, it will make it even more challenging for managers
to omit proposals they perceive as harmful to shareholder
value. The cost of shareholder proposals is substantial and
includes both the legal costs and, more importantly, the time
that managers and directors spend addressing proposals.
Flooding the proxy with environmental and social proposals
likely overwhelms investors, potentially leading to less-
informed voting on critical issues. Institutional investors
often rely on proxy advisory firms, which provide fee-based
voting recommendations to its clients. Their reports can help
passive portfolio managers reduce the cost of voting on
thousands of proxies. However, there are concerns about the
power of proxy advisors in the U.S. as there are only two firms
that dominate the market. Studies show that their voting and
advice is highly influential, but concerns arise with this
influence.
Some show that certain institutional advantage investors
managing trillions of dollars follow their advice more than 95
percent of the time. This is known as robo-voting, which poses
multiple issues. Research indicates that asset managers who
rely less on proxy advice yield higher returns for their
investors. That implies that robo-voting can negatively impact
the majority of investors. One study finds that the largest
proxy advisor often skews its environmental and social
recommendations due to pressure from sponsors of those
proposals, who know that those proxy advisors will bring in
robo-voting. Managers and directors might also proactively
adopt environmental and social proposals that destroy value to
avoid negative attention or negative recommendations from proxy
advisors on their own board seats.
Finally, I am concerned about some of the SEC's recent
rulemakings. These endeavors mandate the disclosure of non-
material information. Shifting away from the materiality
standard for disclosure can harm investors and can harm the
company by revealing proprietary disclosure costs. When the
benefits do not outweigh the costs of disclosure, it should not
be mandated.
Together, these three forces place pressure on public
companies and discourage private companies from going public.
The end result is lower return for shareholders, and fewer
investment or diversification opportunities for retail
investors who lack access to investing in public companies.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. White can be found on page
114 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Wagner. Thank you, Dr. White.
And Ms. Minow, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF NELL MINOW, VICE CHAIR, VALUEEDGE ADVISORS

Ms. Minow. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman, and
members of the subcommittee, for this opportunity to speak to
you. I want to associate myself with the opening remarks made
by Ranking Members Sherman and Waters and thank them very much
for the roundtable they presided over yesterday, and I
recommend that everyone on the committee and the staff take a
look at that.
Many years ago, I was talking to a corporate director who
was very unhappy with the vote on a shareholder proposal, and
he said, ``You have to understand now those are fringe
shareholders.'' And I said, ``The vote got a 60 percent vote in
favor, which means you are the fringe.''
We have talked a little bit about what is material, and I
will tell you, as Ranking Member Sherman said yesterday, the
best people to decide what information is material are the
investors. As much as I appreciate the opportunity to speak to
you today, I particularly appreciate the opportunity to remind
some of the members of this panel, including the National
Association of Manufacturers, of how capitalism works.
``Capitalism'' is named for the providers of capital. It is
provided for the shareholders. And as I guess the only person
on this panel who has actually filed a shareholder proposal, I
can tell you that we have talked a lot about the costs, which I
have to say are grossly overestimated by self-reported figures,
but not about the benefits. I think it is of tremendous
benefit. You would think that the National Association of
Manufacturers would be talking about their recognition of the
importance of sustainability if they hadn't heard from their
shareholders. I don't think they would, so I have a few key
points.
Only a small percentage of companies receive any
shareholder proposals, the household name companies get a lot,
and many companies get one or two, but the vast majority get
none. The average is one every 7 years, so it is really not a
huge problem. Even a 100-percent vote in favor of a shareholder
proposal is not binding. Companies are free to ignore it. It is
a wonderful way, a very cost-effective way on both sides for
shareholders to raise issues of importance.
A lot of these resolutions have been characterized as
political. Again, as with material, it is up to the investors
to decide what is political and what is material. So if the
vote is nonbinding, the cost is really very minimal. Limiting
shareholder proposals is killing the messenger, one of the very
few ways insulated insiders get honest feedback. Now, I have
heard a lot of complaints that a small number of individuals
are responsible for a large percentage of shareholder
proposals, and that is true, but the important figure is the
level of support that those proposals get. For example, 20
percent of the proposals filed by John Chevedden and Ken
Steiner received support of more than 50 percent of
shareholders, including a 79-percent vote at Duke Energy on a
proposal that would require a simple majority vote rather than
a supermajority for certain matters, and a 98-percent vote at
Carlyle and a 99-percent vote at American Airlines. Again,
these are not fringe shareholders, and these are not fringe
issues. These are issues of vital importance to a wide and
diverse variety of investors, of individuals, of index funds,
of pension funds, and of all kinds of different funds. I think
that, again, is how capitalism works.
I also want to point out that shareholder proposals are a
very modest way to raise concerns at a low cost to investors
and issuers. If shareholder proposals are limited further, the
result will be challenges that are far more expensive and
disruptive for everybody. I do want to make, if I may, Madam
Chairwoman, a small correction to one of your points, which is
that if a company goes private, that makes it not available for
investment. In fact, the people I work with, the large pension
funds, are huge investors in private equity. And I welcome
anyone in the National Association of Manufacturers to go
private at a fair price and see how they like dealing with
private equity owners. I guarantee you the first thing that
will happen is they will cut all the salaries.
Proxy advisor services are the exemplars of the free
market. Nobody has to use their services. There is competition.
There is a new anti-ESG proxy advisor that no one has
mentioned, run as a side hustle by Presidential candidate,
Vivek Ramaswamy, already being used by one of the large pension
funds, so if there are no barriers to entry, nobody has to buy
it. And if 90 percent follow the recommendations--and that is
because 90 percent of the recommendations are a vote for the
board of directors, a vote for the auditors--when it comes to
the other issues, the more controversial issues, in fact, they
depart from proxy advisors quite often.
Thank you very much, and I will be happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Minow can be found on page
80 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Wagner. Thank you, Ms. Minow.
We will now turn to Member questions, and I recognize
myself for 5 minutes for questioning.
Dr. White, for more than 80 years, shareholders' engagement
has been focused on a company's strategic direction, or perhaps
their long-term goals would be a better way of putting it, with
an eye on maximizing revenue and increased returns for
investors. Recently, there has been an increase in the number
of shareholder proposals that have turned boardrooms into
partisan battlegrounds fighting over social agendas instead of
focusing on sound financial management and business strategy.
Could you please provide insights into the recent trends of
politically-motivated shareholder proposals, specifically how
this shift has changed the focus of corporate boards away from
investors and companies' strength and onto external agendas
untethered from the organization's financial health?
Mr. White. Thank you, Chairwoman Wagner, for that question.
Yes, I would agree that there has been a politicization in the
corporate boardroom. Companies now have to misallocate what are
scarce resources that investors provide them in hopes of
generating a return. And they are focused not necessarily on
the, ``G,'' component of ESG, but more on the environmental and
social component. As Ms. Minow pointed out, oftentimes, there
are shareholder proposals to remove managerial entrenchment
mechanisms, such as a supermajority vote. I just want to remind
everyone that is the, ``G,'' component of ESG, which academic
research has shown for more than 20 years is valuable.
The environmental and social concerns are that, if you have
a shareholder, or a subset of shareholders, or a minority
shareholder that wants to push a special interest, they may be
willing to sacrifice investment returns if it forwards their
mission objective. That does not benefit all investors. In
fact, if businesses do not run their organizations in the most
efficient way, their competition will, and we compete on a
global basis. To the extent that we politicize the boardroom,
these burdens are just going to be passed onto public
companies, which may then actually go private. That is what the
research shows.
Chairwoman Wagner. Okay. Mr. Netram, in November 2021, the
SEC issued new guidance that made it difficult for companies to
exclude ESG shareholder proposals. Staff Legal Bulletin 14L
states that the SEC will now focus on the social policy
significance of issues raised by shareholder proposals, rather
than an individual company's connection to a particular issue.
How significant of a departure is this from the SEC's
longstanding criteria that relied on a proposal having a
connection to the company's ordinary business operations?
Mr. Netram. It is incredibly significant. As we pointed
out, this is a huge shift in the approach to these topics. What
we have actually seen in practice is that granted requests for
no-action relief after this rulemaking have fallen by about
half. And what that means is that companies are now forced to
deal with issues that are well outside of their control instead
of being able to focus on things that are material to their
underlying business.
Chairwoman Wagner. So, the impact is large on businesses,
on the shareholders, and on the retail investors at the end of
the day?
Mr. Netram. That is correct.
Chairwoman Wagner. Mr. Netram, it has been observed in the
past that proxy firms, ISS and Glass Lewis, have released
voting recommendations based on inaccurate and flawed data. I
got incredible numbers yesterday, somewhere around 42 percent
of those saying that this information is completely flawed and
inaccurate. Investors who rely on the firms' recommendations
are at risk of making uninformed decisions, undermining the
integrity of the market. In this context, can companies review
a proxy for recommendations and provide feedback to ensure that
shareholders can make well-informed decisions when voting?
Mr. Netram. Currently, no. No such process exists for
companies to make sure that the data that runs into the vote
recommendations are accurate.
Chairwoman Wagner. Why is it crucial for businesses to have
the opportunity to review and offer feedback on draft proxy
firm recommendations?
Mr. Netram. Because what we are talking about are,
effectively, governance decisions on the direction of the
business on which Main Street investors are relying for their
retirement security. If those decisions are based on
incomplete, inaccurate, or misleading data, the end result
cannot be good.
Chairwoman Wagner. And upwards of 42 percent is a very
large amount. Would requiring proxy advisor firms to disclose
their methodologies, calculations, and sources of information
lead to a more transparent and reliable advisory process?
Mr. Netram. Absolutely.
Chairwoman Wagner. I thank you, and I will yield back my
time. And I recognize the gentlewoman from California, Ms.
Waters, who is the ranking member of our full Financial
Services Committee.
Ms. Waters. Thank you so much, Madam Chairwoman. First, I
would like Ms. Minow to know that you answered many of my
questions about the value of shareholder proposals, and I would
like to just have you comment further. As I mentioned, for a
party that is supposedly pro-free-market capitalism and pro-
investor-freedom, I find it incredibly ironic that Republicans
want to limit the ability of the capitalists, shareholders, who
are the owners of the companies that power our economy, from
proposing initiatives to be voted on at corporate meetings. A
key tenet of the Republican Party is that the government
shouldn't be able to tell you what you can and can't do, but in
the instances of our capital markets, they are trying to do
just that. Republicans want to stifle the ordinary investor and
their fiduciaries' ability to have a voice in how their
investments are managed. Do you have any additional thoughts on
that? If so, I would like to hear them.
Ms. Minow. I appreciate that very much. There have been a
lot of improvements over the years in boards of directors. When
I first came to work in this field, O.J. Simpson was on five
boards, and he was on an audit committee of one of them, and
boards have become much more engaged, and much more qualified.
That is all because of shareholder initiatives. That is all
because of shareholder proposals. It was not unusual in those
early days for a person to serve on 10 boards. Now, the average
is two or three boards, and board members are doing a vastly
better job because of shareholder proposals' management
entrenchment devices. I am not here to say anything good about
CEO pay, except to say it could be worse and it would be worse
without the oversight of shareholders.
Again, I just want to emphasize that shareholder proposals
are nonbinding. Companies can and do ignore the results of a
shareholder proposal, and if that means the Chair would vote
against the board next year, well, that is how the market
responds. But yes, shareholder proposals have been enormously
important, and I mentioned that 20 of John Chevedden's
proposals got majority votes. I should also mention another 20
of them were successfully negotiated with the company in a
manner that was satisfying to both sides.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Ms. Minow. Could you please discuss
more how pension funds that the whole public shares engage the
companies they own and their ability to engage companies in
which they are invested through private funds? As I understand
it, private funds don't make disclosures, neither of their
investing practices or policies, nor do they make available
information about the underlying portfolio companies. How are
pension funds that are large investors and private funds, such
as private equity funds or venture to capital funds, know
whether the value of their investment is fair? How can they
engage these private companies if they don't know about the
governance or diversity metrics of these companies?
Ms. Minow. Yes. Thank you, Ranking Member Waters. That is
what, ``private,'' means. And it has been my experience in
working with large institutional investors that they are in
very close touch with the managers and partners of the private
equity funds, both in deciding whether to make the investment
as they learn about what those strategies are and also as they
themselves engage with their portfolio holdings. Again, that is
very, very market-based.
Looking at things, I have to say that I work with money
managers, and they are the most, ``mathy,'' people in the
world. They are the most green eyeshade, resolute, forward-
looking people in the world. And portraying them as sort of
flower-strewing hippies who vote on behavior, based on what
their wishes are about flowers and bunnies is just not true.
Ms. Waters. Based on the knowledge that you have about the
position that these pension funds are in, perhaps we need some
legislation to deal with that. Do you agree?
Ms. Minow. I would love to see that. Thank you.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The ranking member yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga,
who is also the Chair of our Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I appreciate
the panel. Welcome to the alternative universe.
It is amazing. Yesterday, this side of the aisle was
compared to, ``Trotskyites.'' By the way, the definition of
that is socialist democracy. And by the way, Trotsky was trying
to overthrow democratic capitalism, and he didn't think the
Soviet Union was going far enough. We also had a misquoting of
Milton Friedman yesterday. This month is the 50th anniversary
of his seminal work. The social responsibility of business is
to increase its profits. It is literally the name of his essay.
But we are being told by others on the other side of the aisle
that we are somehow anti-capitalist, anti-democratic. It is
insanity. It is complete insanity and just underscores how
political this has become.
I am going to get to the Index Act, Mr. Netram, first and
foremost. Republicans in both the House and Senate introduced
the Index Act, which highlights the roles some asset managers
play in passive managed funds. You noted in your testimony that
boards of directors must act in Main Street investors' long-
term financial best interests, and those investors have the
right to hold company leaders accountable via the proxy ballot.
How important is it for these shareholders to have an active
role in the shareholder voting process? In other words, is it
important that Congress create some guardrails on investment
advisors who direct how shareholders should cast their votes?
Mr. Netram. It is critically important because these are
not shares of the asset managers. These are shares held for the
benefit of Main Street investors. They deserve to have a voice
in that process.
Mr. Huizenga. Right. I want to move on to some of the other
issues that we need to cover here. Proxy advisors like Glass
Lewis and ISS--and the former president of one of those
institutions is here today--affect the outcome of millions of
shareholders' votes. Their influence is growing, and,
unfortunately, they increasingly focus heavily on ESG
initiatives without any accountability, oversight, or
competition. That is why they will be appearing before my
Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee this afternoon.
Mr. Berry, your testimony pointed to overlap between the
environmental and social agendas and prominent shareholder
activist and proxy advisors. How do proxy advisors and
shareholder activists arrive at the same priorities? Do they
coordinate?
Mr. Berry. The short answer is, yes. They work through
organizations like Climate Action 100+ that convenes asset
managers, institutional investors, proxy advisors, and
shareholder components.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. And is it true that companies are
already required by law to disclose, ``impacts related to
climate change that have a material effect on a company's
business and operations?''
Mr. Berry. Yes, absolutely, if material.
Mr. Huizenga. Materiality, materiality, materiality. Okay.
Given that material information regarding climate change must
already be disclosed, is there a good reason to deviate from
that standard?
Mr. Berry. As we said previously, it is a time-tested
standard, and there is no good reason as far as ISS.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. In ISS' written testimony, the firm
states that ISS performs its work in a prudent, open, and
honest manner. Yet, in December of 2022, the head of governance
solutions for ISS testified that ISS failed to consult with the
Texas Employees Retirement System over new types of shareholder
proposals.
Mr. Berry, how does a failure like this and others affect
the accuracy, reliability, and information provided to those
actual shareholders?
Mr. Berry. It can have a huge effect. If there is no
feedback, there is no consultation. How can you expect
reliability?
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Mr. Netram, you emphasized in your
testimony that proxy advisors have an outsized influence on
corporate governance at manufacturers of all sizes, public and
private. By the way, I know many privately-held companies that
have sustainability officers because their customers requested
it, or because they feel internally that they need to do that.
How does this influence affect the decision-making process of
companies and their boards?
Mr. Netram. For the manufacturing industry, proxy advisory
firms operate as sort of quasi-regulators. Their influence is
felt well before any vote is cast as companies try to contour
themselves to match their policies with proxy advisory firms'
recommended policies.
Mr. Huizenga. And it is true that while those proxies or
those shareholder proposals may not be legally binding, ISS and
Glass Lewis will then recommend that those boards reject them
or get voted out, correct?
Mr. Netram. That is correct.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Maybe not by legal act, but certainly
by action. Okay, quickly--well, I guess I have 7 seconds left,
so I don't know that I am going to be able to do this, but I
hope that we can blend some common sense to this and that,
``materiality,'' is the watchword, and I yield back, Madam
Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from Michigan yields back.
I now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee, the
gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Capitalism is under attack. If by the sweat of
your brow and the forbearance of consumption you accumulate
capital and you have the courage to invest, these proposals
would deprive you of the information that is material to
millions and millions of investors. And if you do become a
shareholder, the proposals here would prevent the shareholders
from affecting the behavior of the company they own. The
purpose here is to blind the investors when they make the
investment decision and hog-tie them when they try to affect
the company's behavior.
Today's Republican Party has recently begun this war on
capitalism. As I said yesterday, they are of the same mind now
with the centuries'-long effort of the Socialist Workers Party
of Leon Trotsky. The gentleman from Michigan says that is
unfair, and he is right because it is unfair to Mao Zedong
because it takes a Eurocentric view of communist thought and
fails to give appropriate mention to East Asian communism.
Imagine a shareholder resolution that says the company must de-
risk from China, decouple from China, and not sell advanced
technology to China. Many boards, probably most, would fight
hard to block that from the proxy statement, and two political
parties will help them do that: the Republican Party of the
United States; and the Communist Party of China.
We are told that we are supposed to protect retail
investors, but we are told that if you have $25,000 to invest,
you can propose something, but if 3 people have $10,000 to
invest each, they can't. We must have aggregation. We shouldn't
just be talking about ESG, ESG-WNC. The last hearing that I
chaired of this subcommittee focused on workforce as part of
ESG. And as I have just mentioned, we need resolutions about
how companies deal with China, and we need disclosures of the
big China risks that so many companies take. Mr. Berry tells us
we should rely on States. That is a race to the bottom. When a
State needs $100 million or even a few million dollars in
revenue, they will allow boards to be entrenched management. I
do agree with Mr. Berry that we should allow all flowers to
bloom, both red flowers and blue flowers.
A lot of people on my side of this issue are not CPAs--I
guess I am the only CPA on our side--and underestimate just how
hard it is going to be to really have meaningful ESG
disclosures. To ascertain, quantify, tabulate, define, make
comparable, and audit numerical information is very difficult
to devise that system. We are told that investors who care
about ESG are the fringe, and, as Ms. Minow points out, they
are the winners.
Ms. Minow points out the importance of private companies,
and that we need to require disclosures by multibillion-dollar
companies, even if they are privately held, and not just to the
private equity companies that invest. Mr. White puts forward
the idea that if you want to be a, ``John Denver investor,''
rather than an, ``Ebenezer Scrooge investor,'' you are morally
wrong somehow, or you are incompetent, or you should be blinded
and hog-tied, and, frankly, I don't agree with that.
We are told that we have to prevent inaccurate speech.
Everybody who wants to kill the First Amendment says that they
are not going after good speech; they are only going after bad
speech. The answer to bad speech is good speech. And we
shouldn't be censoring political talk, and we shouldn't be
censoring what advisors have to say.
Ms. Minow, we are told that somehow there is a big cost
involved in these things. I remember when creating the proxy
statement was very difficult because you had to set the type.
We didn't have computers back then--I was at the financial
printing office--but I would assume that printing something is
easy now. Tabulating is easy. Isn't most of the cost here the
cost of trying to prevent it by fighting this with lawyers and
to prevent the vote from ever being proposed?
Ms. Minow. Yes, that is true. As I said, the costs that
they send out are very inflated. Shareholders are limited to
500 words. They can have as many words as they want to respond.
They have in-house counsel to respond. In my opinion, it
doesn't take more than an hour or two.
Mr. Sherman. So they attack it as being fringe, and they
say it is expensive, and the expense is the money they get to
prevent these fringe proposals from winning.
Ms. Minow. Correct.
Mr. Sherman. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman. And I
certainly thank all of our witnesses as well.
Proxy voting process is not working to serve the best
interests of investors. I think that is kind of clear when you
have 97 percent of the proxy voting held within two
organizations, which would be alarming to, I think, general
investors who probably aren't aware of that and don't engage in
proxy voting as well. The idea that you happen to agree with a
particular ideology from these proxy companies and that is why
you are favorable to them, can really hedge it down a road that
could reverse its course sometime in the future, particularly
when laws, regulations, standard practices, laws that have been
in effect since 1940, like the Investment Advisers Act of 1940,
where there are fiduciary responsibilities, where there is
ERISA, where it is very clear for pension funds and whatnot
that you are to act in the interest of the investor, not an
ideology, and if there is a conflict of interest, it shouldn't
be disclosed, little things like that, that have been followed
for decades now. But instead, we have an SEC that has decided
to put out a 500-page report that says, well, we are going to
do things a lot differently now, and because we believe in a
certain ideology, we are going to force--not recommend, not
suggest, not even give tax incentive towards--but we are going
to force investment companies.
And of course, we have seen pushback. Warren Buffett has
called it, ``asinine.''--I think that is a technical term.
Large investment firms--I will leave their names out--have
stated that they are being asked, mandated, required, told to
renege on their fiduciary responsibilities. So, what are we
talking about here? If we want to see these sorts of changes,
they need to go through an actual legislative body of the
Federal Government called Congress, right? Not the whims of a
few individuals who are temporarily going to be running a
particular agency, such as the SEC.
Anyway, Dr. White, how does the polarization of business
management, capital allocation, influenced by proxy advisors--
go back to the proxy advisors--impact market confidence and
invester trust? Do you think that this just breeds trust, this
sort of mannerism of voting?
Mr. White. Thanks for the question. When you think of the
word, ``trust,'' you trust whom you are investing your money
with--your retirement income--that they are going to vote in
your best interest as a shareholder. They have a fiduciary duty
to do so. The reality is that asset managers can simply rely on
the voting advice of proxy advisors whose interests might not
be maximizing shareholder value. If I was rational, I would
probably sort on only the votes that they recommend voting
against for the board, and only the proposals on the ENS side
of governance that they recommend voting for, and that leaves
out informed voting, and it is why we see asset managers who
conduct their own research tend to outperform. So, relying on
proxy advice can erode that trust that your investment advisor
is acting in your interest.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you. Mr. Netram, what do you believe, and
isn't it true that the information that is now being required
by Chair Gensler's ESG disclosure proposals as material, if it
is material to a public company's operations, wouldn't it
already be obligated to be disclosed?
Mr. Netram. That is absolutely true. That is the core duty
of a corporation here to disclose material risk to their
investors so that they can make informed investing decisions.
That duty currently exists with or without this proposed rule.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. Mr. Netram, you mentioned Representative
Steil earlier. I don't know if you alluded to the bill. Would
you comment on the importance of his legislation?
Mr. Netram. Absolutely. Congressman Steil's bill would make
sure that proxy firms are actually subject to some level of
oversight. Right now, we are in a system where these are the
only actors in the financial system that have minimal to no
oversight at all. Everybody else--companies, exchanges, asset
managers--are subjected to fairly significant oversight. Proxy
firms so far have been able to escape that, and the Steil bill
would bring them into the net.
Mr. Meuser. Excellent. Thank you. Madam Chairwoman. I yield
back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from Pennsylvania yields
back. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Scott, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I appreciate that.
Ms. Minow, let me start with you. The shareholder process
provides a very important mechanism for investors to express
their views and is very essential to making sure that company
executives are managing the company for the benefit of its
owners, and that is what they are there for. However, I am very
concerned that the SEC's recent proposal to amend Rule 14a-8
will create additional uncertainty and encourage the submission
of proposals by proponents whose interests are not aligned with
the interests of shareholders who are seeking a return on their
investments.
For example, in a situation last month, SEC Commissioner
Mark Uyeda raised concerns about the process through which the
agency staff decides whether to allow companies to exclude
shareholders' proposals from their proxy statements. And
Commissioner Uyeda cited several figures that showed an 18-
percent increase in the number of shareholder proposals
submitted to companies between 2021 and 2023, and a 40-percent
jump in the number of proposals that reached a vote over that
same 2-year period.
My first question is to you, Ms. Minow. Do you agree with
SEC Commissioner Uyeda that we have seen an increase in
shareholders proposals over the past 2 years?
Ms. Minow. Thank you very much, Congressman. Yes, we have,
but as I have noted, a lot of those proposals are withdrawn
following successful negotiations with the company. And, of
course, we have had this new influx of anti-ESG proposals, most
of which got single-digit numbers of support and cannot be
resubmitted because the system works very well. That is how
markets work.
Mr. Scott. Would you attribute this increase, in part, to
the updated November 2021 guidance issued by the SEC's Division
of Corporation Finance about the application of Rule 14a-8, and
its decisions of whether to give no-action relief to companies
that seek to avoid shareholders proposal being voted on?
Ms. Minow. My understanding is that ruling is a return to
earlier guidance. During the Trump Administration, a lot of
tightening of those rules occurred, and I think that the
general feeling of the investor community is a preference for
the earlier approach.
Mr. Scott. And in your experience, do you know of any
shareholder proposal that led to a negative change or a
deterioration of a company?
Ms. Minow. Thank you for that question. As I noted, even a
100-percent vote in favor can be ignored by the company, so
that has not happened.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much.
Ms. Minow. Thank you.
Mr. Scott. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from Georgia yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Arkansas, Mr. Hill,
who is also the Chair of our Subcommittee on Digital Assets,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I appreciate this
hearing. And I'm glad to have our panel with us. Nell, it is
nice to see you again. How long you have been working on these
issues? I think I can beat you by about 2 years, but we have
known each other a long time, and you have been a real voice in
the corporate governance arena.
With that being said, I have to say I don't know if I share
David Scott's concerns or not, but I will share his raising SEC
Rule 14a-8, and I am not convinced that, as proffered, we are
going back to the way things were before the Trump
Administration's changes. We had a great hearing yesterday, and
we heard a lot of concerns about this. And in my view, between
Staff Legal Bulletins 14I, 14J, and 14K, replacing with this
14L, it is a problem. I think it really politicizes the proxy
process.
And my friends on the other side of the aisle might be
talking about great progressive ideas and things of that
nature, and I don't think they should be met with conservative
responses. It is a law of physics here that a force of equal
might well be met by another one opposing it, and that is not
what the proxy process is for.
And in addition to opening up to these social things, which
is not relevant, it disconnects it from the individual company
responsibility, and that is a big difference that usually
doesn't get mentioned. So it makes it, as I say, much easier
for politically-motivated people to weigh in on this situation.
Take the wokest company on the planet, you pick it, Apple,
Google, they reject every one of these social impact-type
statements. The management, the board recommends it because it
is not relevant to the mission. I think we need to go back to
the future and be focused more about who is on the board. Are
they competent? Compensation committees, are they independent?
Are they implementing the strategy? Are they developing a good
quality return for shareholders and getting out of all this
madness?
Mr. Netram, let me start with you. Companies are facing
more and more detailed ESG and political proposals that are
intended to interfere or could be considered to be interfering
with regular business operations. And 14L removed, as I noted,
that longstanding commitment directly to the individual
business by the way it is phrased. How does this proposal
process change when the SEC limits no-action releases under
Rule 14a-8, as Mr. Scott noted?
Mr. Netram. Thanks for the question, Congressman.
Effectively, what it does is it gives activists a roadmap to
engage in real micromanagement of the company. And as you
noted, part of what we need to do here is to support companies
taking risks and innovating and delivering returns to
investors, and part of that is on the company itself. The
company has a duty to respond to the marketplace. If a company
isn't responding to the marketplace for the demands that they
need, would the marketplace trust them to act and build their
business? That company will wither and die, so taking the act
of this and the roadmap out of it will allow companies to
flourish.
Mr. Hill. Dr. White, when you look at these 14a-8
proposals, it seems like it tips the scale to special interest
proponents on either side of the political spectrum. Would this
increase litigation risk for companies, and what other
potential impacts might it have on corporate governance?
Mr. White. Yes, thank you for that question, Congressman.
It would certainly continue to tip the increase towards special
interest groups. What we saw with 14L, which is a staff
opinion, that is, something that receives commentary like
proposed rulemakings at the Commission, we saw an increase in
the SEC's disagreement for no-action relief requests by more
than 50 percent. And we can expect that to continue with the
new Rule 14a-8 proposals that came out in July 2022. The SEC
added language that says even if you address the same subject
matter in the same objective, if it is addressed through a
different means, it is not a reason for duplicative exclusion.
So, one could easily imagine four or five activists getting
together and slightly tweaking the version of their proposal
and having five proposals on the same topic appear on the
proxy.
Mr. Hill. Yes, I just think that goes against the whole. We
have so many rules against not doing that with owning stock,
and yet we are going to try to manipulate the process through
the proxy. It doesn't sound like a good idea.
Ms. Minow, we have been around each other a long time on
passively-managed funds. That was an innovation when we were in
business together. Now, it dominates the market. Do you think
that a passively-managed ETF proxy should just default to vote
with management as a fiduciary in that capacity, except maybe
in the case of M&A?
Ms. Minow. No, I don't. As we said----
Mr. Hill. Why?
Ms. Minow. ----before, the proxy advisors, over 90 percent
of their recommendation----
Mr. Hill. Not the proxy advisors.
Ms. Minow. I understand that, but----
Mr. Hill. Respond to me off the dais. My time has expired.
It is not about the proxy advisors; it is about what the
management is doing. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from Arkansas' time has
expired. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. Vargas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman, and I
appreciate the opportunity. And again, I thank the ranking
member, and, of course, I especially thank the panel here
today. I seldom agree with my colleagues, but today I do.
Welcome to the alternative universe. This is insanity, complete
insanity. I agree with those statements.
This was the headline that I read this morning in The
Washington Post, ``Floods, Fires and Deadly Heat Are the Alarm
Bells of a Planet on the Brink,'' an article by Sarah Kaplan.
It reads, ``The world is hotter than it is been in thousands of
years. It is as if every alarm bell on the earth were ringing.
The warnings are echoing throughout the drenched mountains of
Vermont where 2 months' worth of rain fell in only 2 days.
India and Japan were deluged by extreme flooding. They are
shrilling from the scorching streets of Texas, Florida, Spain,
and China, with a severe heatwave also building in Phoenix and
the Southwest in the coming days. They are burbling up from the
oceans where temperatures have surged to levels considered
beyond extreme, and they are showing up in unprecedented,
still-burning wildfires in Canada that have sent plumes of
dangerous smoke into the United States.
``Scientists say there is no question that this cacophony
was caused by climate change or that it will continue to
intensify as the planet warms. Research shows that human
greenhouse gas emissions, particularly from burning fossil
fuels, have raised the earth temperature by 1.2 degrees.''
It goes on to explain that this is insanity.
When we are trying to take away the rights of shareholders
to know about these climate disasters, and we are doing it in
the name of shareholder rights, this reminds me of the quote
from Peter Arnett back in the Vietnam era, who said, ``It
became necessary to destroy the town to save it.'' It is often
misquoted as, ``We had to kill them to save them.'' This is
what we are trying to do to the shareholders here. This is
exactly what we are attempting to do. This is insanity.
Shareholders want to know about this. Investors want to know
about this, their long-term profitability.
Ms. Minow, am I wrong about this? Is this fringe?
Ms. Minow. Thank you very much. Congressman, I appreciate
that, and it allows me to mention that what we are seeing in
these large institutional investors is a portfolio-wide
approach. And that is, I think, a much better approach for
sustainable, long-term wealth creation, than trying to do stock
picking. You are 100-percent right. These issues that you are
talking about affect every company in America. The information
that we are asking for--it is no secret that it is the fossil
fuel industry that is against these questions. Everybody else
is for them. I haven't noticed anybody come up with a single
example of some ESG proposal or ESG vote that was somehow
detrimental to anybody. There are a lot of grand statements,
but very few specifics.
Mr. Vargas. I totally agree. It is fascinating that when I
talk to people, this is their huge concern, especially in
Phoenix right now, when they are going to San Diego because we
can't take the heat. This is information that they want their
investors--go ahead?
Ms. Minow. Yes, if I may make one more comment?
Mr. Vargas. Sure.
Ms. Minow. I am old enough to remember when I heard a lot
of complaints about the short-termism of the large
institutional investors. They only care about the next quarter.
Now they are looking into the future, they are looking into the
long term, and we are getting the same complaints from the same
people. You can either have patient capital or silent capital.
You cannot have both.
Mr. Vargas. And it is interesting to me, again, when
shareholders want this information, where they find it
material, that now my good friends on the other side of the
aisle say, ``You don't get to have this information. We are not
going to allow it.'' I don't know how that is free market--I
won't quote Trotsky or Mao Zedong, but it does seem to me that
it goes against capitalism. It just seems to be going in the
wrong direction. I don't have much time here left other than
to, again, thank the panel for being here. I appreciate it. It
has been very lively, but read the headlines, and talk to the
people at home. You know that climate disaster is what is on
their minds, especially during these heatwaves, and during the
smoke coming from Canada that we have never seen before. I
don't know how the hell this isn't material. With that, I yield
back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from California yields
back. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr.
Lucas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And before I focus
on my questions, I would simply note I have just come from a
House Science Committee hearing, and I would suggest to my
colleagues, both in Congress and around the country, that one
of the keys to addressing the future of this great planet and
the issues that we address here from a business perspective is
changing how we create our energy sources, urging the
bipartisan leadership, the bicameral leadership, the
appropriations process to fully fund fusion research so that we
can go to the next generation of energy production for this
planet. We have to focus on that. If we won't spend time and
resources on the next source, well, that is our fate.
Let me pull back closer to home. In November of 2021, the
SEC issued revised guidance aimed at broadening the scope and
increasing the volume of shareholder proposals to be considered
by public companies. Instead of focusing on how social policy
matter might impact the actual business, these proposals can
now take aim at the wider aspects to society unrelated to
specific business issues.
Mr. Netram, from your understanding, how does the SEC staff
determine if an issue has a broad social impact? Who gets to
play God on that one?
Mr. Netram. That is an excellent question. It raises a
number of questions, the guidance. What is the society that we
are looking at? Is that the locality in which a company
operates? Is it the entire United States? Is it the entire
world? What is an impact? What is a measurable impact? Who is
being impacted, and has Congress actually empowered the SEC to
make those decisions?
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Berry, could you also discuss this?
Mr. Berry. Certainly, there is a tremendous amount of
viewpoint bias that the SEC staff exercises here, and they will
call one thing significant and another insignificant on pretty
nakedly political grounds.
Mr. Lucas. In your observations, does there need to be any
relationship to the operations of the company to get one of
these classifications?
Mr. Berry. Really, the upshot of what the SEC said in 14
hours is there doesn't need to be any tie whatsoever.
Mr. Lucas. Oh, my goodness. Mr. Berry, in your written
testimony, you provide historic context to how the SEC requires
public companies to interact with shareholders. Could you
expand on this historic perspective, specifically how the SEC
arrived at the current treatment of shareholder proposals, and
how this position has changed over the past decades?
Mr. Berry. The SEC originally focused its rulemaking on the
core mandate of disclosure, what Congress directly authorized.
But over the decades, the SEC has gotten more into the
substance of corporate governance, something that the courts
have disfavored, and yet we are still here. In the last few
decades, the SEC has essentially opened the gates to all manner
of shareholder proposals in the EMES space.
Mr. Lucas. Kind of following up on that, Mr. Doyle, also
looking at the historic perspective, can you discuss how the
proxy process has evolved from, say, the mid-1900s to where we
are today?
Mr. Doyle. The process itself?
Mr. Lucas. Please.
Mr. Doyle. Yes, sort of. Again, as I think has been
mentioned by a couple of other witnesses already, it has
developed--I will try to come up with the right term here. As
was mentioned, it was first not talked about through the
Security and Exchange Commission, and then, as mentioned, they
started to provide rules for their involvement. And I will
mention that the more recent issue with proxy advisors is their
inherent bias on both the recommendations that they make for
clients that they have as well as for for whom they have
consulting services. I don't know if that answers your
particular question.
Mr. Lucas. Fair point. The SEC's aggressive rulemaking
agenda is set to inundate investors with a flood of non-
material information that public companies are required to
disclose.
Mr. Netram, could you speak to the challenges and
compliance costs that public companies face and how they are
preparing themselves for this? This is not free, right?
Mr. Netram. It is absolutely not free. There is a dollar
cost associated with responding to these proposals, but really,
the larger cost and the bigger impact to the investors that
companies are supposedly serving is the distraction from
actually focusing on the underlying business. Manufacturers are
facing an increased challenge. We have supply chain
constraints, workforce constraints, competition from China, and
raw material constraints, and taking time and attention away
from that to respond to activists is really instrumental.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from Oklahoma yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Casten, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And thanks to all
of our witnesses, and I want to thank you for coming here today
and give you a little respite from financial services.
We are all now going to travel to an episode of Shark Tank.
Congratulations, you are all billionaires, and I am an
entrepreneur with a great idea I would like to pitch to you.
But as a pre-condition of the pitch, I get to be CEO of the
company we are going to build, and I do not have to listen to
any of your nonsense as I deploy your capital or make hiring
decisions. Are any of you interested in hearing my pitch? Are
you interested in signing that term sheet?
Ms. Minow. No.
Mr. Netram. I would like to hear the pitch.
Mr. Casten. You are a weirdo.
[laughter]
Mr. Casten. I frame it that way because it is blindly
obvious to the average American how Shark Tank works, what the
rules are, and I think we can get caught up in a lot of this
language around shareholders. But let me remind my colleagues,
as I did yesterday, of Milton Friedman's theory of shareholder
primacy which says that corporate executives are employees of
corporate owners and are accountable thereto.
If you want to know what happens, if you can ignore the
interests of shareholders, if you can get money and not have to
be accountable to them, I would remind our colleagues of the
hearing not that long ago with John Ray and the FTX bankruptcy.
And let's ask Sequoia and Citadel what they thought about
signing term sheets where they had no authority to impact how
capital was spent. Milton Friedman is turning over in his
grave, but I am sure that our nation's beleaguered C-suite
executives are thanking the Republican Party for standing up
for their fragile interests and needs.
Mr. Netram, do you believe that companies' climate risks
are material information for investors to know, yes or no?
Mr. Netram. I'm sorry, sir. Can you repeat the question?
Mr. Casten. Do you believe that the climate risks of a
company represent material information that investors should
know?
Mr. Netram. I think it depends on the underlying company
and what business risks that they face.
Mr. Casten. Okay. I think you used the word, ``material,''
29 times in your testimony. Are you familiar with the
definition of, ``materiality,'' that guides the SEC?
Mr. Netram. Yes, sir.
Mr. Casten. Okay. And just to remind everybody, I will read
it here. It was from the Basic Inc. v. Levinson Supreme Court
case: ``Information is material if there is a substantial
likelihood that a reasonable shareholder would consider it
important in making an investment or voting decision, or if it
would have significantly altered the total mix of information
available,'' a reasonable investor, not what certain Members of
Congress think a reasonable investor should do, because I know
more than them what is reasonable.
In 2016, the SEC issued a concept release requesting
comment on existing disclosure agreements out of the JOBS Act.
Do you know what percentage of investors commented to say that
the voluntary reporting was inadequate to meet the demand for
climate-related information?
Mr. Netram. I do not.
Mr. Casten. It was 90 percent; 90 percent of investors said
voluntary reporting is insufficient. Do you know on the current
proposed climate disclosures what percentage of investors have
commented in support of climate disclosure and public company
10ks?
Mr. Netram. I do not.
Mr. Casten. It's 97 percent. This debate is settled. There
is no question about whether climate disclosures are material
unless you think that there are people on this committee who
know better than free markets, who know better than the
interests of investors.
The SEC's mandate, I would remind everybody, is to maintain
fair, orderly, and efficient capital markets and to facilitate
the formation of capital. It is not to protect C-suite
executives. We are here to protect capital markets. We are here
to protect free markets. It may hurt my colleagues' feelings to
be compared to the socialists and communists of lore, and I
have tremendous respect for the bipartisan Senator. I did not
misquote Milton Friedman yesterday, but I am going to misquote
Barry Goldwater today, ``Partisanship in defense of free
markets is no vice.'' And I am sorry that it has become
partisan to look out for the interests of investors, to look
out for competitive markets, to make sure that we do not end up
with a capital market full of FTX's where you get a bunch of
dumb money where executives can do whatever they want.
And I get it. There are people who would like that in this
world. Our obligation in Congress is not to look out for them,
and I need you all to be full-throated and join us and do that
because if we do not, this beautiful, wonderful economy we have
is dead. I cannot believe we are having this conversation. I
yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Steil, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman. I
appreciate you holding today's hearing. I think it is
absolutely essential that we have this conversation, in
particular when we see the massive concentration between ISS
and Glass Lewis as it relates to proxy advisors and their
advice, which is sometimes pretty suspect. Sometimes, we see
them get the facts wrong. Sometimes, they even get the name of
the CEO wrong in some of their information.
If I can start with you, Mr. Netram, is there a reason we
shouldn't be able to see the analytical process that is playing
out by these two proxy advisors that have a pretty clear
duopoly on the advice?
Mr. Netram. I'm sorry. Can you repeat that question?
Mr. Steil. Sure. They are providing information, but we
don't have visibility into the methodologies that these proxy
advisors are using. Should we have visibility into the
methodologies that these two proxy advisors are using?
Mr. Netram. Absolutely. We need to have visibility into the
methodologies, their sources of information, and their
conflicts of interest.
Mr. Steil. I think that is essential. Do you agree, Mr.
Doyle?
Mr. Doyle. I do.
Mr. Steil. Mr. Berry?
Mr. Berry. Absolutely.
Mr. Steil. It seems like it should be absolutely essential.
It seems like a bit of a no-brainer. And then, we have Chairman
Gensler striking down the original proxy advisor rule that was
drafted when Chairman Clayton was there. Do you know what the
rationale would be behind that, Mr. Netram?
Mr. Netram. I believe that the rationale was to reverse the
Clayton-era changes, thinking that they gave too much power to
companies.
Mr. Steil. But really what we are doing is allowing ISS and
Glass Lewis to be completely unaccountable. Is that correct?
Mr. Netram. Absolutely. It is really----
Mr. Steil. So really, the net effect of Chairman Gensler's
decision was to actually allow these two entities to be able to
operate in the dark with no oversight from the Federal
Government as they are providing advice. But we have seen them
provide advice in conflict either with law or in the case of
just simple errors without an ability for companies to be able
to simply come back and counter the information that is being
provided. Is that correct?
Mr. Netram. That is correct.
Mr. Steil. Do you agree with that, Mr. Doyle?
Mr. Doyle. I do.
Mr. Steil. Mr. Berry?
Mr. Berry. Yes.
Mr. Steil. What is the impact, Mr. Berry, when you allow
this duopoly to play out when misinformation is being produced
or information that simply needs to be countered because one of
the proxy advisors views it in the best interest of a company
for that company to engage in illegal behavior, for example,
the Travelers case where a proxy advisor recommended in favor
of a shareholder proposal which would have required Travelers,
in that case, to engage in illegal behavior by altering the
price of insurance based on race, which is outlawed in our
States, rightfully so.
Mr. Berry. Yes. Inadequate oversight of the proxy advisors
means they are going to be giving the store away to shareholder
activists to drive all kinds of behavior, including things that
can be illegal.
Mr. Steil. Mr. Netram, do you agree with that?
Mr. Netram. I agree, yes.
Mr. Steil. And what is the solution to this, Mr. Netram? I
have a bill--you have commented on it previously--that actually
allows us to shine some light, to have some disclosure, some
understanding, some oversight over this duopoly. Do you think
that is an appropriate approach?
Mr. Netram. I think legislation is desperately needed here
to bring some transparency to this process.
Mr. Steil. What do you think the key aspects of that
transparency should be?
Mr. Netram. I think there are two keys. The first is
disclosing conflicts of interest, disclosing methodologies,
disclosing their sources of information so that investors can
see exactly what is going on here. And then second, making sure
that the anti-fraud standards actually apply to proxy advisory
firms.
Mr. Steil. Making sure that what standards?
Mr. Netram. The anti-fraud standards.
Mr. Steil. Absolutely. There should be some accountability
to ISS and Glass Lewis if they are engaged in providing advice
that is either misleading and correct or, in the case of
Travelers, illegal. Is that right?
Mr. Netram. That is correct.
Mr. Steil. And does the legislation that I have put forward
accomplish that goal, in your opinion?
Mr. Netram. It absolutely does.
Mr. Steil. Mr. Berry, do you have any further comment on
that?
Mr. Berry. I think if we cut down on the agency problems
with the proxy advisors in the same way we care about agency
between shareholders and managers, that would be a huge
improvement.
Mr. Steil. So, we should disclose conflicts of interest?
Mr. Berry. Absolutely.
Mr. Steil. And do you see conflicts of interest in the two
largest proxy advisor firms?
Mr. Berry. Yes, especially between consulting and proxy
advice, there are real issues there.
Mr. Steil. Mr. Doyle, I see you nodding your head. Do you
agree with that?
Mr. Doyle. I do, and I would also mention that members on
this committee and others have supported through a bipartisan
way to respond to and to try to alleviate some of those
conflicts.
Mr. Steil. I think, at a minimum, we should have
disclosure. I think it is abysmal that Chairman Gensler struck
down the Clayton rule. I think it moves us away from further
disclosure. It allows these two proxy advisors to operate in
the dark. I think we actually need to have a more robust regime
than was even the rule in place. I appreciate you being here
and your testimony today. Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from Wisconsin yields
back. And the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I also thank the
ranking member and I appreciate the good work of the panel.
Ms. Minow, prior to coming to Congress, I served as a union
trustee on the Iron Workers Pension Fund, the Taft-Hartley
Fund. I was a union trustee, and we would hire asset managers
and obviously rely upon proxy vote services as well, advisors.
And I have to say that as a union trustee, if a fund manager or
an asset manager and proxy advisors ever voted against the
interests of the ironworkers and the participants of that fund,
they would be former fund managers, former asset managers,
former advisors.
Some are painting this as a system with no accountability
and that it is a couple of activists that are directing the
votes here. Is that really what is happening, or is there some
level of, dare I say, democracy and causation between the views
of the participants of these funds and the way the proxies are
voted?
Ms. Minow. Thank you, Congressman, for that question. It
has been my great privilege to conduct training sessions for
new trustees of union pension funds on proxy voting, and I have
found them to be extremely interested in these issues for the
protection of the plan participants. What do we all want? We
want them to be able to retire in a comfortable way.
So, you are 100-percent correct that the union's pension
funds and the other pension funds that I have worked with, the
public pension funds primarily, are particularly focused on
making sure that their asset managers make, buy, hold, sell,
vote, and litigate any decisions about share ownership purely
for the benefit of plan participants. Furthermore, the Federal
Government has not only the authority but the obligation to act
if they don't do it, and they have acted, not as often as they
should, but they have acted in those cases.
I want to mention that it is not union pension funds or any
other institutional investor who has called for non-financial
measures of corporate performance. It is the Business
Roundtable, which announced that they wanted to go for
stakeholders, and they wanted to have this very amorphous idea
of, throw the dart at the wall and then draw the target around
it. So no, you are 100-percent correct.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. Madam Chairwoman, I ask unanimous
consent to enter into the record a report by the Independent
Shareholder Services entitled, ``U.S. Shareholder Proposals
Jump to a New Record in 2023.''
Chairwoman Wagner. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and it is dated May
24th, so it is about 6-weeks-old, but in the takeaway section,
it says that the volume of shareholder proposals has indeed
jumped 14 percent between January 1, 2023, and May 31, 2023.
Interestingly, it says this increase is being driven by a new
wave of anti-ESG sentiment, fueling a record number of
shareholder proposals. So you are right, there is a spike in
proposals, but it is from anti-ESG people who are offering
these shareholder proposals. And I have to admit, it looks a
lot like democracy, right?
Ms. Minow, you have people who are arguing to protect the
earth from climate change, and then you have people who are
saying, we don't believe in that, and we don't invest along
with those ideas. That is sort of the position we are in,
right? We represent close to 800,000 people apiece, and if we
don't listen to them, they will make changes in leadership.
Isn't this a lot like democracy?
Ms. Minow. It is exactly like democracy, and as I noted,
most of the anti-ESG proposals failed to get enough to pass the
threshold to be reintroduced, so that shows that the market
works. Democracy works. One thing I love to tell Members of
Congress is that even one vote is enough to elect a corporate
director. So if 99 percent of the shareholders vote against, I
will give you all shareholder proposals. I will get rid of
shareholder proposals entirely if shareholders can vote out
boards of directors. If you need 50 percent in order to serve
on the board, then let the shareholders send the message that
way. In the meantime, shareholder proposals are a very modest,
low-cost way for them to raise the issues they care about.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from Massachusetts yields
back. The gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you so
much for holding this hearing, and thanks to the witnesses for
being here today.
Mr. Berry, we are pleased to hear that those across the
aisle are concerned with shareholder democracy. In the spirit
of promoting shareholder democracy, would you agree that if a
shareholder proposal is rejected time and time again by a
majority of shareholders, their voting preferences should be
heard, and there should be a cooling-off period for it being
resubmitted?
Mr. Berry. Yes.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much.
Mr. Netram, in the spirit of promoting shareholder
democracy, should two proxy advisory firms be able to dictate
30 percent of proxy votes? Shouldn't the shareholders
themselves be voting and not auto-voting the preferences of
third parties?
Mr. Netram. I believe the shareholders themselves should be
voting for the preferences.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. It has been suggested, Mr.
Netram, that the cost of shareholder proposals is just an hour
of work. Can you discuss the cost to companies?
Mr. Netram. Sure. The real cost to the companies lies in
the time and attention that executives are diverting from the
operation of the underlying business. In the manufacturing
sector, in particular, we are facing a set of challenges that
are existential, and taking the executives' attention away from
that and navigating these incredibly turbulent waters is not
helpful to shareholder value creation.
Mr. Garbarino. Just an hour of work, that is not true. It
is going to take a long time. What about retail investors? Is
there a cost to them? Presumably, they have to read through the
proposals to make informed decisions. Some companies have
millions of retail investors. Is that time quantifiable?
Mr. Netram. It must be quantifiable. I don't know what the
answer is, but I am sure that it is.
Mr. Garbarino. Wouldn't making our markets more efficient
and letting boards focus on sound financial policy rather than
political platforms enhance capitalism?
Mr. Netram. I strongly agree with that statement.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. I want to ask you now about
impacts to the changes to Bulletin 14L. Companies are facing
more and more detailed environmental, social, and political
proposals that are intended to interfere with regular business
operations. One publication that has helped fuel this pattern
is the SEC's Staff Legal Bulletin 14L, which made a number of
changes that broaden the scope of what could be deemed eligible
for a company's proxy statement. One of those changes is the
altering of ordinary business exclusion, effectively removing
the longstanding requirement that there be a connection between
a proposal and the company.
Mr. Netram, how does the shareholder proposal process
change when the SEC limits the availability of no-action relief
under Rule 14a-8? Additionally, how can this change interact
with the operations or business of a company?
Mr. Netram. It fundamentally alters the way in which a
business is run. If you remove that nexus between the core
operation of the business and the shareholder proposal to open
that up to really anything under the sun, you are taking the
time and attention away from running your underlying business.
Mr. Garbarino. Yes. You said you could open anything up
under the sun, which means you could allow shareholders to
influence more of the day-to-day operations of a company,
right?
Mr. Netram. That is correct.
Mr. Garbarino. Can you explain how the increased level of
detail and specificity in shareholder proposals creates
governance risks by distorting a board's decision-making
process?
Mr. Netram. Absolutely. I think it goes beyond distorting
the decision-making process to actually giving greater power to
shareholder activists, in that under the new regime, you are
allowed to make minor alterations to a proposal, infinite
versions of alterations to proposals, and have corporate
management be forced to consider each of those in turn.
Mr. Garbarino. Is there any way to reform Rule 14a-8 to
combat the submission and resubmission of non-germane
shareholder proposals?
Mr. Netram. Yes. I think we need to go back to actually
ensuring that proposals that are germane to the underlying
business are the focus.
Mr. Garbarino. Dr. White, the SEC's proposed amendments to
Rule 14a-8 would tip the scales in favor of a small group of
like-minded shareholders whose objectives may not be aligned
with the objectives of mainstream investors or the best
interests of the company and shareholders. Can you discuss the
SEC's proposed amendments and the potential impact they will
have on the public markets?
Mr. White. Thank you for that question. Yes, there were
three proposed amendments. One was the substantial
implementation exclusion, and it says that if you have already
substantially implemented the subject matter with the same
objective and the same means, then you can exclude it. The new
rules would require that you prove that in order to achieve
that exclusion.
The duplication exclusion I mentioned earlier, which is if
you have two or three activist shareholders that want to
achieve the same objective, they can propose two or three
different means, and it can appear on the proxy. For example,
Amazon had 18 shareholder proposals on its proxy this year. If
these rules were to move forward, it would make it even harder
to remove.
Mr. Garbarino. I am out of time. Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from New York yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Meeks, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Ms. Minow, do proxy
firms proactively push ESG-related information out to the
investors, or is it customary for investors to ask for ESG-
related information about a company as part of their
established proxy voting policies?
Ms. Minow. Thank you for that question. There is a
variety--the clients have different relationships with ISS, and
you have some in each of those categories. But I was one of the
co-founders of ISS, so I can tell you that ISS began because
all of a sudden there were complicated issues on proxies.
Before that, it was all very routine: vote for the directors;
vote for the auditor; go home. But all of a sudden, there were
complex issues that had to do with CEO pay, that had to do with
management entrenchment. And when the proxy advisors began,
they started addressing those issues. Some will go to ISS and
say, here are our policies, please vote according to our
policies. Some will say, we will look at your advice, and we
will evaluate it and decide what we agree with and what we
don't agree with, so different clients have different kinds of
relationships with ISS.
Mr. Meeks. Would you say then, in asking these questions,
is it unnecessary or irrelevant for an investor to ask for
different kinds of information?
Ms. Minow. Absolutely. That is required by their obligation
as fiduciaries, and just as they get information about buy/sell
decisions, they are getting information about voting decisions
and then acting on it according to their own policies.
Mr. Meeks. Let me make sure that I am correct--would it be
correct to say that proxy advisors are providing this
information in response to a market-driven, investor-driven
demand?
Ms. Minow. That is 100-percent correct, and as I pointed
out earlier, Presidential candidate, Vivek Ramaswamy, has now
started an anti-ESG proxy advisory service, and anyone who
wants to purchase that service can do so.
Mr. Meeks. When we look at our capital market systems,
which I believe to be the envy of the world--everyone looks at
it, this is the envy of the world--it seems that for it to work
best, we would want our institutional investors to have access
to independent analysis provided by proxy advisors or any other
source of their choosing to enable them to make the most
informed decisions possible. Do you agree?
Ms. Minow. One hundred percent.
Mr. Meeks. So, why in the world do you believe that my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle want to stifle this
access?
Ms. Minow. They want to kill the messenger, and that is the
opposite of what capitalism and efficient market theory is
about.
Mr. Meeks. Kill the messenger. I don't understand that. I
listened to my other colleagues when they were asking their
questions. We are in some weird times here. Ms. Minow,
shareholder proposals are helping to raise industry standards
for the diversity of corporate boards and C-suites. Do you
believe this is an effective way for shareholders to signal
that they care about the diversity of a company's board or C-
suite?
Ms. Minow. I really want to emphasize your use of the word,
``signal,'' because it is exactly appropriate. This is an area
where shareholders are communicating. They are not forcing
anybody to do anything. It strikes me that we literally pay
these executives the big bucks so that their knees don't get
weak when someone criticizes them.
Mr. Meeks. Can you share examples from your work where
shareholder proposals have led to positive changes or
improvements within the companies?
Ms. Minow. Absolutely. They have led to boards being far
more engaged, and effective, and qualified. They have led to
the end of many entrenching devices that made companies less
accountable. As I said before, I am not saying anything good
about CEO pay. I am just going to say it would be a lot worse
if it were not for shareholder input. I think it has led to
some very important changes and better disclosure, more
accountability, and, again, that is what markets are all about.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from New York yields back.
The Chair now recognizes yet another gentleman from New York,
Mr. Lawler, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Like many of my
colleagues here today, I have serious concerns about the
potential consequences of focusing on costly non-material
environmental, social, and political issues at the expense of
sound financial policies, what we are seeing in this press from
both government regulation and shareholder activism driving up
the costs and burdens associated with participating in the
United States public markets. And it detracts from companies
being able to raise capital and foster economic growth. Instead
of focusing on running their businesses, we see companies
having to spend their time and resources addressing
politically-motivated proposals that don't have anything to do
with the company's strategic direction or long-term goals.
My home State of New York has been at the forefront of
promoting ESG policies. Back in 2019, New York State
Comptroller Tom DiNapoli released guidelines on how the New
York State Common Retirement Fund would begin to pursue ESG
goals with a new climate action plan, for instance. We have
seen the Common Retirement Fund repeatedly filing shareholder
proposals and pressing public companies to adopt these
policies. This is not just some random shareholder. This is an
elected official using his perch to drive companies to make
decisions. That is not democracy, not even close. Over the past
years, this fund alone has filed hundreds of proposals, and
many companies have chosen just to settle and cut a deal,
leading to more reports, and disclosures, and diverted
resources.
This is the same pension fund, by the way, that just
announced a negative return of 4.1 percent for the State fiscal
year that just ended. Bang up job. They are doing good by the
taxpayers because, by the way, in New York, the taxpayers are
on the hook when we don't meet our requirements. Several
pension funds in New York City are even facing lawsuits
alleging that they have breached their fiduciary duty. Yes,
this is really working out great. Good policies.
We have seen a lot of examples recently, and I hear it from
my constituents. People want corporations to leave politics at
home and focus on the underlying purpose at hand of running
their businesses, selling their products, and delivering a
return for their investors. Stay the hell out of politics.
Leave it to Congress. Leave it to State legislatures. There are
plenty of politics around here at all times. The American
people are so tired of politics consuming everything from the
media, to corporate America, to education. It is pathetic, and
it is creating a challenge across-the-board.
Mr. Berry, do you agree that politics and social policy
should be made in Congress and State legislatures and not in
corporate boardrooms?
Mr. Berry. That is what Congress and legislatures are for,
Congressman.
Mr. Lawler. I agree.
Mr. Netram, shareholders who submit proposals, especially
on environmental and social topics, often argue that these
proposals serve the long-term economic interests of companies
and shareholders. Could you respond to this claim?
Mr. Netram. I would say that the long-term economic
interests of shareholders are best served when companies focus
on their underlying business itself.
Mr. Lawler. Would you agree that if, for instance, the New
York State Pension Fund is giving a negative return, that is
probably not in the best interest of pension fund recipients?
Mr. Netram. Without knowing much about the New York City
Pension Fund, those don't sound like great facts there.
Mr. Lawler. That makes sense.
Dr. White, can you speak about how the prevalence and
persistence of socially-oriented shareholder activism and the
influence of proxy advisory firms affects shareholder value and
the ability of corporations to make efficient and effective
business decisions?
Mr. White. Yes. Thank you. I have heard a lot of discussion
today about how it may be taking 1 hour to respond to
shareholders. You would get a low grade in my class if you
submitted that as a response. You have to carefully consider
each proposal, potentially negotiate with the special
interests, request relief from the SEC, which they reject more
than 50 percent of the time, and reply if they fail to provide
relief. Amazon had 116 pages and 40,000 words, which would take
the average investor 2 hours to read, so I doubt it would take
you 1 hour to respond, if it takes you 2 hours to read, and was
very politicized.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from New York yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Cleaver, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Ms. Minow, I
thank you and all of our witnesses for giving of your valuable
time to be here with us. I think we sometimes take for granted
those of you who come before us and spend a lot of time. And
the check we give you is very little, probably like zero, so
thank you very much.
Saying something is so, does not make it so, and there are
and have been here today suggestions that proxy advisors have
their own political and social agendas. And many of those who
have asserted that say that they have an outsized care about
climate change, which I am still struggling with since this is
the only climate we have. What are your views on this? Do proxy
advisors always recommend in favor of climate or social
proposals?
Ms. Minow. Thank you for the question. And as Dr. White
pointed out, there are a lot of shareholder proposals relating
to climate which did not get substantial votes, and which got
votes lower this year than they did in previous years. So no,
that is not true.
Proxy advisory services, I will say it again: No one has to
buy it. The people who do buy it are the most sophisticated,
professional financial experts in the world. And they have a
choice of one that is a registered proxy advisor, and one that
is not, one that has conflicts of interest, and one that does
not, and now a new one that is the anti-ESG. Maybe, they will
get all three and compare what their recommendations are; those
are their own financial choices. So yes, the evidence shows
that the clients of the proxy advisors depart from the
recommendations of the proxy advisors on any issue that is
complex or controversial.
Mr. Cleaver. Do you agree, Mr. White?
Ms. Minow. I beg your pardon?
Mr. Cleaver. I was asking Mr. White if he agreed.
Mr. White. I think that sounds like a fair description of
the proxy proposal process. Proxy advisors do have conflicts of
interest. Some of them do not. I would be concerned, though, of
such a concentration in two entities that have so much power. I
think if we were describing any other setting where an entity
influenced trillions of dollars of investment returns and we
did not have oversight or regulation or transparency, we would
be highly concerned, so I am not sure how proxy advisors are
different.
Mr. Cleaver. But neither of you are suggesting that the
proxy advisors are puppet masters who have control over asset
managers or institutions?
Ms. Minow. I compare them to restaurant critics. You can
read the review of a restaurant and decide, well, they don't
like green peppers, but I do like green peppers, maybe I will
like it. These are First Amendment-protected publications that
are voluntarily purchased, and I would be very, very cautious
about providing any kind of prior restraint or additional
review.
Mr. Cleaver. Great example with the restaurants. I don't
like green peppers either.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from Missouri yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Nunn, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman, and I
thank the ranking member as well. I appreciate it, and I thank
the panel very much for being here today.
I want to talk a little bit to our witnesses who are
shedding light on this, I think, very important topic. People
in my district, Iowa's 3rd, elected me to serve their best
interests, not that of any political party or social agenda
that is being set forward. To that end, I, along with my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle today, support policies
that prioritize protecting everyday families, farmers in my
home district, small business owners, and Americans across-the-
board. Their investment and their financial futures often
depend on the decisions that are being made in this room. This
follows up on yesterday's hearing on what we would like to
drill down on for a term called, ``robo-voting.'' This is an
alarming and ramping process that has come up.
For those of you watching back in Iowa, robo-voting is the
practice of automatically casting votes with proxy advisors'
recommendations. Only two firms, including a witness who is on
this panel today, are part of a duopoly, if you will, who are
casting 97 percent of the proxy advisor market. They have given
unprecedented power and control over my constituents' 401(k)s
and their future funding.
Essentially, for a corn grower who lives in my home State,
their livelihood to both fuel and feed the world is being
unknowingly funding groups who are committed to demising their
very line of existence, their hard-earned 401(k) portfolio
investment and advisors, who are voting on their shares, both
solely on the recommendations of these two firms that operate
oftentimes in opposition to those very farmers, livestock
producers, and biofuels upon which hey have built their
businesses. In fact, in some cases, they are openly hostile
competitors and overseas companies where their retirement
dollars are going. This can impede and even seek to end
traditional farming in my State, and that is just one sector.
In Iowa, growers who are also investors have little
knowledge and only two respectable options to choose from in
terms of proxy advisors. Not only are farmers losing funds to
their competition, but they are losing market performance on
those hard-earned retirement funds. According to Forbes,
numerous studies demonstrate and correlate between an increase
in activism in areas like environmental activism, and to public
pension funds promoting social agendas and lower stock returns,
resulting in a staggering 14-percent decrease in valuations for
those affected companies.
To that end, Madam Chairwoman, I am introducing a bill next
week that requires the SEC to make a final rulemaking
prohibiting the practice of robo-voting and prohibits
institutional investors from outsourcing their voting decisions
to a proxy advisor. It requires them to be based on investment
merit returns versus activist desires. In my opinion, it is
beyond time that this corrupt and largely lazy practice is
brought into the light and ended. Our constituents are counting
on us for this level of change.
With that, Mr. Netram, can you go into detail and describe
to us the process of robo-voting and how it impacts the
decision-making process and the fiduciary responsibilities of
asset managers?
Mr. Netram. Absolutely. Thank you for that question,
Congressman. Robo-voting, as you so accurately described it, is
the process by which proxy firms automatically cast votes on
asset managers' behalf in line with those proxy firms'
recommendations and without any review by the asset managers.
What you have is a system in which asset managers don't have
the ability to make an informed decision on the votes that they
are taking because the proxy firms are just automatically
casting those votes. By definition, that means that those asset
managers may or may not be acting in the Main Street investors'
best interest.
Mr. Nunn. Why do you think then, that Chair Gensler of the
SEC did away with former Chair Clayton's overhaul of proxy
advisor firms in 2020? And do you think that a robo-voting
bill, like the one I am proposing this morning, is a priority?
Mr. Netram. On the second question, absolutely. Thank you
for leading on that legislation, Congressman. I think it is
absolutely needed and a real priority for the industry. On the
first question about Chairman Gensler's actions here, it is
hard to know his mind, but it certainly does seem to be part
and parcel of the SEC's overall effort to deregulate and
empower proxy advisory firms. The net effect of this is that
your constituents, Iowans, are left with conflicted, error-
ridden advice that is being automatically voted on their behalf
without them even knowing about it.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Netram. With that, Madam
Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman from Iowa yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from Indiana, Mrs.
Houchin, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you, Chairwoman Wagner and Ranking
Member Sherman, and thank you to each of the witnesses for your
testimony and for speaking with us today. One of my top
priorities as a member of this committee is to protect retail
investors and ensure that my constituents in Southern Indiana
are given the same financial opportunities and the level of
priority as investors in any other part of the country.
When I hear from people back home, a constant point of
concern is for the security of their wallets, the ability to
save for retirement, provide for their families, and secure
their futures. As my colleagues have discussed, the current
system has lost sight of these priorities. Our capital markets
and the soundness of our financial system have long been among
our greatest strengths, but as political agendas and unrelated
social issues drive the focus elsewhere, everyday Americans are
forced to bear the cost of diminished returns and lost
financial security. As a member of both the ESG Working Group,
and this committee, I am glad we are now turning our attention
to this issue. There is no reason why the well-being of
everyday investors should take a backseat to politics over
other unrelated issues.
Mr. Netram, you submitted a comment letter to the SEC back
on September 12, 2022, regarding their proposed amendments on
Rule 14a-8. As you stated in your letter, these proposals,
``will ultimately force companies and shareholders to consider
proposals any time an activist demands, irrespective of whether
the company has already taken steps to address the underlying
issue or whether shareholders have already considered and
rejected or are currently considering a similar proposal.''
Needless to say, that is very concerning. As the current system
works, activists can persistently resubmit similar proposals
year after year, despite being previously rejected by a
majority of the shareholders. By moving forward with this
proposal, the SEC would place the interests of activists even
higher than the well-being of their investors.
Mr. Netram, do you think it is fair for companies to have
to continuously invest resources in fighting activist proposals
that clearly do not benefit the company and its shareholders,
especially when the proposals have been rejected in previous
years?
Mr. Netram. Absolutely not. When a broad majority of
shareholders have rejected a proposal, it is absolutely unfair
for companies to have to continually reassess and re-engage
with the activists on those ideas.
Mrs. Houchin. And are there ways that we can reform this
process, the no-action process, so that we can prevent these
duplicative problems?
Mr. Netram. I think Congress has a real role to play here
in reining in the SEC and directing them on a path that is more
in line with the interests of mainstream investors.
Mrs. Houchin. That is certainly part of the reason why we
are here today, to really consider what package of bills we may
be moving forward to address some of these issues. I am pleased
to be leading an initiative that will address the issue. My
bill will nullify this burdensome and unnecessary SEC proposal
from taking place, saving shareholders both time and money and
ensuring that the interests of a small number of activists
don't take priority over our everyday investors.
Mr. Netram, the SEC's required mandate includes protecting
investors, facilitating capital formation, and promoting
efficient markets. How does the dominance of social and policy
issues in corporate annual meetings conflict with those
objectives?
Mr. Netram. The SEC can fulfill its mission to protect
investors and support capital formation by allowing companies
to really focus on long-term value creation. That is where
their focus needs to be. What the SEC has done instead is they
have taken steps to ensure or really encourage activists to
hijack the proxy ballot and divert time, resources, and
attention from the underlying business in which Main Street is
investing.
Mrs. Houchin. And I would argue that, in and of itself, is
a threat to the general bottom line and overall performance of
those shares for their shareholders. I am grateful to each of
you for coming here to speak today. As we continue this
important work on the committee, I hope we can ensure that the
well-being of investors remains the chief focus of our capital
markets. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentlelady from Indiana yields back.
And seeing no other Member on the dais has a question, I
would just like to thank our witnesses today for their
testimony.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:18 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

July 13, 2023

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
